PLENARY MEETING 623rd
hy

Tuesday, 18 Decem'bar 1956,
at 10.30 a.m.

:n-

ng
is-

New York

n-

de
he
ve
lIe
in

Page

~'s

eH
in
of
to
'eam
~o

as
.r.
ry

et
le
,ft
le
e111

10

--.
President: Prince WAN WAITHAYAKON

AGENDA ITEM 25

Admission of new Members ~o. the Uniaed Naticns
ADMISSION .OF JAPAN TO MEMBERSHIP OF THE
UNITED NATIONS

1. The PRESIDENT: I need scarcely say that the
admission of Japan to membership of the United
Nations will be a source of deep satisfaction to us all;
indeed, it is sometPing to which we have looked forward
with anticipation-in the knowledge that the positive
action of the Assembly would certainly result in a
further enhancement of the United Nations by the
inclusion of an influential and highly respected State
among its Members.
2. I amplea,sed to draw your attention to the letter I
have received from the President of the SecurityCouncli transmitting the resolution unanimously. adopted by
the Council recommending that Japan be admitted to
membership of the United Nations [A/3447].
3. lam also pleased to place before the Assembly a
draft resolution on this question sponsored by fifty-one
Members, namely, Afghanistan, Australia, Belgium,
Brazil, Burma, Cambodia, Canada, Ceylon, China, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Fgypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, France, Haiti, Iceland, India, Indonesia, . Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Lebanon,
Liberia, Libya, Luxembourg, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Philip-:
pines, Poland, Saudi Arabia,. Spain, Sudan,. Syria,
Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and

Northern Ireland, United States of America, Venezuela, Yemen and Yugoslavia [A/3460 and Add.1
to 3].
4. I shall put this draft resolution to the vote by
roll-call.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Israel, having been drawn by lot by the President,
was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Israel, Italy. Jordan, Laos, Lebanon,
Liberia, Libya, Luxembourg, Mexico, Morocco, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Paki. stan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Spain, Sudan,
Sweden~ Syria, Thailand" Tunisia, Turkey, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Albania,
Arg~ ',dna, Australia, Austria, Be1gium~ Bolivia, Bulgaria, Burma, Brazil, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Cambodia, Canada, Ceylon, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Czeohoslovakia,. Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Finland, France, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland.
Against: N~ne.
The draft resolution was adopted unanimously.
The delegation of Jaf'an was escorted to' its place ;.",
the General Assembly hall.
5. The PRESIDENT: It is with particular pleasure
that I welcome the representative of a great Asian
nation, Japan; who will now share our common efforts
in promoting world peace and fundamental human
rights, justice and the economic·and social advancement
of all peoples. Japan and the Japanese people are well
qualifies! by their national strength to make a great
contribution to the work of the United Natiol~s. They
have developed their ancient culture into the modern '
civilization of an industrial Power, and they are thus
in a position to play an important part in promoting
social progress and better standards of life in larger
freedom, and in furthering the maintenance of international peace ana securibJ.
6. From my own experience,. I know that the deliberations of the General Assembly will gain by the
participation of the representative of Japan, who will
give' us the benefit of his wise 'counsel and statesmanship. lam sure I am expressing the unanimous
sentiment of all my fellow representatives when I 'offer
0l1r sincere congratulations and good wishes to him
and to his country.
7. I shall now call on ,the Vice-Presidents of the
eleventh session.
'
8. Mr. TSIANG (Ohina): The admission of Japan
make3 this day a happy one for the United Nations.
It is, I am sure, also a day of. rejoicing in Japan.
723

A./PV.623

..

i

•

_

..

"

_

~,

.'

if

~-

,

...

....

•

t:.. '~.

,4..' -

~'.,

4

-

."

.:

•

.':

!

'124

General Auemhly-Eleventh session-Plenary Meetings

9. Japan is unique among the nations of the world.
It is both an ancient and modern uanon. It has succeeded marvellously well in harmonizing its ancient
culture with modern industry and technology. In this
respect, what Japan has achieved is both an example
and an inspiration to many countries of Asia which
are travelling along the same path. Japan's experience
in harmonizing the old and the new will be invaluable
to many countries in the old world.
10. Contemporary Japan is sincerely devoted to the
ideals of peace and democracy. For these reasons, my
delegation has always contended that Japan is fully
qualified for membership in the United Nations.
11. So far as this is concerned, no representative
either in 'the Assembly or in the Security Council has
ever questioned the qualifications of Japan for membership in this world Organization. Now, at last, Japan
is one of us. We are sure that this new Member will
play an important role in the United Nations and will
make valuable contributions to the important work
which this Organization undertakes.
12. We in China are particularly happy today, because, in addition to geographical propinquity, China
and Japan have between them many bo nds of Eastern
culture. In extending my hearty welcome to Japan, I
am expressing the feelings of affection which my
people have towards the people of Japan.
13. Mr. URQUlA (El Salvador) (translated from
Spanish) : Two equally gratifying circumstances enable
me to take the floor at this time as we give expression
to our justified enthusiasm at the admission of Japan
to the United Nations: the first is my position, a
reflection of the hopour conferred upon my country,
as one of the Vice-Presidents 'Of the General Assembly;
the second and no less honourable circumstance is my
position as chairman of the group of Latin American
representatives accredited to the United Nations, with
the consequence that I can speak on behalf of all my
colleagues from that part of the world.
14. Japan should have been admitted a year ago, on 14
December 1955, when, after unremitting' efforts over
a long period of time, all members of the Security
Council, permanent and non-permanent, at last ageeed
to facilitate the admission ofa large number of States
whose applications had not previously been approved
by the Council, either because they had not received
the requisite number of votes, or on account of the
persistent opposition of one of the permanent members,
expressed through the immoderate use of the antidemocratic privilege of the veto, whioh had unfortunately been proposed and accepted at the Yalta
Conference, then reaffirmed in the Dumbarton Oaks
proposals and later e:ildorsed at ,the San Francisco
Conference when the voting procedure of the Security
Council was jaid down in. the Charter.
15. Owing to political interests which are no secret,
Japan had to continue to wait for an invitation to
enter this Organization as a Member, while sixteen
other States were admitted in the last few days of the
tenth session of the General Assembly.
16. With the admission of Japan, which has at last
become a fact this morning through .the impressive
. unanimous vote of the Members of this Assembly, and
the admission of Morocco, TU1;1isia, and the Sudan,.
whichtook place barely a month ago, and that of sixteen
States in December 1955, the number of Members of
the United Nations has risen to eighty, which means

that, with very few exceptions, all the r-eoples of the
world now belong to this Organization and so have
an opportunity of taking part in its work and of exerting themselves to ensure the effective realization of
the Purposes and Principles of the Charter.
17. . Some nations which, for special historical reasons,
are divided despite the efforts of the United Nations
to unify them, are still missing from this Assembly.
This is the case, for example, of a great European
country, Germany, and of an important Asian country,
Korea.
18. The Latin American delegations express the hope
that both Germany and Korea will soon be unified,
and are prepared to continue their efforts to accomplish
this object and to eo everything possible to secure the
admission of those nations to our Organization.
19. On the occasion of today's admission of the great
Far Eastern country to membership of the United
Nations, these delegations extend their warmest welcome and congratulations to Mr. Shigemitsu, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, and through him to His
Majesty, the Emperor Hirohito and to the noble, industrious and intelligent Japanese people who, we are
all sure, will make a most valuable and efficient
'contribution to the work of tJ.:1e United Natio~s.
20. Mr. BROUSTRA (France) (translated front
French) : The French delegation is especially happy to
associate itself with the statements just made by the
President and by the representatives of China and
El Salvador.
21. As I said. quite recently in the Security Council,
since 1952 France has spared no effort in its endea.vour
to facilitate the admission of Japan to our Organization.
France regretted that that great country failed to gain
admission last year, but today these regrets have been
mitigated because the delay has made it possible for
Japan to be admitted in conformity with the principles
and rules of the United Nations Charter, instead of
under a compromise regarding which we voiced the
most express qualifications at the time.
22. Today's vote in the General Assembly on the
draft resolution laid before it was based on solid
grounds. By adopting it, the Assembly has signified,
without equivocation, that it considers Japan a peaceloving State. It has taken note of the fact that Japan
has accepted the obligations laid down in the Charter,
and recognized that Japan is able and willing to
discharge those obligations.
23. We, for our part, have never had 'any doubts on
this score, and we are. happy to welcome here a great
country with which France maintains very friendly
relations in every respect. France has a high regard
for the civilization and culture of Japan" and the French
people have the greatest admiration for the qualities
so often demonstrated by the Japanese people. The
French delegation considers that the admission of
Japan to our Organization can only help the United
Nations in the discharge of its task.
24. Japan is joining our ranks at a difficult period
in our history. We are confident that in this Assembly
it will whole-heartedly uphold the principles on which
our Organization was founded. For these reasons, the
French delegation takes very sincere pleasure in
welcoming Japan in our midst.
25. Mr. Krishna MENON (India): The AGSembly
has the privilege and the pleasure of welcoming a new
Member'to the United Nations, and the draft reso-

lution reI
sored bJ
belonginl
26. It i
accordinl
this Ass
sponsors
every A!
Nations.
27. Jap
country,
tries, ha
United 1
today th(
who ,has
of Japall
Deputy
Minister
28. My
co-opera
Japan, "
as well
litical. ar
desires
years th
pressed
Japan. 1
the Peac
that mu!
its view,
and equ
we took
with Ja
India ha
and we

29. Wi
the Uni
for that
day of ~
withdra~

signal, t
which a
half ace
into all
tries, an
a great
to its 0'
wholew
30. Th
g-lad to
in lndol
an impo
31. Wc
and our
Japan d
from th
sympath
today a
world t
neighb01
32. Th
dea'Vour
in the G
Nations.
relatiOn!
Colomb(
operatio

•
623rd meelmg-18 December 1956

of the
> have

exertion of
~asons,

rations
embly.
ropean
>Untry,
e hope
mified,
mplish
Ire the
~ great
United
;t wel1.1, the
to His
>le, inwe are
fficient
I.

from

.ppy to
by the
la and

:ouncil,
ea.vour
zation.
:0 gain
e been
ble for
nciples
ead of
ed the

an the
solid

l

~ified,

peaceJapan
harter,
ing to

Lbts on

1 great

riendly
regard
French
ualitles
~. The
ion of
United

period
sembly
which
ns, the
Ire in

~embly

anew
t reso-

lution recommending the admission of Japan was sponsored by a very large number of Member States
belonging to different parts of the world.
26. It is my privilege to represent my delegation in
according to the Japanese delegation a welcome to
this Assembly and also to. point out that among the
sponsors of the draft resolution appears the name of
every Asian and African Member State of the United
Nations.
27. Japan applied for membership in 1952, and my
country, along with all other Asian and African countries, has consistently supported its admission to the
United Nations. We are also very happy to note that
today the Japanese deiegation is led i:y Mr. Shig'~mitsu,
who has been so largely responsible for the emergence
of Japan in this age of peace and co-operation, the
Deputy Prime Minister and several times Foreign
Minister of Japan.
28. My delegation looks forward to a great deal of
co-operation, as well as advice and assistance, from
Japan, with which we have very ancient cultural ties
as well as more recent relations in the economic, political and other spheres. The' Government of India
desires to state at this moment that during the six
years that Japan was under military occupation, it
pressed for a generous, early and just settlement with
Japan. The Government of India was unable to sign
the Peace Treaty of San Francisco for the reason that
that multilateral treaty contained provisions which, in
its view, did not afford the necessary position of honour
and equality to the Japanese people, and therefore
we took early steps to conclude a separate peace treaty
with Japan and terminate the state of war. Today
India has treaties of trade and friendship with JapL 1,
and we hope these relai:ions will continually increase.

29. With the admission of Japan as a Member or
the United Nations, we are beginning a new period
for that country, which, on the fateful and unfortunate
day of 27 May 1933, left the comity of nations by its
withdrawal from the League of ,Nations. This is a
signal, therefore, for a more united world, a world in,
which a great country of Asia, in the space of less than
half a century, has emerged from an earlier civilization
into all the equipment of modernity, with great industries, and developed its economic life and made itself
a great Power. Asia looks to Japan for its contribution
to its own territorial neighbourhood as well as to the
whole world in the technical, economic and other fields.
30. The countries of A.sia and Africa were particularly
glad t,? we~comt:; '.1e Japanese delegation at Bandung
tn IndoneSIa last year, where that delegation played
an important part.
31. We were unanimous in expressing OUT' sympathy
and our feelings in regard to the atomic bombing of
Japan during the war, the only country that suffered
from ,. this particular form of war punishment. Our
sympathies also go out to the Japanese people, who
today are more exposed than any other people in the
world to the effects of atomic radiation in their
neighbourhood.
32. The Government of India will use its best endeavours to co-operate with the Japanese delegation
in the General Assembly and in the work of the United
Nations. We have no doubt that, whether in its bilateral
relations or in our multilateral relations, as in the
Colombo Plan or in the various, technical and other
operations in which Member States of the United

725

N ati~ns ~re engaged, Japan will make a very important
contnbubon.
33. It is also of importance for 'Us to point out at
this time that the draft resolution reccmmending the
admission of Japan was sponsored by the permanent
members of the Security Council, as well as by States
which in various ways do not see eye to eye with each
other. So far as we are concerned, there is no one
who is more welcome and in regard t<;> whose admission
:ve a~e happier. We. hope that the presence of Japan
111 this Assembly wIll add tc the expression of the
voice of the still unheard countries, and that very
soon Japan's relations vdth its neighbours will become
more regtuar and more organic, as they should be and
as they have been in past history. To all this our
delegation will make its best contribution.
34. Mr. VITETTI (Italy): I wish to associate myself with the inspired words with which the President
has welcomed the admission of Japan :to the United
Nations, and to join with the other representatives
who have preceded me in expressing the deep gratification of the Italian delegation at this event, which
was strongly advocated. by the Italian Foreign Minister
during the general debate [588th meeting].
35. Last y~ar, the gratification of Italy at being ad.,.
mitted, together with other States, to the United
Nations, was somewhat lessened by the fact that at
that time it had not been possible to obtain the admission of Japan. Now we -are particularly happy that
this lamentable vacancy has been filled.
36. The friendship which has always existed between
our two countries and which dates back to the seventeenth century adds a special satisfaction to the privilege
I have here in welcoming with warm sympathy the
long-expected admission of the Japanese nation as the
eightieth Member of the United Nations.
37. The unanimous vote which has just been cast in
favour of the admission of Japan reflects clearly the
profound respect we all profess for the thousands of.
years of high, civilization of that G.ountry, as well as
the sincere conviction that the Go1}ernment of Japan
not only will be a strong supporter of the principles
established by our Charter, butwj11 also make a highly
important contribution to the fulfilment of'our basic
common aim--the fostering of peace and security
throughout the' world.
.
38. The admission of Japan to membership of, the
United Nations is certainly an. important addition to
the vast number of peace-Ioying States which are
pledged to defend in every part ot the world, with a
de0p sense of responsibility and with firm determination,
the fundamental principles upon which rests the hope
of all mankind, and which will, ensure the universal
triumph of justice, freedom and democracy.
39. ,Considering the political and economic importance of Japan in the modern world, we feel sure that
its contribution in all fields of the vast activities of
the United Nations will be of considerable consequence.
Its <tdmission is also a new and, decisive step towards·
the final goal of universal membership, which is obviously our common aim. Allow me to express the
hope that the few States, and first of all Germany,
which are still out of the United Nations for reasons
not deriving from their own will, although they meet
all the requirements asked for by the Chatter, will be
able in the near future to acquire full membership and
thus ensure to our work the contribution of their
experience and wisdom•.

126

General Aeaamb~EIeventh llellion-Plenary Meetings

40. Let ,therefore welcome today the admission of
Japan as an important step towards this final goal and
as a most valuable acquisition for the United Nations.
41. Mr. KUZNETSOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russia1~) : The delegation
of the Soviet Union congratulates the Japanese people
and Government on the admission of Japan to the
United Nations.
42. The representatives of the Soviet Union in the
United Nations are eager to co-operate with the representatives of Japan in the solution of problems before
the United Nations. As you know, the Soviet and
Japanese Govenunents, in their joint declaration 19
October 1956 announcing the resumpticn of normal
diplomatic relations between the two countriesJ stated
th.at they would base their relations on the principles
of the United Nations Charter.
43. Japan's participation in the work of the United
Nations will help to promote practical co-operation
between Japan and other States. By following an
independent and peace-loving policYJ Japan will be abie
to make its own c0"i1tribution to tlle work of strengthening peace and security in the Far East and throughout the world. «
44. The admission of Japan to the United Nations
is another step forward in the process of implementing
the principle of the uiUversality of the United Nations.
The Soviet Union. supports this important principle
and, for its partJ is doing ·everything possible to ensure
that the United Nations becomes a real centre of practical co-operation between all States in the interests of
peace and international security.
45. It should, however, be noted that there is still
evidence of a policy of discrimination in the United
Nations in connexion with the realization of the principle of universality. While expressing satisfaction at
the admission of Japan J a large Asian countryJ to the
United Nations, the SO'vie~ delegation regrets that
another Asian country-the Monl?;olian Peopl~s Republic-sull remains outside our Organization. A few
days ago, certain members of the Security Council,
induding the United States, the United :KIngdom and
France, a~in prevented the admission of the Mongolian
People's Republic to the United Nations J and thereby
once ~gain flouted the will of the overwhelming- majority of the General Assembly which J in its resolution
[918 (X) J of 8 December 1955; recommended the
admission of the Mongolian People's Republic to the
United Nations.
46.. The Soviet delegation is confidentthat the United
Nations will find means to overcome the obstacles
~rtifici!111y raised by certain Western Powers and will
become a truly universal organization.
47. The Soviet delegation welcomes the Ja.panese
representatives who. are present .and hopes that the
United Nations will receive fhe support of Japan in
its efforts to maintain peace.
48. Sir Pierson PIXON (United Kingdom) : It is a
great pleasure for me to join in welcoming theemi~ent
FClreign .• M:nisterof Japan and the distinguished delee:ation which· accompanies hitn J.as they take their seats
here. among us today.
49. Justice has at .last been done to theGQvf;..:""met1.t
and people of JapanJand it is a privilege for us 1.0 be
here. to· wifuess •. tIns event. It will give great pleasure
to my Government and the British people to know that
Japan has taken its. rightful place in. this Organization.

50. Japan has an important role to play here and can
contribute much to our deliberations. Its great experience in the field of international affairs ....mhe of
inestimable valueJ and in the economic and social
fields the United Nations will derive much benefit
from the -collaboration of a country with so many
achievements to its credit. In particu1arJ as one of the
great nations of Asia, JapanJs pr~sence will do much
to assist us in our consideration of matters affecting
that most important area of the world.
51. History and a community of outlook bind together the island countries of Japan and the United
Kingdom. My delegation looks forward to the closest
co-operation here in the United Nations with our
Japanese friends.
52, Mr. LODGE (United States of America): It is
a great pleasure to extend the wann welcome and greetings of the United States to the newest Member of
the United Nations, a country with one of the old~st
civilizations in the world : Japan.
53. Out of the productive springs of Japanese Cl.1lture
have come some of the finer things of life which have
benefited the entire world. Classical Japanese drama,
the delicate feeling~ of JaFanese art, the simple
beauty of Japanese architecture and the subtlety of
Japanese poetry have enriched the lives of all humanity. Furthermore, with the admission of Japan
to our membership, we bring into our midst not
only an ancient civilization, but also a country with
an advanced technology and a modern outlook.
This advanced level of technology win enable Japan to
contribute greatly to the industri2J ':evelopment of .less
developed areas. As an industrial nation with a large
international trade, Japan can be expected to contribute
in many different ways to the work of the United
Nations.
54:- Japan began its ties with the modern war:,.. a
century ago. The United States was actively involved
in those new contacts from the very be.=';nning. Our
re1ationsJ with the exception of the tragic period of
the Second World WarJ have always been cordial and
c10seJ and we confidently believe that they will continue
to be so in the future.
'
55. We are gratified that a few years ago Mr. DullesJ
who is now the Secretary of State of the UnitedStatesJ
.personally undertook the negotiations which resulted
in the Peace Tr~aty with Japan J restoring Japan to its
proper sovereign role in the community of nations.
56. The steady arid vigorous efforts of many Governments and many peoples have finally resulted in JapanJs
admission to this great world forum J after it had been
unjustly denied its rightful place for many yearr by
a clear-cut abuse of the veto. Let me in particular pay
a tribute to the untiring efforts of the representative
of Peru, Mr. Belaunde, as Chairman of the Good
Offices Committee. The part that Mr. Belaunde played
was indispensable and is a monument to his sagacity
and statesmanship.
57. As the representative of the host Government,
I extend a cordial greeting to the Foreign Minister
of Japan, Mr. Shigemitsu, and assure him that the
United States delegation to the. United. Nations is
looking forward to the constructive contributions which
we .are confident the Japanese delegation will make to
the United Nations in all the complicated issues with
which we must deal.
58. The admission of· this great nation marks a very
important day for the United Nations. JapariJs ad-

62Srd meetin&'-18 December 1956

here and can
ts great exrs ;;.. he of

m

: and social
nuch benefit
th so many
lS one of the
vill do much
ers affecting
lok bind tol the United
o the closest
IS with our
erica): It is
le and greetMember of
)f the olcbst

lOese c1.tlture
: which have
lnese drama,
the simple
subtlety of
: of all hun of Japan
. midst not
:ountry with
:rn outlook.
ble Japan to
Iment of less
with a hirge
to contribute
the United

~rn wor:,.. a
'ely inVOlved
·:nning. Our
ic period of
cordial and
will continue

Mr. Dulles,
nited States,
lich resulted
Japan to its
)f nations.
any Govern~d in Japan's
it had been
tly yearr by
trticular pay

~presentative

f the Good
:unde played
his sagacity

:;overnment,
gn Minister
im that the
Nations is
ttions which
vill make to
issues with

larks a very
Japan's ad-

mission will greatly increase the influence, vigour and
value of our Organization.
59. The PRESIDENT: I now have -the great hOllour
and pleasur.e of calling on the representative of Japan.

60. Mr. SHIGEMITSU (Japan): On behalf of the
Governmt!nt and people of Japan, I wish to express
our profound gratitude for the warm and friendly
words just spoken by the President in welcoming my
country to the United Nations. It is indeed a matter
for gratification to us that our admission to this great
world Organization has taken place during the presidency of this Assembly of a distinguished statesman
and diplomat who represents our traditional friend,
Thailand. I wish also to express my sincere thanks for
the kind greetings of the Vice-Presidents of this
Assembly.
61. Japan first applied for inember~hip n~rly five
years ';$0. It has been a long and at1X1ous watt for us.
But our people fully understand that our failure to
be admitted until today has been due to external reasons
beyond our £ontrol. This has given us all the more
cause to receive with a deeper sense of gratitude the
words spoken. by the representatives of those friendly
States which have so ardently supJ?Orted the admission
of my country.
62. I wish to avail myself of th;s opportunity to express our sincere appreciation to the eminent representatives of those States which have endeavoured
unsparingly durbg these long years to enable us to
realize our cherished hope. Let me also tender our
heartfelt thanks to the Secretary-General, who has
steadfastly supported our cause with his great wisdom,
from which we have benefited enormously.
63. The people of Japan today desire peace for all
time, and are d~eply conscious of the high ideals controlling human relationships. We have determined to
preserVe our security and existence, trusting in the
justice and faith of the peace-loving peoples of the
world. Vile recognize that all peoples of the world have
the right to live in peace, free from fear and want.
We desire to occupy an honoured place in an international society striving for the preservation of peace
and the banishment of tyranny and slavery, oppresllion
and intolerance, for all time from the earth. We be1i~ve
that no nation is responsible to itself alone, but that
the laws of political morality are universal: and that
obedience to such laws is incumbent upon all nations
that would sustain. their own sovereignty and justify
their sovereign relationships with other nations.
64. These sentiments e."lCpress the firm conviction of
the people of Jap:m, a conviction which is expressed
in the preamble of our Constitution and which is in
complete accord with the Purposes and Prin~iples set
forth in the Charter of the United Nations.
65. The application for membership submitted by
. 16 J
1952 [S /2673] t t d
Japan on·
une
. /
S a e :
l'The Japanese peop-Ie have an earnest desire to
participafe in the work of the United Nations and to
utilize the purposes and principles of the Charter as
a guide to the conduct of their affairs."
The declaration accompanying· the application stated:
l'The Government of Japan hereby accepts .the
obligations contained in the Charter of the Umted
Nations, and .undertakes to honour them,. by all
means at its disposal, :irom the day when .Japan
becomes a Member of the United Nations."

111

We solemnly renew these pleliges today as we take
our seat among you.
66. Many grave problems now beset the world. The
United Nations is faced with a momentous challengethe crises in the Middle East and i., Eastern Europe.
They are evidence of the need for vigorous action by
this Organization in order to maintain peace and
security.
67. In the effort to solve the Middle East crisis and
thereby relax international tensions, the United Nations,
with the overwhelming support of its Members, has
played a tremendous role, the effectiveness and importance of which is indeed incalculable. It is epochal that
it has created an international Emergency Force and
is effectively employing that Force as a new instrument
in £oping with a most difficult situation. It is our
earnest hope that the Unit~d Nations will always com~
mand the widest possible power consonant with its
mission as an instrument of world peace. I feel it appropriate at this point to pay a tribute to the SecretaryGeneral, who has played an effective role in implementing the decision of the United Nations.
68. In regard to the situation in Eastern Europe, we
Japanese cannot but feel deep sympathy for the plight
of the people of Hungary. We fervently hope that
the voice of tlj.e· Hung-arian people will be heard and
thL their situation will be relieved in accordance with
the resolutions of the General Assembly.
69. Janan is gratified that, together with the maintenance~ of peace, the United Nations places great
importance on humanitarianism. It has taken up the
problen-' of disarmament as a major task in the pursuit
of its objective of maintaining peace. It is also devoting
its efforts to the prohibition of weapons of mass
destruction, because of its vital concern for humani~r.
70. Being the only country which has experienced
the horrors of the atomic bomb, Japan knows its tra!pc
consequences. It was from this standpoint of humamty
that, in response to the earnest desire of the people,·
both ~fouses of the Diet of Japan adopted in February
1956 a resolution calling for the prohibition of the
use and testing of nuclear bombs. It ca.'11e from a
prayeriul desire that mankind might not again be
visited by the horrors of mass destruction.
71. Vve earnestly hope that., under the leadership of
the United Nations, the great task of disarmament will
be successfully consummated and mankind secured from
a calamitous fate and relieved from the inhibitive psychology of fear. It is most encouraging that the United
Nations is now taking an active initiative in facilitating
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
72. Whatever the uncertainties and the tension in
which the world is placed today, and whatever their
causes, there should be no problems that cannot be
resolved peacefully with the united strength of the
eighty nations which now constitute our Organization.
It wouM be utter folly for mankind, which today has
entered upon the atomic age, to pursue a path that
would lead to its own annihilation.
73. In the region of Asia in which Japan i.s situated,
the world situation is reflected and here, too, tensions
have not receded. No one can say with certainty that
a situation like that in the Middle. East will not arise
in Asia. I am moved to say that the United Nations,
in the spirit of the Charter, must constantly be alert to
situations wbich are· a potential threat to peace; it must
not simply cope with crises after they have occurred,
but devise measures to prevent them.

General Auembb--Eleventh seuion~Plenat'3"MeetiDp

74. Especially in East Asia, where conditions of
peace have not yet been fully restored, there are still
mrmy potential dangers. In this connexion, I believe
that we should separate ourselves from ideoleJical
issues and devise a realistic approach to the practical
problems involved. From this standpoint, Japan has
resumed diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union,
terminating an abnormal technical state of war which
had continued for eleven years. We took this step in
the belief that it would contribute to peace and security
in East Asia. It goes without saying that to find the
basis for lasting peace and stability in East Asia is an
obligation of East Asian nations.
75. The basis for peace and progress in Asia is to be
round in the economic development of the countries of
the region. The countries of Asia today are devoting
their full .efforts toward their economic advancement.
Not a few of them require the further assistance of
the United Nations and its Members in order to make
their efforts more fruitful. Japan's relations with them
are those of mutual co-operation and common destiny,
whether in the political or economic fields, and it holds
great expectations from the growth and development
of those countries.
76. Nationalism thrived in Eastern Europe after the
First World War, and has risen in the Arab and Asian
regions since the Second World War. It is a natural
process in the liberation of mankind. I believe ·it should
be. fostered with understanding, but that it should
avoid running into excp.sses or into extreme nationalism.
77. Japan todayfaces·many difficulties in maintaining
the livelihood of its people. Foremost among these
difficulties is the problem of supporting an excessive
population in its small territory. I need not say that
the motive power to maintain livelihood and raise living
standards lies in the industry of the people. Our people
do not shirk hard work. Both men and women are
labouring industriously' at their places of work. But
the great problem of national policy is how to make
effective the labours of our people. We know that the
be~t .solution to our population problem is to be found
in internal economic development and in the promotion
of foreign trade through increas~d produ~tion. Hence
we are extremely sensitive to obstructions to international trade.
78. J apa1i, therefore, welcomes any efforts of the
United Nations to promote the freer flow of people
and goods. acro'""> national boundaries as an ,effective
policy of peace. In this respect, all of us would be
building a firm basis for peace and justice by developing the unexploited resources of the world and making
life 1I!ore abundant for .peoples everywhere.
79~ Japan is a country that has a world-wide interest
in trade and commerce. At the same time, it is a country
with the history and traditions' of an Asian nation.
Herein is to be found the reason for our participation
in the Asian-African Conference at Bandung last year.
We whole-heartedly support the ten principles of peace
adopted by that Conference, which are .in complete
accord with the spirit of the United Nations Charter.
Peace is one and indivisible. Japan believes that the
United Nations is the world's central driving force
for peace.
80. The substance of Japan~s political, economic and
cultural life is the product of the fusion within the
last century of the civilizations of the Orient and the
Occident; In a way, Japan may well be regarded as
a bridge between the East and the West. It is fully
conscious of the great responsibilities of such a position.

81. May I close my remarks by expressing again
before this great Assembly the resolve of Japan to
serve shlcerely the high cause of the United Nations.
AGENDA ITEM 59

Question of amending article 2 of the Statute oi
the International Law Commission to increase
the membership of the Commission
REPORTS OF THE SIXTH COMMITTEE (Aj34Z7 AND
CORR.l) AND THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (Aj3461)

co
fou
A
As
the
Ac
for
pro
for
in

Mr. Bailey (Australia), Rapporteur of the Sixth
Comtnittee, presented the report of that Committee
and then spoke as follows:
82. Mr. BAILEY (Australia), Rapporteur of the
Sixth Committee: The Committee wishes me to draw
the attention of the General Assembly to paragraph 13
of the report, for that paragraph places on record the
existence of certain understandings reached between
groups of delegations as to the manner of allocating
the additic!1al seats on the International Law Commissi9n.
Pursuant to rule 68 of fhe rules of proced·ure, it was
decidea not to discuss the report of the Sixth Committee.
.
83. The PRESIDENT: As no Member of the Assembly wishes to explain his vote on the draft resolution recommended hy the Sixth Committee [Aj3427
and Corr.l], I shall put the draft resolution to the vote.
The draft resolution was adopted by 75 votes to none,
with 1 abstention.
AGENDA IT.EM 18

Election of the members of the International Law
Commission
,.

84: The PRESIDENT: May :i: draw the attention
of the representatives to two notes by the SecretaryGeneral: one containing the list of candidates nominated
by Member .States· for membership of the International
Law Commission [Aj3155jRev.l] ; the other outlining
the method of election of members of the Commission
[Aj3459].
8S. In accordance with rule' 94 of the rules of procedure, the election will be held by secret ballot.
86, I recognize the representative of Paraguay on a
p01ntof .order.
87. Mr. MONTERO DE VARGAS (Paraguay)
(translated from Spanish) : On behalf of the de1egation~
of EI.Salvador and Uruguay, who do me much honour,
and of my own .delegation, I request the President and
the .represen~atives to the General Assembly to agree
to the postponement of this item until tomorrow afternoon, because for weighty reasons we are not yet able
to state our positions with respect to this election. I
therefore hope that the President. will agree to my
request, with the concurrence of the Assembly, and
that tbis item will be postponed until tomorrow afternoon, 19 December.
88. Mr. QUIROGA GALDO (Bolivia) (translated
from Spanish): The Bolivian delegation opposes the
postponement of the election of the members of the
International Law Commission which is scheduled for
today. We consider that there are no reasons that could
;justify a postponement. All the repr.esentatives present
here are ready ,to vote, and for at least a hlonth the
Foreign Ministries of all the countries have been committed to positions with which we are all famiIi~r; these

Pri

729

623rd meeting-IS Decf'.mher 1956

;sing again
f Japan to
l Nations.
Statute 0:(
increase

I)

/347:7 AND
V3461)
the Sixth
Committee
eur of the
[le to draw

,ragraph 13
record the
~d between
t allocating
Law Com-

r'ure, it was
~ixth Com-

of the Asdraft reso:e [Aj3427
to the vote.
~es to none,

ional Law

e attention
Secretarynominated
lternational
:r outlining
:omnllssion

les of prolalIot.
,guay on a

Paraguay)
delegations
ch honour,
~sident and
y to agree
rrow afterot yet able
election. I
ree to my
mbly, and
'Ww after-

(translated
pposes the
ers of the
lecluled for
that could
res present
hionth the
been comiliar ; these

commitments could hardly be affected by a twentyfour-hour postponement of the vote scheduled for toda.y.
A further consideration is the fact that the General
Assembly elects the members of the Commission on
the basis of the personal qualifications of each candidate.
Accordingly, the Assembly votes not for States but
for individuals, and hence it would be wrong and improper to draw up lists of candidates, and a fort;ori
for the various regional groups which exist informally
in the United Nations to present such lists.
89. For these reasons the Bolivian delegation requests
the General Assembly to proceed immediately with the
election of the twenty-one members of the International
Law Commission.
90. The PRESIDENT: I shall now put to the vote
the proposal that the election of the members of the
International Law Commission be postponed.
The proposal was rejected by 27 votes to 4, with. 27
abstentions.
91. The PRESIDENT: We shall now proceed to the
election of the members of the International Law
Commission.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mangasha
(Ethiopia) and Mr. de Gripenberg (Finland) acted
as tellers.
A vote was taken by seclret ballot.
78
Number of ballot papers :
Invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
78
Abstentions:
0
Number of members voting:
78
Required majority:
40
Numbmr of votes obtained:
Mr. Spl;opoulos (Greece)
, 68
64
Mr. Pal (India)
Mr. PadilIa Nervo (Mexico)
63
Mr. Scelle (France)
63
Mr. Amado (Brazil)
61
Mr. Edmonds (United States of America) 59
Mr. Garcia Amador (Cuba). . . . . . . . . . .. 58
Mr. Zourek (Czechoslovalcia)
, 57 "
Mr. Fitzmaurice (United Kingdom)
S6
Mr. TunIcin (USSR)
, 55
Mr. El-Khour~ (Syria)
, .. 54
Mr. Matine Daftary (Iran)
S4
Mr. Bartos (Yugoslavia)
, 52
Mr. EI-Erian (Egypt)
S2
Mr. Sandstrom(Sweden)
"
51
Mr. Yokota (Japan)
51
Mr. Ago (Italy)
49
Mr. Khoman (Thailand)
,
49
Mr. Hsu (China)
48
Mr. Fra1ll;ois (Netherlands)
:
45
Mr. Verdross (Austria)
40
Mr. Ulloa SotoriIayor (Peru). "
37

Printed in U.S.A.

Mr. Salamanca Figueroa (Bolivia)
35
Mr. Cang (Cambodia)
32
Mr. Alfaro (Panama)................. 31
Mr. Trujillo (Ecuador)
" 30
Mr. Ruiz Moreno (Argentin.a)
29
Mr. Khan (Pakistan)
27
Mr. Trias de Besgiro (Spain)
25
Mr. Myint Tbein (Burma). . . . . . . . . . . .. 22
Mr. Concepcion (Philippines)
17
Mr. P~rera (Ceylon)
15
Mr. Taborda Ferrdra (Portugal)
" 13
Mr. Sayre (United States of America)
12
Mr. Pratt de Maria (TJruguay)
" 12
Mr. Urquia (El Salvador)
10
Mr. Ocampo (Chile).................. 8
Mr. Iberico Rodriguez (Peru)
" 6
Mr. Aycinena Salazar (Guatemala).... .. 4
Mr. Balladore-Pallieri (Italy).......... 4
Mr. Escudero (Ecuador) .... , .. .. . ... .. 4
Mr. Lopez Pineda (Honduras)......... 4
Mr. Nunez (El Salvador)
" 4
Mr. Ramirez Boettner (Par~ouay)...... 3
Mr. Sangoudhai (Thailand)............ 3
Mr. Sapena Pastor (P;;,raguay)
" 3
Mr. Rolz Bennett (GuateJ..nala)......... 2
Mr. Argiiello Vargas (Nicaragua)...... 1
Mr. Valle Candia (Nicani,gua) . . . . . . . . . . 1
The first twenty-one persons listed above, having
obtained the required majority, were elected to membership of the International Law Commissimt.
AGENDA ITEM 5

Constitution of the M&in Committees and election
of o:fficers .
AMENDMENTS TO RULES 31, 38, 39 AND 101 OF THE
RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE GENER!AL ASSEMBLY:
REPORT OF THE SIXTH COMMITTEE (Aj3404)

Mr. Bailey (Austral-ia), J?p,pporteur of the Sixth
Committee, presented the report of that Committee.
Pttrsuant to rule 68 of the rules of procedure, it was
decided not to discuss the report of the Sixth Committee.
.
92. The PRESIDENT: Since no representative
wishes to explain his vote on the draft resolution
presented by the Sixth Committee [Aj3404], and since
the Committee approved its draft resolution without
a vote, I presume . that the Assembly will adopt it in
the same way.
.
The draft resolut~on 'was adopted.
93. The PRESIDENT: B~fore adjourning the meeting, I have to announce that the French delegation
will have a statement to make in connexion with
the question of the Middle East at the end' of this
afternoon's meeting.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

S-77001-May 1957-2,200
