S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6151st meeting
Friday, 26 June 2009, 3.10 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. İlkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Turkey)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Koudougou
Mr. Long Zhou
Mr. Hernández-Milian
Mr. Škrabalo
Ms. Gasri
Mr. Miyamoto
Mr. Gebreel
Mr. Heller
Mr. Zheglov
Mr. Muhumuza
Mr. Saltonstall
Mr. McBride
Mr. Dang Hoang Giang

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2009/277)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-38414 (E)

*0938414*

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers, as I
indicated at the morning session, to please limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
would like to begin by thanking the presidency for
having convened this important debate. At the same
time, since this is my last address to the Security
Council this month, I wish to express my gratitude to
you, Mr. President, and to the Turkish delegation for
successfully leading this important body during this
month. I am sure that your wisdom, guidance and
diplomatic skills will serve as excellent examples to all
of us.
This year, the agenda item on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict marks the tenth anniversary
of its consideration by the Security Council, to which
Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches the utmost
importance. Bosnia and Herzegovina associates itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
the Czech Republic on behalf of the European Union.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/277)
vividly describes how civilians continue to suffer the
consequences of armed conflict and to be the target of
attacks. In some cases women, children and unarmed
men have become the primary target of attacks by
parties to the conflict. An unfortunate characteristic of
contemporary conflict is that civilian casualties often
outnumber combatants killed on the battlefield. Bosnia
and Herzegovina is deeply concerned by such attacks,
especially those deliberately targeting humanitarian
workers during their noble missions.
My delegation condemns all violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law.
Given its own painful experience, Bosnia and
Herzegovina always recognizes the need for strict
compliance with international humanitarian law. The
international community must strengthen mechanisms
to enhance compliance by State and non-State parties
to armed conflict with international law, in particular

2

based on provisions of the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.
As a State party, Bosnia and Herzegovina
reiterates its commitment to the provisions of the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). The Court must be the real guardian of the
provisions of international humanitarian law. In that
regard, combating impunity is a factor in preventing
the commission of such acts against civilians.
Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomed the adoption
of the text of the Convention on Cluster Munitions at
the conference held in Dublin in May 2008. Bosnia and
Herzegovina signed the Convention on Cluster
Munitions at the Signing Conference of the Convention
held on 3 December 2008 in Oslo. The Convention on
Cluster Munitions will serve as an indispensable legal
instrument to broadly contribute to the protection of
civilians during armed conflict.
My country welcomes increased engagement by
the Security Council on issues connected to the
protection of civilians. In that regard, we would like to
commend the Security Council on the adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2009/1, at the last
meeting on this agenda item, and the updated aidememoire on the protection of civilians contained in its
annex.
I am convinced that the aide-memoire, produced
as a result of close cooperation between the Security
Council and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, is an indispensable tool that will
help peacekeeping missions to successfully carry out
their mandates.
My delegation supports the work of the Security
Council Group of Experts on the Protection of
Civilians as a body that will contribute to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict through its
analyses. Bosnia and Herzegovina would like to
reiterate once again the importance of the role of
regional and subregional organizations in conflict
resolution, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and conflict
prevention. Bearing in mind that the majority of
conflicts today are non-international, a regional and
subregional approach would lead to more workable and
lasting solutions. We invite competent United Nations
bodies and agencies to work closely with regional
organizations in that regard.

09-38414

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

Finally, the best way to reduce the consequences
of armed conflict is the timely address of the root
causes.
The President: I give
representative of Lichtenstein.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We welcome
this debate and the excellent report submitted by the
Secretary-General (S/2009/277). In the ten years since
the Council first took up the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, the changing nature of
armed conflict has continued to have a profound
impact on the plight of civilians in armed conflicts.
And indeed the report before us reveals a continued
gap between the existing standards of international
humanitarian law and the current realities on the
ground.
We hope that this debate will prepare the ground
for an open debate in November on the occasion of the
tenth anniversary, that reaffirms the commitment of the
Council to this agenda and results in a set of effective
measures to further advance it. Among the recent steps
taken, we welcome in particular the adoption of the
third version of the aide-memoire and the
establishment of the Security Council Expert Group on
the Protection of Civilians. As illustrated in the
Secretary-General’s report and its annex, the
challenges to the Council in the area of implementation
continue to be very significant.
The development and universal acceptance of
international humanitarian law is among the landmark
achievements in the history of international law.
Among its core principles are the distinction between
combatants and non-combatants, proportionality of the
use of force as well as the requirement to take all
feasible measures to minimize civilian casualties. The
applicable provisions of international humanitarian law
must be respected in any armed conflict and by any
party to it, under all circumstances and irrespective of
the question of the legality of the use of force itself.
The repeated violations of these rules, such as in
the conflicts in Sri Lanka and Gaza, warrant a clear
response from the Council in order to promote the
observance of international humanitarian law in
practice. The Council must unequivocally demand
compliance with international humanitarian law by all
parties to a conflict and call for accountability in cases
where massive and systematic violations have
occurred.

09-38414

Such accountability mechanisms are, ideally,
established at the national level, where necessary with
the
assistance
of
regional
or
international
organizations. When necessary, the Council should
establish commissions of inquiry or similar bodies in
order to enhance accountability for serious violations.
In the most serious cases of the inability or
unwillingness of the State concerned, the Council can
consider referring the matter to the International
Criminal Court (ICC).
One of the most important goals of the
establishment of the ICC was to promote effective
investigations and prosecutions at the national level.
We therefore fully support the call of the SecretaryGeneral on Member States to adopt legislation that
holds perpetrators accountable for genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes and other serious
violations of international humanitarian law.
Access to civilians in need of assistance is a
grave problem in the area of the protection of civilians.
Access is often unsafe, or is granted too late or under
conditions that hinder effective delivery. The annex of
the report refers to bureaucratic constraints imposed by
the authorities in charge, the intensity of hostilities and
attacks on humanitarian personnel and assets as the
most severe and prevalent access constraints. The
restrictions by the Government of Sri Lanka on the
delivery of supplies to the conflict areas, the unclear
and inconsistent criteria and procedures on the entry of
certain relief material to Gaza and the dramatic rise in
kidnappings of humanitarian personnel are disturbing
examples from the recent past.
The Council must call, where necessary, on
parties to conflicts to remove all unwarranted
impediments to humanitarian access and allow safe
passage for civilians seeking to flee conflict zones, and
it must call for temporary ceasefires that are long
enough to enable effective relief action by
humanitarian actors. The Council has a particular
obligation to protect United Nations staff and to ensure
that there is no impunity for attacks on humanitarian
and peacekeeping personnel, which are war crimes
under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court.
The protection of civilians is an inherent task for
all peacekeeping missions, not merely a military task,
so all components of peacekeeping missions must
contribute to carrying out protection mandates. We thus

3

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

welcome the development of mission-specific inclusive
strategies and plans of action. That applies, in
particular, to acts of sexual violence. When committed
on a large scale and in a systematic and targeted
manner, sexual violence is not just a by-product of
armed conflict, but rather a method of warfare aimed at
destroying the social fabric of communities in order to
achieve political and military ends.
In that respect, we reiterate our support for
resolution 1820 (2008) and call on the Security
Council to provide clear guidance on how to protect
civilians from acts of sexual violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
observer of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I express our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening this
debate on a matter of immense importance to Palestine.
The Security Council’s attention to the need for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is both
appropriate and necessary. We also express
appreciation to you and your country, Turkey, for your
wise stewardship of the Council this month. I would
also like to add that I am delighted to see you, as a
good friend, presiding over the Security Council.
I also wish to thank Mr. John Holmes, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his presentation of
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/277) and for his
compelling statement. We hope that the Council will
continue its efforts to address this issue in an effective
manner until serious protection of civilians in armed
conflict is ensured in all cases, without selectivity or
inaction based on political considerations.
While the past 10 years of Security Council
efforts have contributed to increased awareness among
Member States and the broader international
community of the need to provide protection and to
respond to protection issues, the situation confronting
civilians in today’s conflicts is tragically similar to that
which prevailed a decade ago. That can be primarily
attributed to the failure of parties to respect, and to
ensure respect of, their legal obligations to protect
civilians and spare them from the cruel consequences
of war and aggression.
The Palestinian people are all too familiar with
the failure of the international community to guarantee
the protection accorded to them under international

4

law, including humanitarian law and human rights law.
For more than four decades, the Palestinian people
have endured appalling levels of human suffering at the
hands of Israel, the occupying Power, in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. We
reiterate our call, as we have in previous debates on
this issue, that the protection of peoples under foreign
occupation must be a priority undertaking of the
United Nations, in particular the Security Council,
which has clear responsibilities in that regard.
The international community’s repeated inability
to hold Israel accountable for its violations and war
crimes has regrettably reinforced Israel’s impunity and
lawlessness, permitting it to continue using military
force and collective punishment against the defenceless
Palestinian people under its occupation and, in essence,
absolving it from its legal obligations as an occupying
Power.
In that regard, it should be recalled that
protection provisions can be found in many
instruments of law, including the Geneva Conventions,
particularly the Fourth Geneva Convention, the
provisions of which explicitly aim to ensure the safety
of civilians in armed conflict, including specific
provisions for civilians under foreign occupation; the
Additional Protocols to the Geneva Conventions; the
human rights Covenants; the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court; and numerous United
Nations resolutions.
Never has the absence of protection for the
Palestinian civilian population been more evident than
it was during Israel’s three-week aggression against the
Gaza Strip. More than 1,400 Palestinians were killed in
the Israeli onslaught, the overwhelming majority
civilians, including hundreds of children and women;
and more than 5,500 Palestinians, including more than
1,800 children, were injured as a result of the use of
excessive and indiscriminate force and lethal, and even
illegal, weaponry and ammunition by the occupying
forces against the civilian population. Civilian areas
and objects, including United Nations schools where
civilians were known to be sheltering from the
violence, were directly targeted by the occupying
Power, as confirmed by the number of casualties and
the extent of the destruction, as well as by several
investigations, including by the Secretary-General’s
Board of Inquiry, the League of Arab States
Independent Fact Finding Committee on Gaza and

09-38414

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

many human rights and humanitarian organizations on
the ground.
Among countless other violations, the occupying
Power also attacked humanitarian personnel and
clearly-marked ambulances, wantonly destroyed public
and civilian infrastructure, including thousands of
homes, targeted United Nations schools and buildings
and obstructed humanitarian access and access to
medical treatment for the wounded and sick, while
continuously denying an entire population their most
basic rights, including their rights to food and water.
Not only do all such actions constitute serious,
systematic violations of international law, but many
amount to war crimes, for which accountability must
be pursued.
In that regard, as the report rightly states, the
absence of accountability and, worse still, the lack in
many instances of any expectation thereof, are what
allow violations to thrive to a large extent. We thus
fully agree with the recommendations in the report, in
particular the recommendation that the Council
mandate commissions of inquiry to examine situations
where there are concerns regarding serious violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, including with a view to identifying
those responsible and prosecuting them at the national
level or referring the situation to the International
Criminal Court.
In this regard, the aforementioned independent
inquiries and investigations into Israel’s military
aggression against the Gaza Strip clearly confirm that
Israel committed grave breaches of international law,
as it continues to do with its ongoing blockade of the
Gaza Strip in collective punishment of the entire
civilian population, and other illegal measures,
including colonization activities, throughout the
occupied Palestinian territory.
We persist in our calls for serious steps to pursue
accountability and justice with regard to Israel’s crimes
against the Palestinian civilian population. That is
imperative for healing the deep physical and societal
wounds and trauma inflicted upon the Palestinian
people.
The international community, including the
Security Council, must follow up on the findings and
recommendations
from
United
Nations-related
investigations,
including
the
United
Nations
Headquarters Board of Inquiry and the investigation

09-38414

being undertaken by the Human Rights Council’s factfinding commission. The Palestinian people will never
forget what happened, but, at the same time, the
international community must never let it happen
again. That can be guaranteed only if accountability
and the duty to make reparations for violations are
enforced.
At the same time, urgent measures must be
undertaken to end the unlawful Israeli blockade of the
Gaza Strip, which has driven socio-economic
conditions to deplorable levels. For two years now,
since June 2007, Israel, the occupying Power, has
deliberately obstructed humanitarian access, the
movement of persons, including sick persons needing
treatment unavailable in Gaza, and the movement of all
goods, including the most essential goods such as food
and medical and fuel supplies. This inhumane blockade
has perpetuated the dire humanitarian crisis, especially
among the most vulnerable, who continue to live amid
the destruction and trauma of Israel’s aggression due to
its refusal to allow even the entry of materials essential
for reconstruction, leaving over 50,000 people
homeless and with wholly inadequate health care, clean
water, electricity and sanitation. This situation has
deepened the hardships and indignation of a civilian
population that is unquestionably entitled to protection
under humanitarian law and should not be left to the
mercy of the occupying Power.
As long as Israel continues to breach its legal
obligations towards the Palestinian civilian population,
the Security Council must act to uphold its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations
and ensure compliance by Israel with international law
and United Nations resolutions. If Israel as the
occupying Power continues to defy the Council’s calls,
the Council must take appropriate and concrete
measures to protect the civilian population and ensure
respect for the instruments of international law that are
supposed to provide civilians with protection from
human rights violations and crimes, including in
situations of foreign occupation. We are convinced that
the international community has no choice but to make
progress in this regard and create a different and safer
situation than that faced today by the Palestinian
civilian population under Israeli occupation.
The President: I give
representative of Switzerland.

the

floor

to

the

5

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

Mrs. Grau (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, allow me to thank you for organizing
this open debate. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2009/277) and the
Under-Secretary-General, Mr. John Holmes, for his
briefing.
My delegation would like to associate itself with
the statement made by the Costa Rican presidency of
the Human Security Network, of which Switzerland is
part.
The concept of the protection of civilians is based
on respect for the rules of international humanitarian
law, human rights and refugee law. In this context, I
would like to focus on the following aspects of the
report: the challenges with regard to non-State actors,
the fight against impunity, the ways by which the
Security Council can enhance the protection of
civilians, including the commissions of inquiry, and
systematic information on humanitarian access.
First, Switzerland entirely shares the SecretaryGeneral’s analysis regarding respect for international
norms by non-State actors. We believe that it is
indispensable that the international community support
initiatives of humanitarian organizations that engage
non-State groups in order to improve the protection of
civilians. At the operational level, we would like to
welcome the systematic work of the International
Committee of the Red Cross in particular, but also of
the United Nations and certain non-governmental
organizations that are committed to ensuring that
armed groups respect their obligations with regard to
civilians. The organization Geneva Call shows the
potential in this area. In this regard, Switzerland
supports the recommendation of the Secretary-General
requesting a meeting held in accordance with the Arria
Formula.
Furthermore, it is important to clarify the
international law applicable to other non-State actors in
armed conflict, such as private military and security
companies. In this regard, Switzerland, in collaboration
with the International Committee of the Red Cross, has
taken an initiative that resulted last year in the
Montreux Document. We would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his support of this document.
Secondly, the fight against impunity is one of the
pillars of implementation of and respect for international
humanitarian law. States must take the necessary
measures at the national level in order to ensure that

6

international crimes do not go unpunished. Regarding the
International Criminal Court, Switzerland particularly
welcomes the recommendation that the Security Council
do everything within its power to ensure the full
cooperation of States with the Court.
Thirdly, it is crucial that there be investigations
of any alleged violations of international humanitarian
law, whatever the armed conflict or the perpetrator. We
therefore
support
the
recommendation
to
systematically request reports on allegations of
violations of law and consider the creation of
commissions of inquiry. In this regard, Switzerland
recalls the existence of the International Humanitarian
Fact-Finding Commission established by the First
Additional Protocol to the Geneva Conventions. We
encourage the Security Council to give a mandate to
that permanent commission rather than appointing ad
hoc commissions of inquiry.
Fourthly, the Security Council should have
instruments to enable it to tackle the aforementioned
challenges. In this context, we hail the establishment of
an informal group of experts on the protection of
civilians within the Security Council and support the
recommendation calling for the group to meet prior to
the establishment or renewal of the mandates of
peacekeeping missions. The group can thus play an
important role by drawing the Council’s attention to
any alarming situation with regard to the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts.
Fifthly, as recent humanitarian crises have shown,
humanitarian access in armed conflicts is central to the
protection of and assistance to persons in distress. The
annex provides systematic information on situations
where such difficulties prevail. We encourage the
Secretary-General to continue to gather and share with
the Council the relevant data.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Argentina.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me first to congratulate you, Sir, on your work
during your presidency of the Security Council for the
month of June. In particular, I would like to thank you
for convening this open debate, to which my country
attaches special importance. I would also like to
acknowledge the presence of Mr. John Holmes and to
thank him for the briefing he gave this morning.

09-38414

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

This is the tenth consecutive year that the
Security Council considers the issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. In accordance with
international humanitarian law, the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts is a legal obligation of the
parties to the conflict from which they are not relieved
even if the counterparty or counterparties act in breach
of it. It is regrettable that there are still situations in
which that protection is not guaranteed, which has led
to the Council’s permanent consideration of the matter.
We are therefore convinced that the Security Council
must continue to be committed to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, to promoting full respect
for international, humanitarian and human rights law
and to combating impunity.
My delegation is grateful for the report
(S/2009/277) of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We deeply
regret that, as it was 10 years ago, its conclusions are
discouraging. There are still many situations in which
civilians are the target of attacks, as evidenced by the
unacceptably high number of victims among civilians,
situations where children are recruited as soldiers and
are subject to abuse, situations where sexual violence
is a daily occurrence and other situations where
thousands and even millions of persons are displaced
and where it is impossible to deliver humanitarian
assistance. The report of the Secretary-General very
clearly identifies five challenges.
Eradicating armed conflict is one of the
objectives of the Charter of the United Nations and of
the international community as a whole. However,
where conflicts exist, the parties are obliged to respect
the basic rule — which originated even before the
establishment of the Organization — that civilians
must be protected from the effects of the conflict.
With regard to non-State armed groups in
conflicts that are not of an international nature, it is
clear that common article 3 to the four 1949 Geneva
Conventions includes specific obligations that must be
respected by the parties — that is, they apply also to
parties that are not of a State nature.
With regard to peacekeeping operations and the
protection of civilians, my country firmly believes that
including protection activities in the mandates of
United Nations missions is important to ensuring the
effectiveness of humanitarian assistance in practical
terms. However, the report of the Secretary-General

09-38414

and the conclusions of the workshop on the subject
organized in January 2009 by Australia and Uruguay
have underscored the need to develop clearer mandates
that provide the necessary resources in an efficient and
timely manner. In that regard, we await the
independent study requested by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which could
serve as a starting point in continuing to address this
issue.
Another important aspect of the protection of
civilians is to guarantee humanitarian assistance. If,
owing to the inability or lack of will of the parties
involved in a conflict to fulfil their obligations under
international humanitarian law, they should at least
make every effort to guarantee the passage of
shipments and materials and the delivery of emergency
assistance. The other fundamental aspect of access is
that persons escaping from combat areas must be
allowed safe passage to places where they are protected
from the hostilities.
With regard to the role of justice, that is an issue
to which my country, by virtue of its not-too-distant
past, attaches the outmost importance. Individuals who
commit war crimes, genocide or crimes against
humanity are responsible for very serious violations of
the law, and must therefore be criminally accountable
before the law. The Council has established two
international tribunals, namely, for the former
Yugoslavia and for Rwanda. In addition, the
International Criminal Court is now fully operational. I
would like to recall that the International Criminal
Court is not a tribunal intended to supplant national
justice; instead it operates when the latter is not
functioning. In other words, ensuring accountability for
such crimes under national systems is not only an
obligation of States. As suggested by the SecretaryGeneral, it could also help to alleviate some of the
perceptions about the tension between the quest for
justice, on the one hand, and the search for peace, on
the other.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating that, under
international humanitarian law and Security Council
resolutions, attacks on civilians or other protected
persons in situations of armed conflict constitute a
blatant breach of international law. I urge strict
compliance with the obligations arising from the 1899
and 1907 Hague Conventions, the four 1949 Geneva

7

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

Conventions and their 1977 Protocols, and the
decisions of the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the delegation of Turkey for
convening this important debate. Under-SecretaryGeneral Holmes gave us a particularly cogent briefing
at the outset, for which Canada is very appreciative.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the first
groundbreaking thematic resolution on the protection
of civilians. Resolution 1265 (1999) and its sister
resolution 1296 (2000) articulated clearly and
specifically the linkage between the protection of
civilians in situations of armed conflict and the
Council’s responsibilities for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Collectively, the
international community has built a solid international
legal and normative framework. But the question
remains: has that led to positive results for civilian
populations? Since the last open debate on this issue, in
January, a number of situations have demonstrated that
critical gaps remain between words and actions.
In the Sudan, the expulsion in March of 13
international non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
from the northern parts of the country, including
Darfur, and the closure of three national NGOs have
forced the scaling back of assistance and weakened
humanitarian response capacity. In the meantime,
peacekeepers are unable to fulfil their protection
mandate.
In Sri Lanka, the intensification of fighting
during the final months of the conflict led to significant
numbers of civilian casualties. Hundreds of thousands
of civilians were trapped in a shrinking area without
shelter or basic services, under repeated shelling and
used as human shields.
In Afghanistan, indiscriminate acts of violence
remind us why the support for the international
Mission and the Afghan people is so important.
Sharp increases in the numbers of displaced
persons in Pakistan underscores that the international
community’s collective support for international
humanitarian action is a critical component of
protection efforts.

8

Canada welcomes the Secretary-General’s most
recent report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2009/277). It outlines key challenges and
offers a practical road map for Council attention and
action. This afternoon I would like to focus on three
key elements in the report: the need for practical
efforts, access and accountability.
First, 10 years of experience tells us that the
language on the protection of civilians in Security
Council resolutions does not automatically translate
into clear mandates and operations on the ground. To
bridge this gap, Council language must be translated
into practical, field-based guidance for military and
civilian actors, including civilian police, as John
Holmes proposed in his briefing earlier. Those
entrusted with protection must have the knowledge and
training required to effectively fulfil this role, with
particular sensitivity to vulnerable groups, such as
women and children.
Canada was pleased to recently co-sponsor a
conference at Wilton Park, in the United Kingdom, to
examine the role for military peacekeepers in
addressing sexual violence. The conference resulted in
an inventory of good practices for peacekeepers to use
in protecting civilians from sexual violence.
We also need to work together to assign
appropriate accountabilities in order to ensure that
mandated tasks are implemented. Canada applauds the
commitment of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to more effectively
operationalize the protection of civilians within
peacekeeping mandates. We welcome the recent DPKO
high-level seminar on robust peacekeeping, and we
recognize the work of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, which included a reference
to the protection of civilians in its 2009 report. My
delegation also looks forward to the upcoming
OCHA/DPKO lessons-learned study based on 10 years
of implementing protection of civilians mandates in
peacekeeping operations. The potential significance of
this study should not be underestimated. Canada urges
the Council to consider this study seriously and to act
on its key recommendations.
It is also important to prevent gaps in
coordination between peacekeeping operations and
civilian agencies, which have a critical role to play in
protecting civilians. Effective coordination between

09-38414

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

peace and security, development and humanitarian
actors remains key to ensuring that gaps are addressed
and protection needs are met.
Secondly, Canada welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s focus on humanitarian action. The question
of access cuts to the heart of our ability to assist
populations at risk, yet access is too often hindered or
denied outright. Full, safe and unhindered access to
populations in need must be provided. We welcome
OCHA’s efforts to monitor access constraints more
effectively and report to the Council on this issue.
Timely, credible information and analysis on access
challenges are crucial in the development of effective
responses.
However, when issues such as access are brought
to the Council’s attention, follow-up is vital. In its
response, the Council must be willing consistently to
draw upon key tools at its disposal, including
deploying fact-finding missions, good offices, special
envoys,
monitoring
missions
and
preventive
deployments when civilians are at risk, and support for
humanitarian and human rights agencies to promote
compliance with international law. In addition, the
Council must monitor its own resolutions and provide
back-up to missions as necessary.
The Secretariat also has a role. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for example, field visits by the
Security Council Expert Group on the Protection of
Civilians, perhaps in conjunction with the Working
Group of the Security Council on Children and Armed
Conflict, could provide the Council with key
information about humanitarian and protection needs
and the conduct of the mandate.
The third issue remains front and centre, and that
is the issue of accountability. Despite the existence of
numerous provisions under international law, attacks
against civilians, including humanitarian workers,
often continue unabated. Such attacks must be seen as
the crimes that they are. Accountability is critical.
National authorities are responsible for exercising
jurisdiction over those responsible for committing such
crimes. When there is an unwillingness or inability to
do so, the Council and the broader United Nations
membership have a role to play in ensuring that those
who commit serious violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law are brought to justice.
(spoke in French)

09-38414

Finally, the Government of Canada is pleased to
see a reference to the Montreux Document
(S/2008/636, annex) on pertinent international legal
obligations and good practices for States related to
operations of private military and security companies
during armed conflict. Canada is pleased to have
participated in the debate that led to the adoption of
this non-binding document intended to clarify
international law as it pertains to private military and
security companies. This compendium of good
practices is a good guide for Member States, in
particular in their relations with private security
providers. We ask Member States to support this
document and to advocate on its behalf.
Over the past 10 years, we have put in place an
exceptional framework to guide our collective action.
We have sought thereby to ensure that the Council and
its mandated missions will never be at a loss for
strategies to deal with the most serious situations in
which civilians are at risk. In terms of the future, we
have undertaken new initiatives to respond to emerging
problems. Canada urges the Council to ensure that its
actions are appropriate, to remain vigilant in its
monitoring, and to exercise the necessary political will
to deploy the full range of measures at its disposal to
protect civilians.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me to express to you, Mr. President,
and, through you, to members of your delegation and
your friendly country, Turkey, my delegation’s thanks
for having convened this meeting on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. I would also like to thank
Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for introducing the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2009/277).
We continue to see civilians paying the heaviest
price in armed conflicts. The world has seen
remarkable progress in the legal field and through
international agreements in addressing the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, beginning
with the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War and the
many subsequent resolutions adopted by the Council.
However, the striking paradox here is that the gap is
widening between the texts and their application on the

9

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

grounds, in other words between what is legal and the
practices on the ground regarding the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
Ten years have elapsed since this Council first
debated this important theme. Delegations participating
in this debate, Council members, the Secretary-General,
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and the special rapporteurs are all demanding greater
respect for international norms and laws that guarantee
protection for civilians in times of armed conflict.
In that regard, let us recall the Security Council’s
most recent deliberations on this matter, on 14 January
2009 (see S/PV.6066). Those deliberations coincided
with events witnessed by the entire world: brutal and
flagrant aggression by Israel against the Palestinians in
the Gaza Strip. At that time, most delegations demanded
that Israel, the occupying Power, comply with international
law and norms relating to the protection of Palestinian
civilians in Gaza; they stressed the need to ensure the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to those people and the
need for an independent international investigation of the
war crimes committed by Israel during that aggression.
Unfortunately,
however,
despite
repeated
demands by the Security Council and the international
community that Israel cease its illegitimate policies
and practices forthwith, Israel not merely ignored all
those pleas and demands but escalated its aggressive
action targeting unarmed civilians who were virtual
hostages in that vast collective prison. To this day,
Israel continues its policies of aggression against the
Palestinian civilian population by imposing a siege,
closing border crossings, carrying out detentions,
forbidding movements by sick people and students,
impeding the delivery of international aid in the form
of supplies and medicine to the people of Gaza,
imposing collective punishment, confiscating land,
engaging in settlement activities, demolishing homes
and burning farmland, in addition to its oppressive and
arbitrary practices against the civilian Syrian
population of the occupied Syrian Golan. It thus
blatantly thumbs its nose at international legitimacy,
international law and international humanitarian law.
Israel’s criminal acts are a unique instance of the
systematic and comprehensive breach of all
international norms and principles set forth in
international law, international humanitarian law,
international human rights law, the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and the 1949 Geneva

10

Conventions and their Protocols. Israel’s aggressive
behaviour is marked by a stain that no other usurper of
land in history has borne: it breaches, en masse and
without exception, the entire cumulative historical
body of human law.
In a series of statements, most recently that of
14 January 2009 (S/PRST/2009/1), on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, the Security Council has
condemned all violations of international law against
civilians and has called on all parties concerned to put
an end forthwith to such practices. The Council has
also stressed that parties to armed conflict bear the
primary responsibility to take all feasible steps to
ensure the protection of affected civilians and to meet
their basic needs, including by giving special attention
to the specific needs of women and children. The
Council recognized the needs of civilians under foreign
occupation and stressed further, in this regard, the
responsibilities of the occupying Power. It stressed the
importance of safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian personnel in order to ensure the delivery of
assistance to civilians in armed conflict, in conformity with
international humanitarian law. The Council also
emphasized the responsibility of States to comply with
their obligations to end impunity and to prosecute those
responsible for war crimes, genocide and crimes against
humanity.
Furthermore, in his most recent report, the
Secretary-General stated grave concern at the high
number of casualties in Gaza, in particular among
children, and at the damage to homes and schools,
including schools operated by the United Nations
itself, as a result of the Israeli aggression. The
Secretary-General also expressed concern at Israel’s
wide-scale use of cluster munitions and explosive
weapons against civilian populations in Gaza. In his
report, the Secretary-General states that Israel has
persisted in imposing restrictions on the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to Gaza and noted the broad
impact on the lives of civilians. The report states that
“[t]he cumulative effect of these restrictions and their
unpredictability contribute to the protracted suffering
of Gaza’s civilian population” (S/2009/277, annex,
para. 16).
My delegation carefully studied the SecretaryGeneral’s summary of the report of the Board of
Inquiry he dispatched to Gaza. That report documents
crimes committed by Israel against United Nations
premises and against Palestinian civilians in those

09-38414

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

premises, including women and children. It documents
Israel’s use of white phosphorus bombs and its
responsibility for deaths and injuries within United
Nations buildings, along with the damage caused to
those premises.
Those are all war crimes, and the Security
Council is obliged, more than ever before, to
implement the recommendations of the Board of
Inquiry, which was chaired by Mr. Ian Martin, and to
hold Israeli leaders accountable for their repeated
crimes, which are legally defined as war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide.
Here we ask the Security Council to tell us: What
international obligations has Israel met since the
Council added this item to its agenda? Another
important question to which an answer would be much
appreciated is this: Why do we have a double standard
for the implementation of international law, with Israel
exempt from fulfilling the norms of international law?
Or is there a crisis in the understanding of legal
terminology, by which Palestinian civilians are
considered to be unlike any other civilians in the free
world?
The situation of Syrian civilians in the occupied
Syrian Golan does not differ greatly from that of the
Palestinians. The Israeli occupation authorities
continue to pursue practices such as confiscating land,
stealing water resources, laying mines and expanding
illegal settlements. Israel also persists in oppressing the
Syrian civilian population in the occupied Golan and
throwing civilians into prisons and detention centres,
without justification, in life-threatening conditions. Let
me also cite in particular the case of a Syrian citizen,
Bishr al-Mukt, with respect to whom my Government
has appealed to the Secretary-General and to the
International Committee of the Red Cross and other
international institutions, urging them to intervene to
save his life.
The most recent such practice in the occupied
Syrian Golan was the imposition by the Israeli
authorities of two years of house arrest against a
two-year-old child, Fahid Lu’ay Shuqeir, on the excuse
that he was born outside Israel when his parents were
studying in Syria. In the same context, Israel persists in
its policy of disrupting all forms of communication
among Syrian families that have been torn asunder as a
result of occupation. Also, the Israeli occupation
authorities confiscated the Syrian identity cards of

09-38414

Syrian students studying at Damascus University when
they returned to their towns and villages in the
occupied Golan.
To lend credibility to this special debate, Syria
demands that this Council bring pressure to bear on
Israel in order to allow the immediate resumption of
family visits by Syrian citizens through the Quneitra
crossing. My country addressed letters on this matter to
the Secretary-General, the President of the Security
Council and the President of the General Assembly and
to international governmental and non-governmental
organizations, requesting that they intervene to resolve
this matter. It is our sincere hope that all these parties
will translate their positions that we have heard in this
debate into realities on the ground, especially since
international law considers that Israel’s occupation of
the Golan is double occupation, which requires double
criminalization by this Council.
Israel was not satisfied by having occupied the
Syrian Golan since 1967 but enacted an unjust and
provocative decree to annex it. The Security Council
unanimously rejected that decree in resolution 497
(1981), which considered Israel’s annexation of the
occupied Syrian Golan null and void and demanded
that Israel rescind it forthwith.
The President: I next give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Chávez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for promoting the holding of
this open debate and to thank the Secretary-General for
the presentation of the report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/2009/277). We also thank
Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for his comprehensive
introduction to the subject on which we are meeting
today.
The report of the Secretary-General mentions
concrete progress that should be underscored, for
example, the establishment of the Security Council
Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians in
response to a recommendation from the SecretaryGeneral. The Group, which has already held a number
of meetings, has substantively promoted the treatment
in the Security Council of matters relating to the
protection of civilians. That has contributed to the
subject’s being reflected in respective Council
resolutions. That achievement, we believe, can promote
the strengthening of the needed interaction between the

11

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the Security Council, as indicated in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. Peru firmly supports this. The Expert
Group needs to continue to work steadily, focusing on
those cases that, as the report indicates, have not yet
been definitively resolved, in spite of the passage of
time and the efforts devoted to them.
We have all seen how the United Nations has
been working, particularly in the Security Council, to
promote and provide real protection for civilians in
armed conflicts. In the past 10 years there have been
many reports and resolutions that define steps and
actions to be taken with regard to this problem.
Nonetheless, it is very alarming to see in the report of
the Secretary-General that in 1999 the situation was
not substantively different from the current situation.
In other words, there are still inexcusable situations
where human rights and international humanitarian law
are violated in the different conflicts that now persist.
The civilian population, women and children in
particular, are the main victims.
In light of this situation, the Security Council
must maintain and promote concrete and effective
action to ensure the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts and of displaced persons and refugees.
Therefore we urge the Council to effectively manage
the complete implementation of its resolutions 1296
(2000) and 1674 (2006), which reflect the heart of
today’s debate — in other words, the responsibility of
all Member States to protect the civilian population in
armed conflicts. Along with those efforts, it would be
desirable for the debate on the responsibility to protect
to begin as soon as possible in the relevant forum.
Likewise,
Peru
resolutely
supports
the
programmes and policies that promote the prevention
of violence. That is why we must insist on the need for
the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) so
that grave cases of rape and other forms of sexual
violence will be referred to the International Criminal
Court. On that same issue, it is indispensable that
States assume as a matter of priority their
responsibility to execute justice and to punish those
responsible for the crime as part of the integral
approach to national reconciliation — which should be
their goal.
We also share the views expressed by the
Secretary-General in his report regarding the need to
implement certain measures that will contribute

12

substantially to actions undertaken to protect civilians
in armed conflicts. Among others, we would
underscore the promotion of respect for international
humanitarian law and of compliance therewith by all
parties to a conflict, in particular by non-State armed
groups. Other measures include the strengthening of
protection of civilians by making peacekeeping
operations and other, related operations more effective
and, lastly, broad access to humanitarian assistance and
accountability when the law is broken. With these
concrete actions we would be giving renewed impetus
to the protection of civilians in armed conflicts.
Finally, we must recognize that in order to
strengthen the protection of civilians once the conflicts
have ended, resolute action should be initiated to build
and strengthen, in the affected countries, institutions
and the rule of law and to ensure stable economic
conditions with development strategies. Those would
be crucial steps towards consolidating any integral
peace and development process, which would
effectively combat poverty and social exclusion —
problems that often lie at the origin of internal armed
conflicts that we endeavour to prevent.
The President: I now give the floor to the new
Permanent Representative of Australia and wish him
continued health, happiness and success.
Mr.
Quinlan
(Australia):
Thank
you,
Mr. President. At the outset, I would like to thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs for
his briefing this morning and, through him, to
commend the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for their tireless efforts in
advancing the protection of civilians. I would also like
to commend the Secretary-General for his latest
comprehensive report (S/2009/277) on this very serious
subject. The breadth of the report is striking and serves
to remind us of the challenges we need to overcome if
we are really serious about affording protection to
civilians.
Given the constraints of time, it is not possible,
obviously, to do justice to the report in its entirety;
rather, I will focus my remarks on three areas of
particular importance for Australia.
First, the question of humanitarian access remains
a critical challenge for the Council and for Member
States. It is vital that people in need have access to
humanitarian assistance. While we may all agree on
that broad principle, in practice constraints on access

09-38414

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

deprive millions of vulnerable people of life-saving
assistance. The annex to the Secretary-General’s report
helpfully seeks to unpack this issue, highlighting the
key types of constraints that are faced and identifying
practical measures that need to be taken to overcome
them.
As emphasized by the Secretary-General,
Member States need to increase their efforts to address
these constraints to access. In particular, there is a clear
need for action to streamline bureaucratic procedures
to facilitate humanitarian assistance. While we
welcome the efforts of many States in that regard, there
remain too many instances where onerous bureaucratic
restrictions jeopardize timely responses and add to the
cost and reduce the effectiveness of humanitarian
operations.
Furthermore, all parties to a conflict must respect
international
humanitarian
law
and
protect
humanitarian personnel, assets and facilities. To this
end, it is important for all parties, including non-State
actors, to cooperate with humanitarian organizations to
establish arrangements that allow for the safe passage
of humanitarian workers and relief items to affected
populations.
We also support increased efforts to build
partnerships and strengthen coordination between
affected States, regional organizations, the United
Nations system, the Red Cross movement, and the
broader international humanitarian community. Strong
partnerships built on trust and mutual respect are
clearly essential to ensuring access.
The second issue I would like to touch on is the
inclusion of protection of civilians tasks in
peacekeeping mandates. The will to mandate for the
protection of civilians has a growing consensus, as
demonstrated by the recognition of such mandates in
the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations for the first time earlier this year.
Nevertheless, there is a commonly identified gap
between the strategic and operational levels in United
Nations protection of civilians mandates. The absence
of guidelines and training for peacekeepers on
protection tasks contributes to the ineffective
implementation of mandates. We would encourage the
development of such guidelines and training to assist
mission personnel in understanding how to effectively
implement their mandates. We would also encourage
closer cooperation between the Security Council, the

09-38414

Secretariat, and troop- and police-contributing
countries in developing and implementing realistic
mandates.
The third point I would like to touch on is that the
Council needs to be more willing to consider country
situations in which civilians are at risk. The experience
of the past 10 years has demonstrated that the Council
accepts its responsibility to address the protection
needs of civilians in internal conflicts. We welcome the
Council’s attention to the needs of civilians in such
conflicts, from Afghanistan to the Sudan, from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to Timor-Leste.
However, there is clearly a need for greater
consistency in the Council’s approach. Too often still,
the Council appears unwilling to address the plight of
civilians in many internal armed conflicts,
notwithstanding the obvious destabilizing effects and
regional consequences of such conflicts. In failing to
do so, the Council falls short of its obligations under
the Charter.
The Council does not want for policy options in
addressing such threats. Chapters VI, VII and VIII of
the Charter, as demonstrated by past Council practice,
provide the Council with adequate tools to make a
difference, including the condemnation of violations of
international humanitarian law, targeted measures such
as sanctions, the utilization of international criminal
justice mechanisms to end impunity, and the
authorization of the use of force. What is lacking at
times, as we know, is the political resolve of the
Council to use those tools to protect civilians and of
the broader membership to support such Council
action.
Australia looks forward to continuing to work
with the Council, other Member States and the
Secretariat in advancing our collective consideration of
these important issues.
The President: I
representative of Jordan.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Al-Allaf (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to thank you, Sir, most sincerely for
convening this important meeting and for leading the
work of the Council so skilfully and wisely. We also
thank your predecessor, the representative of the
Russian Federation.
My delegation further wishes to thank the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs for his

13

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

briefing. We welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2009/277) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and the recommendations contained
therein.

hindering early recovery efforts. If for some reason all
of this did not fall under the principle of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, the principle itself would
have to be reviewed and redefined.

Jordan supports the recommendation made by the
delegation of Costa Rica on behalf of the States
members of the Human Security Network.

Jordan calls for full respect for humanitarian law
and international human rights. It also upholds the
distinction between civilians and combatants and the
international instruments related thereto, and insists
that all parties respect the principle of legitimate selfdefence against armed aggression. Innocent civilians
must not be deliberately or indiscriminately targeted in
attacks. International humanitarian law tells us how
people should be treated if they are not taking part
directly in military operations. States should show their
moral commitment by using their genuine political will
to change the harsh realities on the ground experienced
by civilians in armed conflict, including in cases of
foreign occupation, where the victims are always
civilians.

Over the past 10 years, the Council has developed
the concept of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, which has become one of the principal
substantive thematic issues on its agenda. Despite
some positive developments, a number of persistent
challenges are hindering us from achieving our aim of
protecting civilians, especially children, women and
people with special needs. Jordan agrees that these
challenges include enhancing respect for international
law by parties to conflicts, including non-State armed
groups and especially in military operations;
strengthening
protection
by
improving
the
effectiveness and resources of peacekeeping operations
and other missions; facilitating access to humanitarian
assistance; and ensuring accountability for violations
of the law.
When we talk of the need to protect civilians in
armed conflicts, the case of Gaza stands out among the
ongoing concerns of our family of nations. We must
apply the concept of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict fairly and comprehensively. As the
United Nations family has failed to implement this
concept in the course of military operations and armed
aggression, we should at least apply it following such
operations. The two principal preconditions of human
security, and the central tenets of the Human Security
Network, are freedom from fear and freedom from
want. The protection of all should be a priority for all
United Nations Member States, united under the
Charter, in which we affirm our deep faith in human
dignity and values and basic human rights, the most
important of which is the essential right to life.
The suffering of Palestinian civilians in the Gaza
Strip did not stop with the end of the Israeli aggression,
but persists under the restrictions on the delivery of
relief and assistance imposed by Israel. This ongoing
suffering has had an impact on social, economic and
human activities in Gaza. Israel continues to prevent
the delivery of basic construction materials for
rebuilding the infrastructure and water and sanitary
facilities. The border crossings remain restricted,

14

We agree with the Secretary-General that
peacekeeping operations include components that
enable them to have a direct impact on the protection
of civilians. Jordan supports the inclusion of civilian
protection mandates in all peacekeeping mandates.
This should apply in particular to those civilians who
are threatened by physical violence — without
undermining the primary responsibility of the host
country to protect civilians. Jordan is pleased that the
report has proposed that peacekeeping operations assist
host States with such missions, in order to create a
climate of peace and security.
Successful protection of civilians requires a
certain number of components. Those include a
comprehensive approach, clarity in the mission
mandates adopted by the Security Council, support to
missions from the standpoint of resources, training and
concepts of operations.
It is important to understand that the protection of
civilians is not solely a military task. All components
of a peacekeeping operation should help with the
obligation to protect, as entrusted to the mission.
Finally, my delegation would like to state its
readiness to take part in the efforts to develop the
concept of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and to work with all parties concerned, and it
welcomes the creation of a group of experts on the
protection of civilians, as well as the convening of this
meeting.

09-38414

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Cornado (Italy): Thank you, Mr. President,
for taking the initiative of convening this debate. Let
me also express my appreciation to Under-SecretaryGeneral Holmes for his thorough briefing on the
progress achieved and on ongoing concerns regarding
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We
endorse the five core challenges approach referred to in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/277).
Italy fully associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Czech Republic
on behalf of the European Union. I will touch on points
of particular interest to my Government, keeping in
mind my country’s recent experience as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council.
Italy is proud to have been one of the sponsors of
resolution 1820 (2008), to whose drafting we actively
contributed. Sexual violence as a tactic of war has
emerged as one of the foremost threats to the civilian
population in recent conflicts. Women and children
bear the main brunt of that horrific practice. With
resolution 1820 (2008), the Council stated loud and
clear that this is a matter of international peace and
security to which the utmost attention must be paid.
Parties to conflict must immediately and effectively put
an end to sexual violence and take special measures to
protect women and children from it. Impunity must
cease and those responsible must be held accountable.
We look forward to receiving the SecretaryGeneral’s report pursuant to resolution 1820 (2008).
We will read it with attention and will consider its
recommendations, and we hope very much that the
Council will act upon them to make further progress in
protecting women and children.
Whenever a peacekeeping operation is in place,
civilians expect to be protected by United Nations
forces. When that task is not fulfilled, the
Organization’s credibility is at stake. Failure to prevent
civilian casualties and to ensure the safe return of
refugees and the protection of children could engender
mistrust and disappointment, and could ultimately put
peacekeeping missions at risk. That is another reason
why the protection of civilians should continue to be
part of peacekeeping mandates and why peacekeepers
should be properly trained and equipped.

09-38414

The ongoing review of the peacekeeping doctrine
is taking those developments into account. The concept
of robust peacekeeping is now spreading through
international seminars, the Secretariat’s assessments
and Security Council debates. Yet, as the SecretaryGeneral’s report highlights, the protection of civilians
is not only a military task; it is a more inclusive
challenge. Every component of a peacekeeping
mission — military, police, civil, gender, human rights
and child protection — has to contribute to achieving
the protection goals.
During Italy’s recent term as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, we supported the
inclusion of civilian protection clauses in peacekeeping
mandates. We did not stop there. Together with the
United Nations, the Italian Government hosted a
symposium on child protection in armed conflict in
Rome three days ago. As the Italian Foreign Minister
stated on that occasion, the ultimate goal is to spread
awareness among the international community on the
impact of armed conflict on civilians, especially
children. As a concrete result of the event, joint
training initiatives in this field are being considered by
the Italian Government and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.
Just as peacekeeping operations require
instruments that are not only military in nature,
international criminal jurisdiction should be viewed
increasingly as a complementary instrument in the
suppression of international crimes. It is States that, by
adapting their laws and jurisdictions, should be the first
to respond to serious breaches of law, such as war
crimes and crimes against humanity, committed in their
territories. At the same time, it is up to States —
through collaboration with the International Committee
of the Red Cross and other institutions competent in
the field — to raise awareness of the basic principles
and the importance of international humanitarian law,
especially in the armed forces.
We are convinced that the protection of civilians
requires further efforts to prevent the destabilizing
accumulation of conventional weapons and to
minimize their humanitarian impact as much as
possible. Italy is therefore at the forefront of the fight
against the illicit trafficking of small arms and light
weapons and is actively engaged in the United Nations
process towards a legally binding arms trade treaty
establishing international standards — including the

15

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

respect for international humanitarian law and human
rights — for transfers of conventional weapons.
Italy also strongly supports universal adherence
to and full implementation of the Ottawa Convention
on the prohibition of anti-personnel mines and the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons — in
particular its Protocol V, on explosive remnants of
war — as well as the early entry into force of the
Convention banning the cluster munitions that cause
unacceptable harm to civilians.
I would like to conclude on a more general note
by recalling the reaffirmation by resolution 1674
(2006) of the principle of the responsibility to protect,
a cardinal achievement of the United Nations. That
principle implies that sovereignty brings special
responsibilities. Governments must protect their own
populations, and the best way for them to do so is to
promote human rights, the rule of law and democratic
governance. Only when a Government is unable or
unwilling to do so should the international community
intervene. The responsibility to protect should not be
perceived in a confrontational manner; it should be
seen instead as an instrument available to the
international community to overcome crises, provided
that the conditions referred to in paragraphs 138 and
139 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General
Assembly resolution 60/1) are met.
Within that framework, the debate on the report
of the Secretary-General will be a timely opportunity
to build on the consensus achieved at the 2005 World
Summit and concretely implement the responsibility to
protect. Italy intends to actively participate in that
debate.

the framework of strict compliance with the principles
contained in the United Nations Charter, with full
respect for the national sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the countries involved in a conflict.
Although the principle of the protection of civilian
populations is among the most commendable, we shall
not allow it to be manipulated so that some interfere in
the strictly internal affairs of sovereign States.
Unfortunately, there is a plethora of examples of that
type of manipulation in the history of Nicaragua, Latin
America and the Caribbean in general.
The Secretary-General, in the report before us for
consideration (S/2009/277), describes a way to
strengthen compliance with the relevant international
norms, but it is obvious that the Council has been
selective in its approach and decisions in that regard.
In fact, in its resolution 1674 (2006), the Security
Council reaffirmed that it was essential to end
impunity so that a society in conflict or recovering
from conflict could come to terms with past abuses and
prevent future such abuses.
Where then is the Council’s resolve when it
comes to the humiliated and tormented Palestinian
population? Unfortunately, the day when the longawaited justice for which the Palestinian people have
been calling becomes a reality seems very uncertain
and distant. Applying a double standard with regard to
the protection of civilian populations inevitably
undermines the credibility of this Council. It is that
double standard that fuels, inter alia, the despair of a
people who see no future other than that of the missiles
launched against them by a Power with crushing
military technology.

Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me first of all to congratulate you, Sir,
on your presidency of the Security Council. I am also
grateful to Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, for his introduction of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/277).

We also hope that where there are so-called
coalitions or multinational forces, mechanisms for
accountability and international justice will be
developed, so that the words “collateral damage”, used
euphemistically by the military hierarchies of certain
countries, will disappear from the international news
and so that the relatives of the victims of the
devastation of war by some will be compensated and
justice applied.

In a few months, we will mark a decade since the
subject of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
was first considered by the Security Council. My
country considers it important to reiterate at this time a
few basic points on that topic. First, the protection of
civilians in armed conflict must be carried out within

With regard to the protection of civilians in
imminent danger of physical violence, as the Security
Council has provided for in the context of
peacekeeping operations, it is important to reiterate
that such a task must be accomplished in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nicaragua.

16

09-38414

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

Charter and with the guiding principles of
peacekeeping operations, which, I recall, include the
consent of the host State. In peacekeeping operations,
the protection of civilian populations cannot be
consistently ensured without a broad peace process in
which all interested parties participate and that is
supported by the national authorities. It is therefore of
primary importance that peacekeeping missions not
only cooperate closely with the national authorities but
also support them in carrying out their task of
protecting civilians.
Similarly, the difficult and painstaking session of
the Fifth Committee, that just concluded yesterday
should serve as a lesson to the members of the Council.
May it be understood once and for all that, in order to
be able to implement the mandates voted on here in
this Council, peacekeeping missions must be provided
with all necessary resources. Those resources are vital
to the provision of consolidated and specific training
activities for each mission with a mandate to protect
civilians, and to increase the operational capacity of
the Blue Helmets and the national forces of the host
country. In that regard, the General Assembly awaits
the report of the Secretary-General requested by the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations on
bringing approved resources in line with operation
mandates.
Political crises that degenerate into armed
conflicts are, in the overwhelming majority of cases,
the symptom of social and economic crises that cannot
be lastingly resolved without genuinely tackling the
root of the problems. There will be no peace and
security in the world without economic and social
development for all. Only in that way will civilian
populations be truly and effectively protected.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Allow me, first of all, on behalf of the Moroccan
delegation, to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this important debate on the crucial subject of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. My thanks
also go to Mr. John Holmes for his briefing at the
beginning of this debate.
The protection of civilians has become a
recurring topic in the face of violations by parties to
armed conflict of their obligations under international
law and international humanitarian law. The tragic

09-38414

experiences of terror and privation to which civilians
are subjected in situations of armed conflict arouse our
indignation.
In fact, the growing importance that the Security
Council has accorded to this issue for 10 years is fully
justified. But the negative observation in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2009/277) that, despite the efforts
made since 1999 and the various decisions taken by the
Council, in particular the growing asymmetry of
conflicts and their consequences for civilians impels us
to rethink the concept of the protection of civilians and
to broaden it to include the post-conflict phase.
The existence of conflicts and the persistence of
some of them, sometimes for decades, are explained by
many factors. Among those, we cannot ignore the
sometimes active involvement of States of the region,
either through their direct engagement or indirect
participation, which contributes to the continuation of
those conflicts and thus makes them more difficult to
resolve. That is why the issue of good neighbourliness
and regional cooperation in all its forms is often the
key to any lasting solution that guarantees the
protection and prosperity of the populations concerned.
The new wave of intra-State armed conflicts and
armed rebel dissidence is, in most cases, the result of
frustration generated by poverty, the poor distribution
of resources, where they exist, and underdevelopment.
Those armed conflicts, fuelled by trafficking in arms
and drugs, have endangered the security of men,
women, elderly people and children, who are often
forced to flee for fear of reprisals, as targets of military
attacks in flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law.
Those intra-State conflicts have given rise to a
proliferation of the tasks assigned to peacekeeping
operations, including the protection of civilians. The
execution of those tasks must be in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter,
in implementation of the guiding principles governing
the conduct of peacekeeping operations and based on
the support of the international community.
The task of protecting civilians, in the context of
peacekeeping operations that have such a mandate, is
the primary responsibility of the host country, as
affirmed by the most recent report of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, and therefore
the missions that have such a mandate should

17

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

undertake their activities without prejudice to the
primary responsibility of the host State.
It is also worth underscoring that the success of
activities aimed at ensuring the protection of civilians,
when they come under a United Nations mandate,
requires the integration of efforts at all levels, the
availability of resources and necessary means, the
improvement of operational capacities and, above all,
the mandates for the mandates of peacekeeping
operations to be clear and feasible. Of course, it goes
without saying that priority should be given to the
political process itself, since deployment in a context
where that is non-existent or compromised will not
ensure the success of the mission deployed. The best
guarantee for the protection of civilians has one name,
that of peace.
When the 2005 World Summit endorsed the
principle of the responsibility to protect, it did so
taking into account the sovereignty of States and their
primary responsibility to protect their own populations
against any foreign intervention. As we see it, the
implementation of this principle should be the subject
of broad, multilateral and universal consultation to
define the parameters and field of action of such
protection. Likewise, the work of humanitarian
organizations must be carried out judiciously and
effectively, in accordance with the principles of justice,
neutrality, objectivity and independence.
The instruments of international law, including
the obligation to protect civilians in situations of armed
conflict, are reflected in the Fourth Geneva
Convention, the Additional Protocols, the human rights
covenants and the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council.
Nonetheless, in spite of the existence of this legal
arsenal, the Palestinian people continue to suffer
terribly. The Council will recall that, last December,
the Palestinian people in Gaza suffered military attacks
and were the victims of the disproportionate use of
force by Israel without any international protection
leaving hundreds dead and thousands wounded,
including many children, in violation of international
law and international humanitarian law. This situation
is all the more disturbing in that it is accompanied by
unacceptable restrictions on humanitarian access, thus
depriving the most vulnerable sectors of the Palestinian
people of their most basic rights.

18

One factor fuelling the outbreak of armed conflict
and causing physical and psychological harm to the
civilian population is the proliferation of light weapons
and their illicit traffic. The suffering inflicted on the
populations affected by the proliferation of light
weapons, particularly in Africa, requires serious
regulation of the traffic in these weapons. My
delegation associates itself with international efforts to
develop international standards to regulate the import,
export and transfer of such weapons.
Stepping up efforts to prevent and resolve
conflicts through peaceful means and to consolidate
peace in countries emerging from conflict will make it
possible to stem the risk of recurrence and thereby to
limit the scope of internal displacement and the
number of refugees and to guarantee civilians their
rightful protection.
Host countries must lend their full support to the
efforts of the international community in order to
facilitate, in accordance with international practice, the
unhindered repatriation of refugee populations and to
register them in conditions of complete transparency.
The lack of reliable and regularly updated information
on these populations will promote confidence neither
among donors who give aid and assistance to the
refugees nor among the parties to conflicts who are
engaged in dialogue to resolve them.
Furthermore, there is a close link between
peacebuilding efforts and the return of displaced and
refugee populations. When the priorities of security,
justice and reconstruction and the first dividends of
peace are visible and concrete, populations that have
fled a war and its consequences will return to their
countries in the hope that they will find dignity and
protection.
In this regard, we commend the Peacebuilding
Commission for having included in its integrated
peacebuilding strategies for the countries on its agenda
provisions for the protection of children, such as the
release of children who have been involved in armed
groups and their reintegration into their communities,
as well as a gender approach that gives equal
opportunity to men and women ex-combatants or
refugees to regain their rightful place and role in
society.
Towards this end, the prospect of receiving
professional
training,
physical
and
mental
rehabilitation services, and rapid-impact economic

09-38414

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

projects will facilitate the reintegration of these
populations.
In other words, the approach to the tragic
consequences of conflict must be as preventive as it is
reactive. It is vital to address the principal causes of
armed conflict directly in order to prevent their
re-emergence. This preventive approach must include
sustainable development, poverty eradication, good
governance and the promotion of democracy.
The President: I give the floor to the Permanent
Representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to thank the delegation of Turkey for
having convened this very important debate. The
delegation of Uruguay welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2009/277), presented this morning by
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. John Holmes. The report constitutes an important
input for advancing the discussion of this issue. Its
issuance 10 years after this question was first
considered by the Security Council raises expectations
regarding not only the evaluation to be made about the
progress made, but also concerning the core challenges
that lie ahead.
In addition to being an ethical imperative that
reflects the broad evolution of human consciousness
towards ways of life whose core values are respect for
life, integrity and human dignity, the protection of
civilians also represents a legal imperative based on
universally
accepted
rules
of
international
humanitarian law. In the case of the protection carried
out by the United Nations in the framework of a
peacekeeping operation, these rules must include the
consent of the host country and the existence of a
Security Council resolution containing such a mandate.
Uruguay shares the view that, above and beyond
humanitarian action, in order effectively to improve the
protection of civilians this activity should be addressed
through a comprehensive approach that also includes
protection through peacekeeping, the promotion of the
rule of law, political stability, disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration, reconstruction and
economic and social development.
Given time constraints, my delegation would like
to take this opportunity to focus on two extremely
sensitive aspects of this issue: the situation of the most

09-38414

vulnerable sectors of the civilian population in armed
conflicts, such as women and children; and the
protection of civilians through peacekeeping
operations.
Once again, women and children are identified as
vulnerable groups that require special protection. The
attention given to this subject by various United
Nations bodies, in particular in the General Assembly
and the Security Council, has increased. Despite the
considerable efforts made in this regard, a great deal of
work remains to be done if we are to ensure the due
protection that they are due.
It is imperative to ensure the inclusion of a crosscutting gender perspective in all the work of the
Organization, including in peacekeeping operations
and in the field of humanitarian assistance. The number
of cases of gender-based violence, including sexual
violence, in situations of armed conflict is alarming.
Uruguay supports the increased priority being
given to children affected by armed conflicts on the
international agenda, and will continue to contribute to
all efforts in this regard. We value the joint work of
civil society with the entire United Nations system,
including the Office of the Special Representative on
Children and Armed Conflict, UNICEF child
protection advisers and the staff of peacekeeping
missions; to create sustainable child protection
mechanisms.
We reiterate the need to pay greater attention to
the reintegration of the victims of grave violations of
their rights, in particular in cases of sexual abuse and
exploitation. We believe that it is essential to tirelessly
combat impunity for those responsible for violations in
blatant contravention of international norms, especially
against women and children. In that connection, we
urge the Security Council to refer such cases to the
International Criminal Court.
We are especially grateful for the report’s annex
concerning restrictions to access to humanitarian
assistance. We agree that only safe, timely and
unhindered access will make it possible to provide
protection and assistance to those in need.
Any humanitarian response must be sustainable
and take into account the development perspective. In
that regard, it is essential to ensure the necessary
building of capacities at the national level, in particular
in cases in which constraints are due to the physical

19

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

environment. We regret that, in some cases, constraints
are the result of Government policies or the practices
of local actors who interfere with humanitarian
operations. The reports of the Secretary-General must
continue to request the facilitation of speedy and
timely access for humanitarian assistance given the
numerous obstacles that continue to be set up even in
cases in which international humanitarian law requires
such access.

on Peacekeeping Operations decided to take up this
issue for the first time. As we pointed out on that
occasion and as various participants on the ground
indicated at the workshop we co-hosted with Australia
earlier this year, there is a need for clear guidelines that
emanate from equally clear and realistic mandates, as
well as for specialized training for those who must
implement this complex task. Above all, there is a need
for appropriate resources.

Uruguay reiterates the urgent need to preserve
and strengthen the norms of international humanitarian
law in order to ensure the full implementation of the
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence. It is also crucial to facilitate access to
humanitarian personal and ensure that they have the
proper security conditions in which to carry out their
tasks.

It is essential to ensure that certain conditions
exist so that this effort can be carried out effectively
and while protecting the physical and emotional
integrity of those who undertake it. In that regard, there
must be a close correlation between mandates and
resources. Too often, civilian protection mandates do
not include the necessary and appropriate human and
material assets. It is therefore essential that those
resources be sufficient to undertake this complex task
successfully to the benefit of all.

Enhancing protection by improving effectiveness
and providing greater resources to peacekeeping
operations is one of the five core challenges identified
in the report of the Secretary-General, which stresses
that the inclusion of protection activities in the
mandates of peacekeeping missions, which began in
1999 with the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone,
is among the most significant of Security Council
actions on this issue.
Uruguay acknowledges that the Council has
played a pioneering role in the development of this
concept, and especially in translating it into reality.
Nevertheless, we take this opportunity to emphasize
the importance of achieving the broadest possible
support for this issue, in which the lives of innocent
people and the credibility of the United Nations are at
stake.
A wider base of support would not ensure greater
legitimacy for and less resistance to these efforts, but
would also produce a deeper commitment among all
actors involved in implementation. For instance, it
should not be forgotten that those responsible for
implementing the civilian protection mandates of
peacekeeping operations adopted by the Security
Council are by and large troop-contributing countries
from the developing world. Those countries have very
limited opportunities to participate in or influence the
process of developing those mandates.
In that connection, we believe that this is a good
time to highlight the significant effort made by
Member States in March when the Special Committee

20

Finally, the delegation of Uruguay looks forward
to the joint report of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. We hope to be able to continue
to participate constructively on the discussions on this
issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Kenya.
Mr. Muita (Kenya): I have the honour to
participate in today’s debate. At the outset, let me
express my appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important debate. I also thank Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his
comprehensive briefing this morning.
My delegation welcomes the Secretary-General’s
latest report (S/2009/277) on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. This year marks the tenth
anniversary of the first consideration by the Security
Council of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
as a thematic issue. The Council’s continued
consideration of this agenda item, including its
integration of protection concerns into peacekeeping
mandates, indicates the Organization’s commitment to
protect civilians in conflict situations. It has also
resulted in concrete proposals and decisions intended
to improve the lives of countless men, women, girls
and boys affected by the horrors and indignities of war

09-38414

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

through increased efforts to fight impunity at the
national and international levels.
While words have not matched actions on the
ground, some achievements have nevertheless been
realized in this area. Thy include increased engagement
by the Council through the adoption of relevant
resolutions — including resolutions 1265 (1999), 1296
(2000), 1674 (2006) and 1738 (2006) — on the
protection of civilians, the adoption of the aidememoire on the protection of civilians and the
establishment of the Council Expert Group on the
Protection of Civilians to mainstream protection into
the Council’s action and the prioritizing of civilian
protection in peacekeeping mandates. Nevertheless,
there some considerable challenges remain. I would
like at this juncture to highlight a few of those that are
of concern to Kenya.
First, with regard to civilian protection mandates,
my delegation appreciates that the protection of
civilians is currently mandated in a number of United
Nations peacekeeping missions. However, it remains
largely undefined as both a military task and as a
mission’s wider task. The Council therefore needs to
provide clear guidelines that underline the importance
of a comprehensive approach involving all components
of a mission on how to deliver on the task. There is
also a need to ensure that available capacity and
resources are deployed for the task at hand and made
available in a timely manner. It is also necessary to
emphasize that peacekeeping missions should conduct
this task without prejudice to the primary responsibility
of host nations to protect civilians.
Secondly, with regard to humanitarian access,
access during conflict is a fundamental prerequisite for
life-saving assistance. It is therefore important to
provide a secure environment in order for humanitarian
workers to have access to civilians in need, including
displaced persons. While current efforts to enhance the
capacity of peacekeeping missions to provide
protection to humanitarian providers are commendable,
significant challenges remain at the operational level,
where peacekeepers lack the capacity to reach the
entire threatened population. There is, in this regard,
urgent need to address and streamline this aspect to
avert large-scale population displacements and
widespread human rights violations.
Thirdly, sexual violence is no longer a simple byproduct of armed conflict. It has turned into a tool of

09-38414

warfare aimed at dehumanizing and instilling fear in
the civilian population in order to achieve political and
military objectives. While the adoption of resolution
1820 (2008) against sexual and other forms of violence
against civilians in conflict situations, in particular
women and children, was a step in the right direction, a
lot is still required to enhance its implementation. We
need to move from words to deeds so as to ensure the
protection of sexually vulnerable populations in armed
conflict situations.
As I conclude, my delegation reaffirms Kenya’s
commitment to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and to guaranteeing their rights in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations. Together, we
need to create a culture of protection in which
Governments fulfil their responsibilities, armed groups
respect the norms of international law and the private
sector recognizes the impact of its commitments to
countries in conflict.
Finally, Kenya urges this Council, the entire
United Nations, Member States and regional and
international organizations to act in a swift and
decisive manner when civilians are threatened in armed
conflicts.
The President: I give
representative of Afghanistan.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Ayoob (Afghanistan): It is an honour for me
to participate in this debate. On behalf of the Afghan
delegation, I would like to begin by congratulating
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency of this Council and by thanking you for
holding this meeting today, which is highly important
for my delegation. I would also like to thank UnderSecretary-General John Holmes for his typically
concise and insightful presentation this morning.
Finally, I thank the Secretary-General for his
thoughtful and comprehensive report and its annex on
constraints on humanitarian access (S/2009/277).
The United Nations has brought serious attention
to the plight of suffering civilians caught in the
crossfire and established a comprehensive framework
in the Security Council to deal with the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. However, with the recent
trend towards asymmetric conflicts and the tendency of
non-State actors to use civilians as human shields or
worse, this work is even more essential.

21

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

The Government of Afghanistan, with the
assistance of our friends in the international
community, is making good progress in providing
Afghans with the opportunity for a better life, while the
enemies of Afghanistan continue to bring more
suffering to the civilians of that war-stricken nation, in
particular its women and children.
As numerous United Nations reports have
detailed, the Taliban and their local and international
allies are showing an increasingly blatant disregard for
human rights in Afghanistan. They rely increasingly on
the use of improvised explosive devices detonated in
high-density civilian areas, causing indiscriminate
damage and loss of life and affecting predominantly
women and children. The Taliban have stepped up their
use of assassinations, school attacks, kidnappings and
threats targeted against those accused of cooperation
with the Government of Afghanistan or the
international community. They continue to use
civilians as human shields, milking accidental tragedy
for their own propaganda.
The Taliban have two simple aims. First, they
want to terrify our citizens and convince them that they
are helpless and cannot trust the international
community or their Government to protect them.
Secondly, they seek to divide Afghans and the
international community, weakening us both. We
cannot and shall not let them succeed in either of their
goals.
Unfortunately, in the course of our fight against
terrorism, sometimes civilians have become victims of
our actions as well, however unintentionally. Every
civilian death hurts our cause. Every death undermines
the faith of the people in their Government and
weakens our most valuable asset in the rebuilding of
Afghanistan: the Afghans themselves. The Afghan
people rightly expect that efforts to fight terrorism
would be part of a larger counter-terrorism effort rather
than vice versa. Their security should be central.
The best hope for the Afghan people is the
continuing support of the international community, and
Afghans are more aware of this than anyone. We all
understand the necessity of defeating the brutally
violent and dark-minded elements who wage war on
peace, stability and prosperity in our region and in the
world. Our allies have sent their sons and daughters to
fight on foreign land, and Afghanistan is profoundly
grateful for that. Without the assistance of the

22

international community and its military presence, our
people would not have escaped the repression and
brutality of the Taliban era and would not now have a
better future in sight.
The safety of each person and the prevention of
the deaths of innocent civilians are critically important
to us, and the Government of Afghanistan has raised
this issue repeatedly with our friends and allies.
Afghans should be made to feel that their security,
safety and dignity are the centrepiece of our fight
against terrorism. We welcomed the recent reviews of
this issue, and applaud the decisions of the United
States and NATO to improve the rules of engagement
in populated areas, minimize the use of air
bombardment and make human security a priority in
our strategy.
In addition, it is fundamentally important that the
international community focus on and do more in terms
of the professional training and better equipping of our
growing Afghan National Army and Police forces, so
that the Government of Afghanistan is able to take
more — and eventually all — responsibility for the
protection of its citizens. The main goal of the Afghan
Government and our allies in fighting terrorism is to
bring about a better future for the Afghan people.
Therefore, while fighting their enemies, we must take
every measure to protect them and ensure that they do
not become victims of that conflict and that they have
the opportunity to build their lives in safety and
dignity.
The President: I give
representative of Sri Lanka.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Chandra (Sri Lanka): I join previous
speakers in expressing appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s open debate. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2009/277).
The Secretary-General’s report provides useful
information and analysis for us, the Member States, to
address the complex but essential issue of protecting
civilians in armed conflict. As noted by the report
itself, the protection task cannot be understood and
addressed in humanitarian terms alone, as it requires
focus and action on a multiplicity of different areas,
ranging from politics to human rights to disarmament.
While the report correctly outlines a framework
of core challenges in this field and notes that the

09-38414

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

Council has reflected several of these complexities in
some of its resolutions, albeit inconsistently, the report
itself suffers from selectivity of language and
situations in dealing with different countries. It must
also be noted that the synthesis in the report cannot be
looked at in isolation as a set of all-purpose guidelines
that can be applied regardless of the circumstances.

is gratified that, due to the professionalism and
sacrifices of the soldiers, there was no cataclysmic
scenario, as some had predicted. We need to recognize
that this effort by the security forces succeeded in
bringing to safety hundreds of thousands of civilians
from a terrible hostage situation and a human shield
created by that terror group, the LTTE.

The recent situation in my country, which is also
referred to in the report with considerable factual
inaccuracies in some places, was one where a terrorist
group took a large number of civilians hostage and
used them as a human shield. The children of those
civilians were forcibly conscripted, suicide attacks
were launched on civilians who exercised their
legitimate right to seek protection by leaving the area
of conflict, adults were used for forced labour and a
large portion of the food and medicine delivered to
those civilians by the Government and agencies
including the United Nations were forcibly taken by
this terrorist group. All appeals of the international
community to the terrorists to release the civilians went
unheeded.

Member States also need to address the causes of
the escalation of armed conflict. The proliferation of
illicit arms has contributed to the spread of violence
and terrorism everywhere. Unless we are able to stop
such proliferation, as agreed in Council resolution
1612 (2005), civilian safety will remain at stake and
our best efforts to deal with the humanitarian
consequences of conflicts will soon exceed existing
capacities and available resources. While measures can
be imposed, albeit selectively, on States legitimately
engaged in protecting their civilian population from
terrorists, non-State actors such as terrorist groups, on
the other hand, can have relatively easy access to illicit
weapons. This is because there is no dedicated
international regime to conduct surveillance, let alone
interdict such illicit arms trafficking.

In those circumstances, security forces had to
facilitate the rescue of the civilians from the
unsustainable hostage situation created by the terrorists
and to bring an end to the conflict that would have
otherwise prolonged the suffering. It is necessary,
therefore, to recognize the extraordinary challenges
and new situations that constantly confront elected
Governments in dealing with such unrelenting groups
and to find new ways to address those challenges from
the lessons learned.
Our recent experience showed how non-State
actors taking cover in civilian garb used schools and
hospitals for terrorist operations in order to deceive the
world by blurring the distinction between civilian and
military targets. Non-State actors pay scant attention to
international norms and standards and do not feel
bound by any legal framework. The country, the region
and the international community have recognized and
acknowledged that by bringing the conflict in Sri
Lanka to an end, further loss of lives and prolongation
of suffering have been prevented for our people.
As in most conflicts — especially those involving
a ruthless and unrelenting terrorist group such as the
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) — the ending
of the conflict inevitably had its cost in terms of loss of
life, property and national wealth. But the Government

09-38414

On the other hand, external actors such as
diaspora communities openly fund arms purchases
aimed at destabilizing States, while receiving support
and protection in their host countries; and their
criminal agents cross international boundaries at will,
unchecked. The smuggling of arms in international
waters and across boundaries continues rendering
regimes such as Council resolution 1373 (2001), rather
ineffective in this area.
There is also a need to recognize the legitimate
role of the military in civilian protection, although we
can agree that it is not an exclusive role. It is
noteworthy that protective responsibilities are part of
the mandate of United Nations peacekeeping forces,
and their valuable contribution in that regard has been
noted.
The role of Governments in civilian protection
should be respected, as it is their primary responsibility
to protect their own citizens, especially in times of
armed conflict. United Nations and other humanitarian
agencies must support and assist Governments and in
doing so be sensitive to ground realities including
respect for the sovereignty of States. The principle of
unimpeded access for humanitarian personnel must be
respected, but one cannot disregard the State’s

23

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

responsibility to ensure the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel, as terrorists do not distinguish
between military and humanitarian personnel in their
attacks.
It must never be overlooked that the military,
often at huge cost to its personnel, must brave the
dangers of suicide terrorism to bring civilians out of
harm’s way. Therefore, military and humanitarian
personnel must seek to work in partnership, and their
responsibilities towards civilians must be addressed
through regular dialogue and consultation in places
where civilian protection is at stake.
Therefore, we should look at measures to build
the capacity of military personnel and peacekeeping
forces to deal with civilian protection activities. This
becomes particularly pertinent given that we are
dealing increasingly with internal conflicts.
Another inevitable consequence of armed conflict
is internal displacement. The Secretary-General’s
report brings out the concern that internal displacement
is on the rise globally. Council resolution 1674 (2006)
addresses this issue. Internal displacement poses
several challenges. Key among them is that armed
groups use displacement to exploit civilian
populations, sometimes by masquerading among them.
In that context, civilians have a right to be protected,
and the State has the primary responsibility not only to
provide for the welfare of displaced civilians in terms
of food, clothing, medical care and shelter, but also to
ensure their safety and to take necessary measures in
that regard.
Unfortunately, these ground realities are not
understood or considered by those who look at civilian
protection in isolation and who apply generalizations
regardless of the specific circumstances. That would
also apply to resettlement, where, in some situations,
uncharted mine fields laid by armed groups,
unexploded ordnance and booby traps have to be
cleared — quite apart from the reconstruction activities
that create conditions conducive to resettlement in
secure surroundings.
The cost of armed conflict for civilians is a
matter of concern to all democratic and elected
Governments. Quite often, and quite naturally, the
focus on civilian casualties is centred on the loss of life
and property damage caused in military operations,
while insufficient consideration is given to the

24

thousands of lives lost in suicide attacks on civilian
targets by non-State actors.
In my country, over a period of 26 years, many
lives were senselessly lost due to suicide terrorist
attacks on our Central Bank, the central bus station,
passenger trains and other public places. From the
standpoint of civilian protection efforts, efforts to end
prolonged conflicts which have resulted in massive
casualty tolls and where so many lives could be saved
should be recognized as a priority. It is agreed that
more attention needs to be paid to the issue of making
armed groups compliant. In this regard, our
Government would welcome more openness on the part
of United Nations agencies with regard to sharing
outcomes from the monitoring of compliance by armed
groups to ensure that appropriate measures are taken by
the Government to protect civilians from armed
groups.
However, United Nations agencies seeking
compliance by concluding instruments with non-State
armed groups should do so with the concurrence of
Governments and be cautious of terrorist groups
seeking legitimacy. Censure of armed groups should
not be confined to rhetoric. Experience tells us that the
measures suggested to engage such terrorist groups are
less effective than targeted measures, taken bilaterally,
that compel the key diaspora figures of such groups to
move away from promoting and funding extremism. It
is also agreed that more in-depth consideration of this
issue is needed. However, it would not be useful to
conduct such a discussion in limited forums without
involving the larger membership, given the geographic
spread of such groups and their networking in the
diaspora.
My delegation hopes that the Council’s debate on
protection of civilians will facilitate practical decisions
based on realities on the ground. The challenges facing
us are primarily of a practical nature, requiring more
international cooperation and greater coordination
between the United Nations bodies and Member States.
It is for this reason that my delegation has sought to
share our experience and for all of us to invest greater
efforts in preventing conflicts and their recurrence and
to respond practically and proportionately to situations
affecting civilian populations.
For Sri Lanka, one of the longest-standing
democracies in our subregion, this period was also
extremely difficult and, in a way, defining. We

09-38414

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

appreciate the Council’s concerns because they are also
our shared concerns. We have endeavoured to
cooperate constructively with the Secretary-General
and the Council without being divisive or
confrontational while the Government dealt with the
complex challenge of countering a ruthless terrorist
group that shunned and sabotaged all genuine attempts
at negotiations for over 25 years and brought harm and
suffering to the very people whom it said it was
seeking to represent. On Sri Lanka’s part, the
Government reiterates that the framework which the
Secretary-General and President of Sri Lanka agreed
upon in their joint statement would be the basis on
which we will continue to cooperate with the United
Nations in the post-conflict period as we look forward
to the priority tasks of rehabilitation, reconstruction,
reconciliation and launching the political process.
In conclusion, we would like to acknowledge the
valuable contribution of the United Nations agencies,
particularly the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, and other national and
international partners in providing support and
assistance to the Government’s efforts towards the
relief, rehabilitation and resettlement of the affected
civilians.
The President: I give
representative of Indonesia.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I should like to
begin by thanking you, Sir, for organizing this meeting,
and the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. John
Holmes, for his statement.
Notwithstanding the pronounced focus on the
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
over the past decade, the deplorable fact remains that
civilians continue to fall victim to violence. Persistent
violations include the deliberate targeting of civilians,
the indiscriminate and excessive use of force, and
sexual and gender-based violence in violation of
international law, human rights law and refugee law.
Indeed, in many instances we have witnessed attacks
on relief workers, humanitarian aid convoys and others
engaging in humanitarian assistance to civilians
suffering the effects of war.
Indonesia has been and will continue to be firmly
committed to addressing the impact of armed conflict
on civilians. We are cognizant of the five core
challenges to their protection identified in the

09-38414

Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/277). We concur
that the failure of parties to comply fully with their
obligation to protect civilians in armed conflict is key.
In this respect, all parties to armed conflicts should
adhere to relevant international law, including the 1994
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel and its Optional Protocol.
We value the Security Council’s efforts,
consistent with its Charter-mandated responsibilities,
in protecting civilians in armed conflict, which merit
the wide support of regional and international actors
alike. At the same time, it is worth underscoring that
the best protection from armed conflict is its
prevention and resolution. The Council should spare no
effort in this area.
By the same token, the Security Council should
lend its full support to the efforts of regional
organizations in addressing dire humanitarian
situations. A culture of protection must continually be
promoted
through
regional
and
international
organizations. This would sustain attention on the issue
and promote concrete action by the various actors.
It is Indonesia’s view that that there are at least
three key prerequisites with regard to this crucial issue.
First, respect for humanitarian principles needs to be
continuously maintained. The rapid and unimpeded
access of humanitarian personnel should be ensured,
consistent with international humanitarian law.
Likewise, humanitarian personnel are subject to the
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality,
independence, and respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and national unity of States.
Secondly, in the conduct of hostilities, parties should
do everything feasible to protect civilians and civilian
objects. Thirdly, examples of good practices should
also be noted and, where feasible, implemented to
ensure that populations in urgent need enjoy consistent
assistance.
Finally, let me reiterate that all efforts to protect
civilians in armed conflict must be founded on the
tenets of human rights, security and development —
the three pillars of the United Nations. These three
principles should be reflected in the next report in
commemoration of the tenth anniversary this coming
November. The tenth anniversary should also serve to
maintain the momentum by strengthening the United
Nations system’s capacity to work in a coordinated,
coherent, comprehensive and cooperative manner with

25

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

Member States and other stakeholders. An approach
that
includes
development
and
humanitarian
dimensions is required, and must be supported by the
political will of States to ensure that civilians are
protected in times of armed conflict and in times of
peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Lomaia (Georgia): The protection of
civilians in armed conflicts is among the priorities of
the Human Security Network, and I would like to thank
the Turkish presidency for the organization of this
important debate. In recent years, the international
community has kept the issue firmly on its agenda.
The delegation of Georgia fully associates itself
with the statement made by the Czech presidency of
the European Union.
Last year, the citizens of my country suffered a
massive foreign military invasion, followed by the
occupation of up to 20 per cent of our territory. This
war took the lives of 600 citizens of Georgia, most of
them civilians. Over 130,000 were forced from their
homes in a move that was branded as ethnic cleansing
by a major European intergovernmental body. Satellite
images obtained by the Operational Satellite
Applications Programme of the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research confirm the
deliberate and targeted destruction of dozens of
villages inside the territory occupied by regular
Russian forces and proxy militia.
For many of my displaced compatriots, the horror
of ethnic cleansing continues as we speak. As a matter
of policy, tens of thousands of them are being
prevented from returning to their homes or what is left
of their homes in the occupied territories. As
Mr. Walter Kalïn, the Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on the human rights of internally displaced
persons, puts it in his report: “An estimated 37,600 ...
will not be able to return in the foreseeable future”
(A/HRC/10/13/Add.2, para. 58). This policy represents
a third wave of ethnic cleansing, with the first two
carried out in another occupied Georgian province,
Abkhazia, where 400,000 citizens of the pre-war
population of 550,000 were either killed or expelled —
including, most recently, 3,000 men and women in the
past year.

We take note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the issue. Here, I would like to draw the
Council’s attention to the issue of the humanitarian
blockade of the occupied territories, and to provide an
update on the situation on the ground. It is a fact that
the Russian occupying forces have been completely
blocking access of humanitarian aid to the occupied
territories, requiring humanitarian missions to enter the
Tskhinvali region of South Ossetia exclusively via
Russian territory. This policy represents yet another
breach of the principles of international humanitarian
law, as well as of paragraph 3 of the European Unionbrokered ceasefire agreement. A number of
international organizations have protested against that
policy. The blockade turns the occupied territories into
a black hole where people are deprived of their basic
rights and humanitarian aid is simply not allowed.
No one will be surprised to learn that it is with
the same lack of constructiveness that Russia has
refused even to consider a compromise solution to the
problem that envisaged allowing double and
simultaneous access to the territories from both the
northern and southern directions. It should be reiterated
that the Government of Georgia, as well as the entire
international community, regrets the termination of the
activities of the United Nations Observation Mission in
Georgia (UNOMIG), due to the single — I emphasize
single — Russian vote cast against it. This constitutes a
clear violation of paragraph 4 of resolution 1866
(2009), which calls for “facilitating, and refraining
from placing any impediment to, humanitarian
assistance”.
The termination of UNOMIG’s mandate was
meant to reduce the level of protection for human
rights in occupied Abkhazia. It is also aimed at creating
yet another obstacle to the safe and dignified return of
internally displaced persons and refugees to their
homes, in contravention of a number of resolutions of
this Council and the General Assembly. We are
convinced that to better address these needs, we have
to substantially enhance the presence of the relevant
United Nations agencies — such as the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the United
Nations Development Programme, among others —
inside the occupied territories of Abkhazia and the
Tskhinvali region of South Ossetia.
My Government joins the call to take this
opportunity to reinvigorate our joint commitment to

26

09-38414

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

making the protection of civilians a reality for all those
caught up in conflict.

armed conflict exposes civilians to the harshest effects
of hostilities.

The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Guatemala.

Secondly, in order to promote compliance by
non-State armed groups, we must engage in outreach
aimed at sensitizing such groups, as well as civil
society, to the importance of maintaining the strictest
respect for civilians, international humanitarian law,
human rights and refugees.

Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We are pleased to take part in this debate under your
presidency, Sir, on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. This issue is of extreme importance not only
for the Security Council but for the United Nations
system as a whole. My delegation welcomes the
valuable report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/277),
as well as the briefing by Mr. John Holmes, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, containing
information and concrete proposals to enhance the
United Nations collective capacity to protect civilians
in armed conflict, a vulnerable group that merits our
immediate attention.
While noting the conclusions and key proposals
identified in the report of the Secretary-General, my
delegation wishes to comment on their eventual
application and importance. Ten years have passed
since the first debate in the Security Council on the
protection of civilians. While there is no doubt as to
the importance of all the reports, resolutions and
actions of the past decade, the report of the SecretaryGeneral reveals that the situation confronting civilians
in current conflicts is depressingly similar to that
which prevailed in 1999. Civilians still account for the
vast majority of casualties and continue to be targeted
and subject to indiscriminate attacks and other
violations by parties to conflicts. Any progress will
therefore remain relative if it is not accompanied by
substantial improvement in the protection of civilians
on the ground.
With regard to the five core challenges outlined
by the Secretary-General, given the need for
determined action within and beyond the United
Nations to enhance the protection of civilians, we wish
to be a part of the proposed culture of protection. In
that regard, we offer our firm support for the
reinvigorated commitment noted by the SecretaryGeneral and wish to make the following specific
observations.
First, regarding compliance with international
law, our efforts should not be limited to ensuring
respect for existing norms, but should also be aimed at
strengthening them. The inability of the parties to a
conflict to respect international law applicable to

09-38414

Thirdly, enhanced protection of civilians will
depend on a broad scope of action by the Security
Council. We support a multidimensional approach,
addressing all aspects of the protection of civilians
through thematic and country-specific and groupspecific considerations. The effectiveness of protection
will also depend on other external factors, some of
which we have the power to affect, such as the
allocation of adequate resources, the number of
personnel on the ground, and the logistical and tactical
capacity-building.
Fourthly, access to humanitarian assistance, while
not recognized as an obligation under international law,
is undoubtedly a fundamental prerequisite for
humanitarian action. We are concerned by the reversals
experienced in this area in recent years. We welcome
the annex to the report of the Secretary-General, which
contains an analysis of the restrictions to access, and
hope that its recommendations will soon become
concrete measures.
Fifthly, with regard to accountability for
violations, we must remember that the Security
Council is not a legal, but a political body, entrusted
with the maintenance of international peace and
security. Therefore, we must turn to international
cooperation and mutual assistance in criminal matters,
as the report proposes, through measures directed at
States.
To conclude, in view of what I have said, allow
me to mention one subject that cannot be omitted from
our debate today and is of particular relevance in
meeting the previously mentioned challenges. Our
delegation is among those that consider paragraphs 138
and 139 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General
Assembly resolution 60/1) to be one of the most
important achievements of that meeting. The
development of the doctrine of humanitarian law in the
past years marks, in our opinion, an important step
forward. The primary responsibility to protect civilians
falls on States, and they, in turn, are obliged to seek

27

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

international help when they cannot provide it. In the
coming years, both the General Assembly and the
Security Council will have a very prominent role to
play to make that concept operational; this offers an
opportunity to continue improving the United Nations
assistance framework.
We must collectively ensure that populations at
risk have access to the best possible protection at all
times. The Security Council and the entire international
community will be judged by their capacity to protect
the most vulnerable. That is a challenge to which we
must immediately respond.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mrs. Juul (Norway): Norway welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/2009/277), and especially
the recommendations on improving humanitarian
access, upholding humanitarian law, the safety of
humanitarian workers and holding violators of
international humanitarian law accountable. A key
issue ahead will be how to translate the
recommendations of that report into decisions by the
Council and, ultimately, into results on the ground.
Norway also looks forward to the independent
study on protection mandates for peacekeeping
operations, to be presented shortly by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. We expect
that the study will provide concrete guidelines on
protection that can quickly be effectuated in the field.
Here Member States — and not only troop-contributing
countries — should pull together to provide the
necessary systematic training, based on the
forthcoming guidelines on protection.
Norway would like to take this opportunity to
focus on two main issues, namely the need for
increased respect for international humanitarian law
and the need to effectively combat sexual violence and
rape in armed conflict. The many violations of
humanitarian law that we have seen in the past few
years, in particular with regard to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, is a cause for grave
concern. The targeting of civilians has serious
humanitarian consequences and represents a threat to
peace and security. There is an urgent need to
strengthen respect for international humanitarian law in

28

order to improve the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.
A key concern is to secure humanitarian access to
those in need of assistance. We also need to ensure that
those who violate international humanitarian law are
held accountable. There is a need to strengthen the
obligations of States and non-State actors with regard
to international humanitarian law. Promoting respect
for international humanitarian law requires engaging
also non-State actors. We welcome the proposal by the
Secretary-General to hold an Arria formula meeting to
discuss the experiences of the United Nations and
non-Governmental actors in engaging armed groups.
Women and children are often forced to bear the
heaviest burden when it comes to the consequences of
armed conflict. Sexual violence and rape occur every
single day in armed conflicts and have tragic
consequences not only for the individual, but for the
whole community. Sexual violence leaves lasting scars
for many generations to come, making peacebuilding
extremely difficult. It is crucial that these acts not be
viewed as separate, individual crimes. In many cases,
they are calculated tactics of war and should be treated
as such. Crimes of rape and sexual violence in armed
conflict must be placed higher on the international
agenda. The systematic use of rape has rightly been
recognized as a war crime both by the Council and by
the International Criminal Court.
An important step towards preventing sexual
violence in conflict was taken in June last year, when
the Security Council adopted resolution 1820 (2008),
on women, and peace and security and sexual violence
in situations of armed conflict. The Security Council
recognized sexual violence as a security problem — a
problem that requires a systematic security response.
We are satisfied that the adoption of resolution 1820
(2008) has ended the debate on whether or not sexual
violence belongs on the Security Council agenda. We
look forward to the Secretary-General’s report on the
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008). We expect
the
recommendations
to
be
forceful
and
comprehensive, resulting in a strong response from the
Council.
Norway would also like to see the Security
Council make use of the most effective measures at its
disposal, including targeted sanctions, to make it clear
that sexual violence is unacceptable and that
perpetrators will be held accountable. It is

09-38414

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

unacceptable that impunity for these extremely severe
crimes seems to be the rule, not the exception. Norway
supports the referral of such crimes to the International
Criminal Court and consideration of sanctions against
Member States, as well as non-State actors, that
perpetrate these criminal acts. It is also our obligation
as Member States to ensure that violators are brought
to justice. It is our duty to ensure that the whole United
Nations family — funds and programmes and
peacekeeping missions — strengthen its focus and
allocate resources in order to protect women and girls.
The protection of civilians is a comprehensive
issue that requires comprehensive analysis and a
concerted international response. That implies
improving respect for international humanitarian law. It
also implies providing United Nations peacekeeping
operations with strong mandates, as well as the
resources required to fulfil those mandates. Combating
impunity and holding perpetrators accountable are key
to protecting civilians in armed conflict and ending
sexual violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Republic of Korea.
Mr. Park In-kook (Republic of Korea): My
delegation shares the deep concerns over systematic,
flagrant and widespread violations of international
humanitarian and international human rights law. In
that regard, we fully support the continued attention of
the Security Council to that issue.
Indeed, the Security Council has made good
normative progress on that issue over the past 10 years.
Now, it is time to raise the urgency to translate that
normative progress into concrete implementation on
the ground. We therefore welcome and concur with the
five
core
challenges
identified
and
the
recommendations made in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2009/277) to address that urgency. Hoping
that those challenges and recommendations will serve
as a good basis to further our endeavour to translate
normative discussion into action, I would like to
highlight the following points.
First, no violators of international humanitarian
law should go unpunished. As the Security Council
reaffirms in resolution 1674 (2006), ending impunity is
essential. When it is clearly established that there is no
escape for a violator, compliance with international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
will be accordingly enhanced. Such law is respected

09-38414

and complied with when the consequences of egregious
violations are clear. As stated in the latest presidential
statement on protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/PRST/2009/1), protection of civilians is the primary
responsibility of the parties to the armed conflict. In
this regard, we fully endorse the Secretary-General’s
emphasis on accountability for those who commit mass
atrocities, as well as the responsibility of States to
prosecute those suspected of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes. Recognizing the
responsibility of States, my delegation also wants to
emphasize that the role of the International Criminal
Court should be respected in upholding the concept of
“no impunity” when there is clear evidence of inability
or unwillingness by States to prosecute criminals.
Secondly, the proliferation and fragmentation of
non-State armed groups deserves special attention. As
traditional States see little profit in war in the
globalized world and thus try to avoid war, the intraState wars that involve non-State armed groups have
increased drastically. Usually, these intra-State wars
are based on ethnic, religious and cultural differences,
which often give rise to genocide and atrocities against
civilians.
Thirdly, sexual violence against women and girls
in armed conflicts is one of the most horrible forms of
violence against civilians and must be stopped. Women
and girls are the most vulnerable, and sexual violence
has a devastating and corrosive effect on society as a
whole. The unanimous adoption of resolution 1820
(2008) was very encouraging, but considering that
horrific sexual violence against women continues to be
committed in many conflict situations, we need to
strengthen our efforts to protect women and girls in
conflict areas.
Finally, timely, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access is a cardinal rule and should always be ensured.
My delegation fully agrees with the findings and
suggestions of the Secretary-General on this issue. As
the source of lifesaving activities, the humanitarian
response should be driven exclusively by the
humanitarian needs of the affected populations,
irrespective of any political grounds. Preventing access
will only increase unnecessary casualties involving
civilians, and States and non-State actors that employ
accession prevention as a tactic should be held
responsible. I look forward to further discussions at the
Security
Council
on
the
Secretary-General’s
suggestions with a view to their full implementation.

29

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

My delegation appreciates the continuing efforts
of the Security Council to protect civilians in armed
conflict and has been rendering its full support. The
Republic of Korea also believes that these efforts to
protect civilians should be an integral part of all United
Nations peacekeeping missions, and we welcomed
resolution 1674 (2006), in which the Council stated its
intention to include clear guidelines on civilian
protection in the peacekeeping operations mandates.
We expect the continued efforts of the Council to
define and elaborate protection mandates, strategies
and plans of action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President, may I
congratulate you on your fine work as President of the
Security Council this month. I welcome the initiative
that enables us to discuss this very important issue,
namely the protection of civilians in armed conflicts.
Armed conflicts are characterized by their
changing nature, which involves a multiplicity of
factors, requiring, in turn, an integral approach. The
parties involved, the Security Council, the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Human Rights Council, as well as other organs of the
system within their respective fields of competence,
must develop prevention strategies to safeguard peace
and protect civilians, dealing with the underlying
causes of armed conflicts: poverty, external
intervention by international corporations, desire for
domination on the part of some countries, and so forth.
Our State has had the responsibility of protecting
civilians displaced by the internal conflict being
experienced by our Colombian neighbours and have
received them as brothers and sisters and as though
they were citizens of our country. These are civilians
who flee from their lands and their homes to escape the
internal war. Many of them settle in our country, and
we welcome them and integrate them into our society.
Other displaced persons return to their homes in
Colombia when they see the opportunity for a fresh
start. In these circumstances, they have been treated in
strict compliance with humanitarian law and in keeping
with our constitutional responsibility to respect human
rights.
Nonetheless, that has not been the fate of other
peoples in the world, and here I must refer to the

30

specific case of the long-suffering people of Palestine.
The illegal occupation of Gaza by the Government of
Israel towards the end of 2008 and in early 2009 gave
rise to the criminal imposition of a curfew on the
civilian population, which still persists. On that
occasion, over 1,300 Palestinian children and women
were killed and 5,300 were wounded or mutilated for
life by these undesirable practices. This situation must
not go unpunished. Otherwise, some countries waging
war would be encouraged to engage in the perverse
practice of targeting civilians and the people for
military attacks. Practices such as these must be the
subject of the most rigorous consideration by this body,
fully backed by the General Assembly, and the
necessary legal measures to avoid more civilian lives
being lost because of the impunity syndrome must be
taken.
Wrongful practices against civilians also include
the detention of children, adolescents and women in
military conflicts for the alleged purpose of obtaining
information about the conflict and its protagonists, a
situation that is in clear violation of the human rights
of civilians. Another practice consists in attacking
humanitarian missions, such as the Red Cross and the
Red Crescent and United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as we have seen in Gaza in recent months,
with the destruction of infrastructure for public
services, housing, schools and United Nations
buildings where staff of this Organization who were on
a humanitarian mission lost their lives.
The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela reiterates that the primary responsibility for
the protection of civilians in armed conflicts resides
with States, and that the international community can
play a constructive role in support of national efforts,
always with respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States.
We also view with concern the attempts of some
States to interpret as they see fit the concept of
responsibility to protect contained in paragraph 139 of
the Final Document of 2005 World Summit. Some
countries have groundlessly tried to affirm that this
concept is a norm that can be implemented without the
required discussions, but we believe that the General
Assembly must discuss this concept and provide it with
a consensus interpretation.
Finally, Venezuela would like to reiterate its
commitment to peace and its readiness to debate in the

09-38414

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

General Assembly all measures to effectively protect
civilians in armed conflict. We are convinced that it is
in that body that we can achieve the genuine political
commitment of States in the implementation of the
norms of international humanitarian law and human
rights on behalf of civilian populations affected by
such conflicts.

Warning System — also include important elements
pertaining to the protection of civilians in situations of
armed conflict. The African Union’s Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development framework further
sets out principles for comprehensive post-conflict
recovery, rehabilitation and reconciliation in three
phases and six major pillars.

The President: I now give the floor to Mrs. Alice
Mungwa, Senior Political Affairs Adviser at the Office
of the Permanent Observer of the African Union to the
United Nations.

The adoption of that legal framework
demonstrates the commitment of African States to fully
play their role in efforts to protect civilians in
situations of armed conflict. Various frameworks have
been established aimed at their implementation. We
continue to call on the Security Council to continue to
lend its support for the implementation of those
frameworks, which include, in particular, the office of
the special representative of the African Union for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, which
advocates with both State and non-State actors at the
highest level in respect of international humanitarian
law and the protection of civilians in situations of
armed conflict. African Union leaders also maintain a
vigorous system of special envoys and representatives
who work closely with member States to conduct early
preventive diplomacy and other good offices to help
prevent conflict and to de-escalate tensions, working
closely with other international partners.

Mrs. Mungwa: Allow me to join previous
speakers in commending you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important debate, as well as to convey
to you the apologies of my Ambassador. She is away
from New York today to attend meetings for the
upcoming Assembly of the African Union in Sirte,
Libya. We would also like to join previous speakers in
thanking the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/277). We also thank Under-Secretary-General
Holmes for his introduction of the report this morning
and for all the efforts he is making in order to promote
the protection of civilians in situations of armed
conflict, which is a particularly relevant issue for
Africa.
The protection of civilians — in particular of
women, children, the elderly and persons with
disabilities — during a situation of conflict is a basic
foundation of African culture, which is also
synonymous with international humanitarian law.
Indeed, barely three years into its existence, the former
Organization of African Unity enacted the 1969
Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee
Problems in Africa. In the same vein, since its
inception in 2002, the African Union, in seeking to
foster the protection of civilians in situations of armed
conflict in the continent, has established major policy
frameworks and institutions.
Indeed, article 4(h) of the Constitutive Act of the
African Union further conveys a mandate on the Union
to intervene in a member State pursuant to a decision
of the Assembly in respect of grave circumstances —
namely, war crimes, genocide and crimes against
humanity — in order to protect civilians. Furthermore,
the provisions of institutions comprising the African
Peace and Security Architecture — notably the Peace
and Security Council, the African Stand-by Force, the
Panel of the Wise and the African Continental Early

09-38414

Overall, following the efforts of the African
Union to promote peace and security and democratic
governance around the continent with the support of
the Security Council, we believe that there is renewed
confidence and hope among millions of civilians who
are affected by conflicts in Africa that those efforts will
significantly improve their situation as the Security
Council continues to focus on this particular issue.
The African Union is also pursuing other
activities and thematic questions that we believe will
contribute to the protection of civilians in situations of
armed conflict as well. Those include the whole
question of security-sector reform and the promotion of
a human security approach that also seeks to enhance
efforts aimed at addressing the root causes of conflict.
We are pleased with the emphasis that has been
placed on the protection of women and children in the
debate today, because that is also one area where the
African Union has placed special emphasis, as
demonstrated by the adoption of three major policy
instruments since 2002. They include the Protocol to
the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on

31

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

the Rights of Women in Africa, the African Union
Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa and
the gender policy of the African Union, which was
recently adopted. Special emphasis has also been
placed on the protection of youth, who are often
vulnerable to non-State actors who perpetrate serious
attacks against civilians in situations of armed conflict.
Other components of the African Union are also
focusing on helping to understand attacks against
civilians in situations of armed conflict. In that regard,
the Pan-African Parliament and the Economic and
Social Council of the African Union are also working
with non-State actors to conduct fact-finding missions,
lend their support for an increased voice for women in
peace talks and provide technical support to various
peace-support initiatives of the African Union.
However, as has been mentioned by many
previous speakers in today’s debate, despite the
progress
achieved
in
establishing
necessary
instruments — those I just described as well as those
that have been adopted by the Security Council —
there have certainly been serious gaps in
implementation in the field. Just to take one example,
for the past 10 years, during which the Security
Council has debated the protection of civilians in
situations of armed conflict, extensive violence and
death have been visited upon innocent civilians in
Somalia. We would therefore like to take this
opportunity to once again thank the Council and the
international community for the efforts deployed so far,
as well as to restate the appeal of the Transitional
Federal Government of Somalia, the African Union and
other international partners for the Security Council to
take necessary measures concerning the situation in
Somalia in particular. We also call on the Council to
lend its support to the efforts of the African Union as it
continues to try to prevent the escalation of the
situation in Somalia. We are grateful for the progress
that has been made in connection with the support
package approved by the Council for the African Union
Mission in Somalia.
The international community must also not lose
sight of the up to 20 million internally displaced people
in Africa, most of whom have been in that situation for
several years, or even decades in some situations. In
that connection, the African Union is also continuing to
do its part and is in the process of establishing a new
instrument devoted to addressing the question of
internally displaced persons in order to strengthen

32

applicable norms of international humanitarian law,
which have been the only recourse for internally
displaced persons around the continent.
The importance of prevention and early conflictresolution has also been emphasized and widely
supported in the debate today. We believe they form
the best strategy to avert the tragedies faced by
civilians in situations of armed conflict. The African
Union, working closely with the United Nations and
the international community, continues to initiate and
participate in diplomatic initiatives to avert the
outbreak of conflict.
The protection of civilians in situations of armed
conflict is clearly a complex process. That underscores
the need to forge partnerships involving all relevant
actors,
including
Governments,
humanitarian
organizations, civil society, the military in certain
situations, the private sector, the donor community and
affected populations themselves. We believe that, for
this to be effective, this partnership should be designed
to support and complement national efforts and
initiatives, which are responsive and adapted to the
realities on the ground. Each actor should be engaged
based on what it can do best and focusing on its
comparative advantages in relation to the others.
We feel fortunate that this debate is taking place
at a time when the Security Council is discussing the
question of the mobilization of resources and the
support of peace support operations by regional
organizations such as the African Union. It is indeed
our sincere hope that this debate will strengthen the
resolve of the Security Council to enhance the
mandates and capabilities of peacekeeping operations,
in particular those that are related to the protection of
civilians, and to enhance support for the peace efforts
of regional organizations such as the African Union.
Finally, we also wish to reiterate the importance
of addressing the crucial question of the illegal
circulation of small arms and lights weapons, which
often fall into the hands of non-State actors, who use
them to perpetrate attacks against civilians in situations
of armed conflict.
With these few remarks, Sir, we thank you so
much for giving us the opportunity to participate in this
meeting, and we certainly look forward to working on
the implementation of the recommendations outlined in
the report of the Secretary-General.

09-38414

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I give him the floor.
Mr. Zheglov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I am forced to take the floor in connection
with a number of statements made by the distinguished
representative of Georgia. I would like once again to
point out to the Council that it was in fact Georgia that
in August 2008 unleashed an attack against South
Ossetia, which resulted in a humanitarian catastrophe
for the entire people and mass human rights violations.
During the night of 8 August 2008, the Georgian army,
trained and well-armed from abroad, attacked the
sleeping city of Tskhinvali. In spite of agreements that
had been signed, the norms of international law and the
dictates of human morality, the armed forces of
Georgia struck at civilians and shot at peacekeepers.
Operation Clear Field, which had as its goal the
physical destruction and ousting of Ossetians from the
land of their ancestors, was a continuation of the policy
of Tbilisi towards the Ossetian people which began in
1991. In August 2008, the implementation of this
policy spilled over into ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity.
The basic outcome of this adventure on the part
of Saakashvili is well known: hundreds of people were
killed and wounded, and tens of thousands became
refugees and internally displaced persons. There is
evidence of the fact that the Georgian military
deliberately targeted civilians on the streets of the city
and refugees on the road to Zarsk.
One of the harshest results of Georgian
aggression against South Ossetia was the mass exodus
of the inhabitants of the Republic. The Georgian people
themselves were victims of Saakashvili’s policy.
Citizens of that country and non-citizens alike did not
wish to return to their homes, fearing persecution and
repression from the Georgian authorities and extremist
elements. As a result, approximately 2,000 inhabitants
of Georgia appealed to be officially recognized by the
Russian Federation as refugees.
It is absolutely false to assert that the Russian
Federation is occupying the territory of Georgia. The
legal basis for introducing Russian troops into the
territory of South Ossetia was Article 51 of the United
Nations Charter, on the right to self-defence, about
which, in accordance with the established procedure,
the Security Council was informed.

09-38414

We cannot agree with allegations to the effect that
there are restrictions on humanitarian access to South
Ossetia. It has been demonstrated in practice that, for
those institutions that truly wish to help South Ossetia,
access is open. Against this background, we can see
that it is the Georgian leadership that is trying to hinder
international humanitarian assistance to South Ossetia
in carrying out recovery work. To that end, the
Georgian law on the so-called occupied territories,
which is referred to in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2009/277, annex, para. 12), is being
invoked.
The crimes of the Georgian army in South
Ossetia should be properly assessed, including from
the standpoint of international law. First and foremost,
there is the responsibility of the Georgian leadership,
which took military action against civilians in the
country and committed, over a period of almost two
decades, many acts that can be classified as
international crimes.
At the current time, the situation in the so-called
buffer zones is becoming more tense as a result of the
build-up there of Georgia’s armed forces, something
that may lead to new hotbeds of tension on the borders
between South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
In conclusion, I would mention that the Russian
and Georgian peoples, historically, have always had
warm and fraternal relations, and we are certain that
this will continue in the future. The conflict unleashed
by Saakashvili is an example of civilians’ interests
being held hostage by political adventures.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. John
Holmes to respond to the comments made.
Mr. Holmes: I have listened carefully to all of
today’s debate, and I welcome the clear commitment to
the protection of civilians agenda shown both by the
number of speakers and their obvious commitment in
their comments to this issue. I also welcome the
recognition by virtually all speakers of the need to do
much more to ensure that our words and actions make
a tangible difference on the ground for civilians
affected by armed conflict.
I am heartened by the support expressed for many
of the recommendations in the Secretary-General’s
report and for the continued activities of the informal
Expert Group, and by the comments on the value of the
revised aide-mémoire and the importance of the future

33

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

report by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations on the protection of civilians
in peacekeeping mandates.
Given the lateness of the hour, I will not try to
respond to all the detailed points that have been made
by individual delegations, but let me comment on one
or two points of particular significance.
Some speakers raised concerns over the inclusion
of certain situations in the report of the SecretaryGeneral and therefore their characterization as
situations of armed conflict, explaining that they
should be seen rather as law enforcement or counterterrorism operations. Whether a situation constitutes an
armed conflict is in fact determined by the facts on the
ground on the basis of criteria developed in the
jurisprudence of international tribunals, notably the
involvement of organized parties fighting one another
and the intensity and duration of the violence.
Situations referred to in this report, in our view, meet
these criteria. They have been marked by prolonged
and intense military engagements, including by
Government armed forces as opposed to just by police,
by the use of heavy weapons and by the displacement
of thousands of civilians as well as significant civilian
casualties. The motive for an operation and how it is
referred to by the affected States themselves do not
alter this determination.
That being said — and I hope this will respond in
part to comments raised by the representative of
Sri Lanka — it is important to repeat and to reassure
Member States that such a determination or inclusion
in such a report should not be seen as judging or
condemning the conduct of the parties or in any way
questioning States’ entitlement to take the measures to
put an end to terrorism, nor does it affect the legal
status of the parties involved or equate the parties in
any way. Again, in response to what was said by the
representative of Sri Lanka, in our considerations, we
do indeed try to take account of the ground realities,
civilian casualties from suicide bombings and other
indiscriminate attacks, which I mentioned specifically
this morning, and the need to both respect national
sovereignty and cooperate with national Governments
while, of course, at the same time, respecting the basic
humanitarian principles of independence, impartiality
and neutrality.

34

What that means is that once the response to
terrorism is such as to reach the threshold of an armed
conflict, it must comply with international
humanitarian law and, as I have emphasized before,
violations of this law by the parties the affected State is
fighting does not entitle it to ignore its own obligations
under international law.
I listened carefully to what the distinguished
representative of Israel said, and I of course take
seriously the points he made, while not necessarily
agreeing with him. I have one or two specific
comments to make in response. The brief factual
paragraph that was devoted to the conflict in Gaza at
the beginning of this year could not, of course, cover
all the points or all the nuances of a complex situation
in the same way that references to other situations did
not pretend to be comprehensive, while still aiming to
be balanced. The report did not mention on this
occasion the rocket attacks against southern Israel, but
the Secretary-General, I and many others from the
United Nations have strongly and systematically
condemned such intentional targeting of civilians in the
past, so there should be no question about our position
on this.
As to the manner in which the report refers to the
conduct of Hamas during the conflict, we are
unfortunately not in a position ourselves to verify
reports of improper use of civilian objects or civilians
themselves as shields — inter alia, for some of the
reasons given by Israel — and therefore cannot speak
with a greater degree of certainty. However, the
information we do have does raise extremely serious
concerns in this regard. The fact-finding commission
currently being conducted by Judge Goldstone under
the auspices of the Human Rights Council is aiming to
clarify this question, as well as others raised in this
context. It is a matter of regret that the Government of
Israel has not so far been willing to cooperate with the
inquiry.
Meanwhile — and I hope, again, that this will
respond to some extent to comments made by the
representative of Sri Lanka — we certainly are very
conscious of the general problem of non-State actors
not adhering to their protection of civilians obligations
and, more widely, the problems posed in this context
by asymmetric warfare, as the Secretary-General’s
report and, indeed, my presentation this morning made
clear.

09-38414

S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)

A number of States have, in fact, expressed
support for further discussion about engagement with
non-State armed groups in order to improve their
compliance with the law and the idea of an Arria
formula meeting. A number of States also noted the
sensitivities that surround such engagement and the
need to avoid political legitimization. I fully
acknowledge these sensitivities, but at the same time the
truth is that we do need to engage with such groups if
we are going to promote and seek improved protection
of civilians, if we are to have consistent access to those
in need, and if aid workers are to be able to carry out
their work in a safe and secure environment, which is
frequently not the case at the moment.
On the question of access, I am encouraged by
the positive response to the annex on access
constraints, and we intend to continue to provide
detailed information on this issue to the Security
Council, including through the Expert Group, with the
aim of improving access in practical terms on the
ground.
Finally, I have noted the numerous calls for
improving the quality of the reporting on protection of
civilians in the Secretary-General’s country-specific
reports, and also calls for more assessments and
monitoring of the actual implementation of the

09-38414

Council’s mandates to protect civilians. This is one
area we intend to take forward with Member States and
other relevant parts of the Secretariat between now and
our next debate in November.
My colleagues in the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs will also be consulting with
members of the Council and other Member States to
identify the most appropriate and effective means of
ensuring follow-up to the recommendations in the
report, in advance of the next open debate in
November. In this context, I welcome the intention of
the future Austrian presidency to give that debate
ministerial attention, and I hope that other Security
Council delegations will consider following this
example as a sign of the seriousness with which the
Council takes these issues and of its determination to
achieve practical results.
I thank you again, Sir, for organizing debate, and
I thank all delegations for their contributions and
attention.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

35
