A/66/PV.3

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records
:

Sixty-sixth session

3

rd plenary meeting
Monday, 19 September 2011, 9 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Qatar)

The meeting was called to order at 9.10 a.m.
High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the
Prevention and Control of Non-communicable Diseases
Agenda item 117
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/66/L.1)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I declare open
the High-level Plenary Meeting of the General
Assembly on the Prevention and Control of
Non-communicable Diseases, held in accordance with
resolutions 64/265, of 13 May 2010, and 65/238, of
24 December 2010.
Statement by the President
The President (spoke in Arabic): All over the
world, men and women are dying premature deaths. All
over the world, men and women are dying preventable
deaths. And all over the world, health-care systems are
overburdened and economic growth is curtailed
because of the loss of healthy workers.
Let there be no doubt that non-communicable
diseases (NCDs) have reached epidemic proportions.
Non-communicable diseases are the biggest cause of
death worldwide. More than 36 million people die
annually from NCDs, making up 63 per cent of global
deaths — deaths which, in large part, could have been
prevented.

The impact of this loss — this tragedy — goes
beyond individuals, beyond families. NCDs are
altering demographics, stunting development and
impacting economic growth.
This High-level Meeting is a landmark in the
global fight against NCDs. This is the second time in
the history of the United Nations that the General
Assembly is meeting at the level of heads of State and
Government to discuss an emerging health issue with a
major socio-economic impact. This meeting is a
historic opportunity to set a new global agenda and to
advance the protection of the world’s vulnerable
populations. Let us not forget that everyone has the
right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable
standard of physical and mental health and that it is our
responsibility to contribute to the full realization of this
right.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
two co-facilitators, Her Excellency Ms. Sylvie Lucas,
Permanent Representative of Luxembourg, and His
Excellency
Mr.
Raymond
Wolfe,
Permanent
Representative of Jamaica, for their efforts in leading
the consultations on the modalities and the outcome
document for this High-level Meeting. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, the Director-General of the World
Health Organization, Ms. Margaret Chan, and all
participants here today for their efforts to bring greater
understanding and better solutions to these complex
issues.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-50343 (E)

*1150343*

A/66/PV.3

I would also like to mention, with appreciation,
the contribution of the Member States that have
brought this important health and development
problem to the attention of the General Assembly. The
role played by the Caribbean Community countries
deserves particular recognition.
Since 2000, when Member States at the World
Health Assembly first committed to reducing the toll of
premature mortality due to NCDs, there have been
important developments in our understanding of the
causes and prevention of non-communicable diseases.
It has become unequivocally clear that “best buy”
interventions that reduce the toll of NCD-related
premature deaths are workable and affordable
solutions. It is also evident that the most rapid
improvements in public health are often realized
through relatively inexpensive interventions that begin
in childhood. Perhaps most significant, it is now clear
that, to move effectively to prevent and protect against
non-communicable diseases, Governments must adopt
approaches that go beyond just the health sectors.
In some wealthy nations, the health impact of
non-communicable diseases has been reduced through
advocacy, community mobilization, health system
organization and restructuring, legislation and
regulation. We have seen fewer whole-of-Government
approaches in developing countries, and their
experiences have been starkly different: premature
deaths due to non-communicable diseases among
women range as low as 6 per cent in high-income
countries but they are as high as 58 per cent in lowincome countries. Among the many tragic
consequences of such inequality is the impact it has on
fulfilling the Millennium Development Goals.
Today, we meet to take the vision and the road
map emerging from over 10 years of coordinated
efforts and consolidate them to set a new global agenda
that will drive forward the fight against
non-communicable diseases. If Member States so
choose, this High-level Meeting will be a turning point
and an opportunity for heads of State and Government
to make major advances by committing to set national
targets for the reduction of premature deaths from
non-communicable diseases, as well as an opportunity
to promote a whole-of-Government approach at the
national level.
If such commitments are to have any impact, this
High-level Meeting must address the widening

2

disparities in various countries’ capacities for
addressing non-communicable diseases. This requires
thinking in terms of international cooperation. That
cooperation plays a pivotal role in the eradication of
poverty, as well as in combating inequality at all levels,
which is essential to the creation of a more prosperous
and sustainable future for all. The international
community must work together to monitor reductions
in exposure to risks and improve health care for people
with non-communicable diseases.
One of our paramount goals must be to take
measures to formulate a strong, well-coordinated,
coherent and effective United Nations response, aimed
at scaling up technical support for developing countries
under the leadership of the World Health Organization
in order to assist countries in explicitly incorporating
the issues of non-communicable diseases into their
poverty-reduction strategies and relevant social and
economic policies. We must also recognize the
important role of civil society, including the private
sector.
As part of the work of the Meeting during the
next two days, I encourage delegations to share lessons
learned on ways to strengthen national capacities and
appropriate policies. I believe it will also become clear
that problems with financing national initiatives remain
a major impediment to achieving progress, and I
encourage all to identify ways to foster international
cooperation in the coming years.
Today the Assembly will adopt an outcome
document (A/66/L.1) that will shape the international
agenda for future generations. Let that document
reaffirm a vision that goes beyond health, a vision that
also reflects the impact that non-communicable
diseases have on development and on our economies.
And let it be a document that will galvanize us into
action and guide our efforts for years to come. I thank
the Assembly in advance for its hard work and
constructive debate, and I hope for a productive highlevel meeting.
I now give the floor to His Excellency the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: This is a landmark
meeting. Three out of every five people on Earth die
from the diseases that we are gathered here to address.
I am guessing that each one of us has been close to
someone whose life has been changed or ended too
early by a non-communicable disease.

11-50343

A/66/PV.3

This is the second health issue ever to be
addressed at a special meeting of the General
Assembly. Our collaboration is more than a public
health necessity. Non-communicable diseases (NCDs)
are a threat to development. NCDs hit the poor and
vulnerable particularly hard and drive them deeper into
poverty. More than a quarter of all people who die
from NCDs succumb in the prime of life. The vast
majority live in developing countries. Millions of
families are pushed into poverty each year when one of
their members becomes too weak to work, or when the
cost of medicines and treatments overwhelms the
family budget, or when the main breadwinner has to
stay home to care for someone who is sick. Women and
children are affected differently but significantly by
NCDs and their impact on families.
The prognosis is grim. According to the World
Health Organization, deaths from NCDs will increase
by 17 per cent in the next decade. In Africa, that
number will jump by 24 per cent. These statistics are
alarming, but we know how to drive them down.
Treating NCDs can be affordable. But preventing them
can cost next to nothing and can even save money.
When people cycle to work instead of driving, they get
exercise and the planet is spared more greenhouse gas
emissions. When children are fed a nutritious diet at
school, their attendance goes up, and such eating habits
can last a lifetime. When women have access to quality
screening and vaccines to prevent cervical cancer, their
lives can be saved. These are just a few examples of
the simple solutions at the ready.
This is not a problem that health ministers can
solve on their own. We need all partners —
Governments, to provide the right incentives;
individuals, to protect their own health; civic groups,
to maintain pressure for responsible marketing; and
businesses, to produce healthier, more sustainable
goods.
We should encourage individuals to make smart
choices that will protect their health: get exercise, eat
well, limit alcohol consumption and stop smoking. But
even the healthiest individual cannot escape toxic
substances in the environment, so we need to keep our
air, water and land clean.
States crippled by these diseases cannot progress.
Early detection is in everyone’s interest, and early
treatment reduces pain, cuts costs and lowers the risk
of disability or death. We have to get medicines to all

11-50343

who need them, and those treatments need to be more
affordable and accessible. I count on Governments to
lead this campaign. I depend on our friends in industry
to do what is right.
I am a strong believer in the power of businesses
to improve our world. Time and again, I have seen the
private sector do extraordinary things for human wellbeing with its ingenuity and its foresight in recognizing
that economic productivity depends on good health.
Precisely because I am a champion of the private
sector, I must acknowledge some hard truths.
There is a well-documented and shameful history
of certain players in industry who have ignored
science — sometimes even their own research — and
put public health at risk to protect their own profits.
There are many, many more industry giants which have
acted responsibly. That is all the more reason why we
must hold everyone accountable — so that the
disgraceful actions of a few do not sully the reputation
of the many which are doing such important work to
foster progress. I especially call on corporations that
profit from selling processed foods to children to act
with the utmost integrity. I refer not only to food
manufacturers, but also the media, marketing and
advertising companies that play central roles in these
enterprises. Those who profit from alcohol sales have
to do their part to promote moderation in alcohol
consumption. And we can all work to end tobacco use.
Individuals can have a say through the choices
they make each day. Governments should educate
people and encourage healthier options. This will be a
massive effort, but I am convinced that we can
succeed. Success requires public-private partnerships.
It requires political vision and resource mobilization.
I have seen similar success happen before. Ten
years ago, the General Assembly held its first-ever
meeting on a health issue. That issue was AIDS. Since
then, we have made enormous progress. We have a
long way to go, but no one can deny that political
commitment of Government officials saved lives. No
one can minimize the contributions of industry leaders
who made medicines affordable and available. No one
can doubt the value of the United Nations in driving
the global campaign to stop AIDS.
NCDs are different from AIDS, but many of the
same tools work in response. From visiting clinics and
hospitals around the world, I know that holistic action
on health works. Improving health systems improves

3

A/66/PV.3

health services. Involving all parts of Government
attacks all sides of a problem, and taking
comprehensive action is the best way to protect against
all diseases. Addressing NCDs is critical to global
public health, but it will also be good for the economy,
for the environment, and for the global public good in
the broadest sense. If we come together to tackle
NCDs, we can do more than heal individuals — we can
safeguard our very future.
The draft political declaration (A/66/L.1) that so
many here worked hard to draft and build consensus on
is an excellent foundation. We must now act together to
carry out its provisions and bring NCDs into our
broader global health and development agenda. We
should all work to meet targets to reduce the risks. The
World Health Organization’s “best buys” serve as
excellent guidance.
I especially challenge Member States to step up
accountability for carrying out the political declaration.
If this document remains just a set of words, we will
have failed in our obligation towards future
generations. But if we can give the political declaration
meaning through multiple, concerted and tough
actions, we will honour our responsibility to safeguard
our shared future. I count on Members’ leadership and
commitment.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Margaret Chan,
Director-General of World Health Organization.
Ms. Chan (World Health Organization): First,
Sir, let me commend your leadership and courage in
addressing
and
tackling
issues
related
to
non-communicable diseases. I thank you for the honour
of addressing this meeting, and I am strong in my
conviction that it must serve as a wake-up call.
But not for the medical and public health
professions. We are already wide awake, and with very
deep concerns. We know the statistics and the ominous
trends that now encircle the globe. We know what lies
ahead. Right now, medical and health professionals see
patients, dispense chronic care, manage complications
and disabilities, write medical bills, and agonize over
the huge costs to families and societies. We plead for
lifestyle changes and strict tobacco regulation.
But health ministries acting alone cannot
re-engineer societies in ways that protect entire

4

populations from the well-known and easily modified
risks that lead to these diseases. And this is what needs
to happen. This meeting must be a wake-up call for
Governments at their highest level. This must be a
watershed event, with a clear before and after and with
ignorance, complacency and inertia replaced by
awareness, shock and the right actions, right away.
Why must this responsibility fall on Heads of
State? Because the problem is too big and too broadly
based to be addressed by any single Government
ministry; because the rise of these diseases is being
driven by powerful, universal forces, such as rapid
urbanization and the globalization of unhealthy
lifestyles; and because the response to these trends
must come with equal power — top-level power that
can command the right protective policies across all
sectors of Government.
The worldwide increase of non-communicable
diseases is a slow-motion disaster, as most of these
diseases develop over time. But unhealthy lifestyles
that fuel these diseases are spreading with a stunning
speed and sweep. I can understand why some
developing countries are being taken by surprise by the
onslaught of these diseases. Their initial burden was
greatest in affluent societies — rich countries that have
very strong research-and-development capacities to
develop ever-better treatments. When drugs are
available to reduce blood pressure, lower cholesterol
and improve glucose metabolism, the situation looks
somehow under control. But that is not the case; this
appearance is misleading and blunts the urgent call for
policy change.
The root causes of these diseases are not being
addressed, and widespread obesity is the tell-tale
signal. Worldwide, obesity rates have almost doubled
since 1980. This is a world in which more than
40 million preschool children are obese or overweight.
This is a world where more than 50 per cent of the
adult population in some countries is obese or
overweight. Obesity is the signal that something is
terribly wrong in the policy environment. Widespread
obesity in a population is not a mark of failure of
individual willpower. No, it is a mark of failure in
policies at the highest level.
Processed foods, which are high in salt,
trans-fats, and sugar, have become the new staple food
in nearly every corner of the world. They are readily
available and heavily marketed. For a growing number

11-50343

A/66/PV.3

of people, they are the cheapest way to fill a hungry
stomach. The world certainly needs to feed its
population of nearly seven billion people, but it does
not need to feed them junk food.

cost-effective, feasible and affordable public health
interventions. At the individual level, people at high
risk of cardiovascular disease can be protected with a
very low-cost regimen of generic medicines.

Just as one cannot hide obesity, one cannot hide
the huge costs of these diseases to economies and
societies. These are the diseases that break the bank.
Left unchecked, they have the capacity to devour the
benefits of economic gain. In some countries, for
example, care for diabetes alone consumes as much as
15 per cent of the national health budget. A recent
World Economic Forum and Harvard University study
estimates that over the next 20 years, non-communicable
diseases will cost the global economy more than
$30 trillion, representing 48 per cent of the global GDP
in 2010.

As I said, this high-level event on NCDs must be
a watershed event. In the absence of urgent action, the
rising financial and economic costs of these diseases
will reach levels that are beyond the coping capacity of
even the wealthiest countries in the world.

In large parts of the developing world, these
chronic conditions are detected late, when patients
need extensive and expensive hospital care for severe
complications or acute events. Most care for these
diseases is covered through out-of-pocket payments,
leading to catastrophic medical expenditures.
For all these reasons, non-communicable diseases
deliver a two-punch blow to development. They cause
billions of dollars in losses of national income, and
they push millions of people below the poverty line,
each and every year.
These diseases break the bank, and they are
largely preventable through cost-effective measures.
Some have an especially big payback. For example,
full implementation of the World Health Organization
(WHO) Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
would deal the single biggest blow to heart disease,
cancer, diabetes and respiratory disease. I call on heads
of State and Government to stand rock-hard against the
despicable efforts of the tobacco industry to subvert
this treaty. We must stand firm against their open and
extremely
aggressive
tactics
against
some
Governments.
In terms of demand reduction, increases in
tobacco taxes and prices are the most effective
measures. They not only protect health, but also bring
in considerable revenue to Governments. The same is
true for taxes on alcohol.
Salt in processed foods is a major reason why
daily salt intake in most countries exceeds the WHOrecommended level. Salt reduction is one of the most

11-50343

Excellencies, you have the power to stop or
reverse the NCDs disaster. You have the power to
protect your people, and you have the power to ensure
that your development is moving along a good path.
We must act now and with a sense of urgency.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Her Royal Highness Princess Dina Mired, who
will speak in her capacity as representative of the
Union for International Cancer Control, which enjoys
consultative status with the Economic and Social
Council.
Princess Dina Mired (Union for International
Cancer Control): I am honoured to be the
representative of civil society on one of the most
important health issues that we are facing in this
century. Knowing the long and arduous road that the
issue of non-communicable diseases (NCDs) has
travelled to grace this Hall and this honoured audience,
I hope that in the few minutes that are allotted I can
humbly attempt to translate the agony of the millions
of people who are dying each year, people who look to
this Assembly to deliver the global changes required to
stop this unnecessary loss of life.
Today, we are the voice of the 36 million people
who have died from an NCD in the past year and of the
more than 360 million people who will lose their lives
to NCDs in the next decade. What do we say on behalf
of all those people?
To start with, we have an incredible situation. We
are armed with the figures, the statistics, an
understanding of the common factors, the knowledge
of proven, affordable interventions and even the
overwhelming human cost to prove our point. And yet,
we are facing what has rightly been described by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon as a public health
emergency in slow motion.
left

How did we reach this point? Why were NCDs
to flourish uncontrolled, especially in the

5

A/66/PV.3

developing world? We are struggling with an issue of
labelling. Four major diseases — cancer, heart disease,
chronic respiratory illnesses and diabetes — each
affecting millions of people each year, have been
lumped together under one pseudonym: NCDs, or
non-communicable diseases. Even the name makes
them sound unimportant, as if to say, “Do not worry,
these diseases are non-communicable. You cannot
catch them. Therefore, we can deal with them later”.
While splitting diseases into communicable and
non-communicable categories may be convenient for
the United Nations, it has ultimately resulted in one
group receiving all the attention, all the bilateral
funding and all the action, while the other has been left
to flounder unassisted.
NCDs also took on another label by becoming
known as a problem exclusive to the developed world.
Think again. Non-communicable diseases are
responsible for more deaths worldwide than all other
causes combined. Around 63 per cent of total deaths
are caused by NCDs, and 80 per cent of those deaths
occur in low- and middle-income countries. This
means that even though an individual in the developing
world may survive AIDS, malaria or tuberculosis
thanks to the great global efforts being made, chances
are that the very same survivor will eventually die
prematurely of an NCD, thereby putting all those great
efforts to waste. One fact is certain: NCDs are the clear
winners in the business of dying.
The good news, however, is that today we are all
here to correct that wrong. Heads of State, ministers of
health, United Nations agencies, civil society, the
global community and the medical, political, financial
and private sectors are all here to lift the lid on NCDs.
As I read the draft political declaration (A/66/L.1,
annex), I was pleased to see the inclusion of several
key points: recognition of the scale of the problem we
are facing and a call for urgent action; an
understanding that NCDs are the great equalizers,
affecting people of every age, gender, race and income
level; and comprehension of the fact that NCDs affect
not only the health of nations but also their economic
development. Most importantly, I was happy to see an
affirmation of the right of everyone to receive the
highest standards of health care.
However, I noted with great disappointment that
the NCD burden is not recognized as an epidemic but
is rather diluted into a challenge of academic

6

proportions. Not one to be known for diplomacy —
and I happen to be standing here with a microphone in
front of me — I would like to tell it like it is. Let it
echo through this Hall: there is an NCD epidemic. The
World
Health
Organization
has
said
it;
non-governmental organizations have said it; the
scientific community has said it; and, most importantly,
the 36 million people who lost their lives this year have
proved it. Let us not do NCDs another injustice of
mislabelling. Let us acknowledge the scope of the
challenge that is facing us for what it is. Otherwise,
how else can we respond adequately and effectively?
The next thing I noted in the political declaration
was that although it covers the full depth and breadth
of the NCD issues we all face, there is an absence of
clear and measurable targets. The document is infused
with elusive and vague terms: “may” instead of “will”,
“encourage where appropriate” instead of “provide”.
Unfortunately, in the world of NCDs the terms are
crystal clear and painfully emphatic. There are
36 million people who are dying each year — not
probably, not possibly, not maybe. There is nothing
vague or elusive about that.
Let us be inspired by what has been achieved in
addressing HIV/AIDS since 2001. The General
Assembly agreed to a political declaration that
transformed the lives of millions of people around the
globe. It increased financial backing for combating
communicable diseases tenfold. It seized a once-in-ageneration opportunity and converted political will into
action, with targets and resources in place, and we
continue to see the positive results today. As Margaret
Chan says, in our business, what gets measured gets
done.
By comparison, the reality of today’s health care
vis-à-vis NCDs is extremely bleak. The disparity is one
that I experienced on a very personal level when my
son Rakan, just two days shy of his second birthday,
was diagnosed with leukaemia. Fortunately, I was able
to travel the distance necessary to ensure that he
received the lifesaving treatment he needed. Others are
not so lucky. The sad reality is that 90 per cent of
children with leukaemia in the developed world are
cured, while 90 per cent of their counterparts in the
world’s 25 poorest countries will die.
Tragically, these numbers are repeated many
times over for NCDs. That harsh disparity between
treatments in the developed and developing worlds is

11-50343

A/66/PV.3

simply unacceptable. While prevention and early
detection efforts are the cornerstone for stemming
future cases of NCDs, they take time to have an
impact. What about the people who are dying now?
What about the millions who are suffering from pain
and disability from NCDs now?
Governments must take responsibility and lead on
these issues. They must adjust their thinking to
recognize that spending on health care now is a real
and necessary investment that is far less of a burden
than the untallied cost of inaction. We understand that
in a challenging financial climate such as we are facing
today, income from tobacco sales and certain unhealthy
food products may seem indispensable for economic
growth. However, if Governments can see past the
short-term profits, they will realize how their inaction
is crippling their health systems and ruining their
economic development.
That said, Government efforts should be
paralleled by funding and support from the global
community. As His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan said
with regard to AIDS, the war will not be won without a
war chest. NCDs, by their very nature, are complicated
diseases that require sophisticated infrastructures and
human resources, and they are associated with
debilitating costs of medicines and treatments.
We all know that only a few nations in the world
can manage their own NCD burden. Most countries in
the developing world are struggling with the delivery
of basic health care, if any. Accessibility to essential
drugs and to the specialists and specialized centres that
are required for the treatment of NCDs is either
non-existent or stretched to the breaking point.
Lifestyle changes, as they are called, give the
impression that it is a matter of choice or preference.
But when unhealthy foods are more affordable than
healthy ones, when tobacco, which kills, is so easily
accessible, and when facilities or space for exercise are
non-existent, it becomes not a lifestyle choice but a life
sentence.
To do justice through our duty as the voice of all
those who have suffered from NCDs, and to protect the
lives of all those who will be affected by them in the
coming years, we — all of us here in this Hall — have
the opportunity and the moral responsibility today to
muster the political will that is required to deliver the
right punch in this fight. To start with, let us send a
message to the world that we will take the necessary

11-50343

steps to reduce avoidable NCD deaths by 25 per cent
by 2025 — 25 by ‘25. Otherwise, without clear targets
there will be neither accountability nor a real incentive
to deliver.
It is inconceivable that we should leave this
meeting without tackling the evils of the most obvious,
the indisputable, risk factor: tobacco. Let us make our
future tobacco-free. We all know this product kills; we
even put a label on it that says it kills. This century,
tobacco is expected to kill one billion people, and yet
we still find it in every outlet, increasingly so in the
under-regulated markets of the developing world.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
Let us address the critical issue of treatment now;
let us facilitate the transfer of scientific knowledge
between countries and provide essential medicines to
those who desperately need them now. It is time for us
to resolve, to no longer measure the magnitude of the
NCD epidemic in lives lost. It is time to quit
numbering deaths and start counting survivors. Not
only is this doable, it is simply impossible to ignore the
predicament of 36 million souls a year on this planet
and the unthinkable tragedy facing our future
generations.
The Acting President: Before proceeding
further, I would like to consult the Assembly about the
participation of the International Olympic Committee
in this opening segment. May I take it that the
Assembly agrees to hear a statement now on behalf of
the International Olympic Committee? As I hear no
objection, we shall proceed accordingly.
In accordance with resolution 64/3 of 19 October
2009 and the decision just taken, I now call on
Mr. Jacques Rogge, President of the International
Olympic Committee.
Mr. Rogge (International Olympic Committee):
The International Olympic Committee conveys its
compliments to the General Assembly and is honoured
to have the opportunity to address it on our shared
commitment to serving humanity through the
prevention of non-communicable diseases (NCDs).
The issue that has brought us together today is of
particular concern to the International Olympic
Committee because our movement was founded on the
belief that there is a direct connection between healthy
individuals and healthy societies. The International

7

A/66/PV.3

Olympic Committee is committed to the cause of
combating NCDs through the promotion of physical
activity and healthy lifestyles. By working together and
by enlisting the support of Governments, educational
institutions, businesses, non-governmental organizations
and other elements of civil society, we can reverse the
current trend.
I urge the Assembly to support for several
important steps that could make a significant
difference. Together, we could advocate for more safe
and accessible public spaces for physical activities and
sport. Children should not be forced to play in vacant
lots littered with broken glass, or in alleys choked with
trash or fields contaminated by chemical waste.
Together, we could build new partnerships with
sectors beyond sport — transportation, finance, urban
planning, industry and others — to expand the impact
of sport and physical activity in urban areas. Together,
we could work with Government authorities and
educators to increase the amount of time that students
devote to physical education at school and university.
Together, we could persuade parents of the importance
of physical activity and sports not only for themselves,
but foremost for their children. And together, we could
encourage the development of sport infrastructures and
sports organizations. Sport is the primary gateway to
physical activity and healthy lifestyles.
Perhaps more importantly, I call upon the
Assembly to help the International Olympic Committee
and other sports organizations continue to forge new
and stronger partnerships with the United Nations, with
Governments and civil society at large. In that spirit, it
is the fervent hope of the International Olympic
Committee that the critical role of the sports movement
in the prevention of NCDs will be enshrined in the
outcome document of this High-level Meeting
(A/66/L.1).
As a new Permanent Observer to the United
Nations and an active and responsible member of civil
society, the International Olympic Committee looks
forward to continuing to play a role in the prevention
and control of NCDs. Together, we can turn back the
rising tide of NCDs and create a global society that is
healthier, more prosperous and more peaceful.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker for the opening of the High-Level Meeting.

8

The Assembly will now proceed to take action on
draft
resolution
A/66/L.1,
entitled
“Political
Declaration of the High Level Meeting of the General
Assembly on the Prevention and Control of
Non-Communicable Diseases”. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution A/66/L.1?
Draft resolution A/66/L.1 was adopted (resolution
66/2).
The Acting President: I should like to express
my sincere thanks to Her Excellency Ms. Sylvie Lucas,
Permanent Representative of Luxembourg, and his
Excellency
Mr.
Raymond
Wolfe,
Permanent
Representative of Jamaica, who so ably and patiently
conducted the complex negotiations in the informal
consultations to bring them to a successful conclusion.
I know from personal experience how demanding such
consultations can be, and I am sure that all members of
the Assembly join me in extending to Ambassador
Lucas and Ambassador Wolfe our sincerest
appreciation.
Representatives are reminded that round table 1,
which is entitled “The rising incidence of
developmental and other challenges in the social and
economic impact of non-communicable diseases and
their risk factors,” will take place from 10 a.m. in the
Chamber of the Economic and Social Council Chamber
of the North Lawn Building.
Before we begin the list of speakers, I should like
to turn to some organizational matters pertaining to the
conduct of the High-level Meeting.
First, on the length of statements, I should like to
remind members that statements in the national
capacity will be limited to three minutes. When
delivered on behalf of a group, statements should not
exceed five minutes. In the light of that given time
frame, I should like to appeal to speakers to deliver
their statements at a normal speed so that interpretation
may be provided accordingly. To assist speakers in
managing their time, a light system has been installed
at the speaker’s rostrum. May I appeal to all speakers
for their cooperation in observing the time limits of
statements.
Representatives are also reminded that photos of
Heads of State delivering statements in the plenary of
the General Assembly are routinely taken and are
available for download in high resolution from the
United Nations website and from the United Nations

11-50343

A/66/PV.3

photo library, located in room 506A in the Innovation
Luggage building. Photos are free of charge but may
not be used for advertising purposes, and special
requests for photo coverage may be addressed to the
Chief of the United Nations Photo Unit.
The Assembly will now hear an address by His
Excellency Mr. Desiré Delano Bouterse, President of
the Republic of Suriname, who will speak on behalf of
the Caribbean Community.
President Bouterse: The convening of the Highlevel Meeting of the General Assembly on the
Prevention and Control of Non-Communicable
Diseases is a source of pride, gratitude and
accomplishment for the States members of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM), on whose behalf I
speak today.
Four years ago in Port of Spain, the Heads of
State and Governments of CARICOM expressed alarm
at the impact of non-communicable diseases (NCDs)
on our societies. Our deep concern stimulated urgent
efforts within CARICOM member States, as well as
initiatives at the international level, to increase
attention to addressing NCDs. The most notable
outcome of these efforts was the adoption by the
General Assembly of the landmark resolution 64/265
on the prevention and control of non-communicable
diseases.
In view of the scope and impact of the NCD
epidemic, the resolution embodies our conviction that
efforts to successfully combat NCDs will require a
response that is urgent, comprehensive, multisectoral
and fully coordinated at the national, regional and
global levels. The necessity of formulating such a
response by Heads of State occasioned this High-level
Meeting.
The Political Declaration adopted at this meeting
(resolution 66/2, annex) is the outcome of the intense
and sustained activity that followed the adoption of
resolution 64/265. In this regard, we owe a debt of
gratitude to the co-facilitators, the Permanent
Representatives of Jamaica and Luxembourg, for the
great efficiency and dedication with which they
conducted the preparatory work. We are also thankful
to our experts for their tireless efforts and to all
delegations for the constructive spirit of collaboration
that allowed for agreement on a consensus document in
a timely manner.

11-50343

It is clear that the NCD epidemic is a scourge,
particularly for developing countries, whose financial
resources cannot match the high cost of treatment and
care of these diseases. Additionally, we are challenged
by the commercialization and proliferation of
unhealthy lifestyles, which will only increase the
number of patients.
The good news, however, is that NCDs do not
have to spell inevitable doom for our countries and
peoples. The scientific and other knowledge
concerning the origin and spread of these diseases,
combined with the technical capacities available,
provide a basis for responding in an effective manner.
This, we believe, is the strength of the Political
Declaration before us. It offers a turning point in the
fight against the global tsunami of NCDs at all levels
as it provides a good platform for ongoing
consideration of the development and other impacts of
NCDs by the international community. For this reason,
CARICOM fully supported the adoption of the
Political Declaration.
For CARICOM, the central message of the
Declaration is a global consensus on strengthened
commitment to action to address NCDs and their risk
factors at all levels. Among other things, the
Declaration makes vivid the gravity of the impact of
the NCD epidemic, particularly on development;
stresses the primacy of prevention and the importance
of multisectoral approaches; emphasizes the costeffectiveness of responses and the desirability of an
effective partnership involving all stakeholders; and
further commits to the implementation of a range of
actions to combat NCDs and their risk factors,
including through specific follow-up initiatives.
The successful wide-scale implementation of
cost-effective measures presupposes a context of finely
focused and well-structured national and global plans
that include the identification of clear targets and
indicators for measuring progress toward their
achievement. However, to increase the likelihood of
the success and sustainability of these efforts, the
support of the international community is critical. Such
support, which must include technical and financial
resources, is needed to complement the national
resources available to developing countries, as well as
to enable United Nations agencies to scale up action to
help countries prevent and control NCDs.

9

A/66/PV.3

CARICOM is committed to ensuring that the
Declaration does not turn out to be a mere rhetorical
achievement, but that it becomes a platform for
resolute actions by all States and other stakeholders.
That spirit of commitment is already being
demonstrated in our actions. We have developed a
strategic plan of action for our region and established
national commissions in eight of our member
territories. Ratification of the Framework Convention
on Tobacco Control has expanded, and we have
developed standards for tobacco labelling. Standards
for nutrition labelling for salt, sugar and trans-fat have
also been developed, and Member States are at
different stages of ratifying them. A new primary-care
policy aimed at improving chronic care policy has been
developed. and we are putting in place mechanisms to
track risk factors and monitor annual progress towards
the goals of the Declaration of Port of Spain.
One of the actions that the CARICOM countries
have implemented, and which we regard as our premier
regional health-promotion activity, is the setting aside
of the second Saturday in September of each year as
Caribbean Wellness Day. It is a day dedicated to
teaching about and practicing healthy lifestyles. We
feel very proud of this achievement and invite Member
States to join us in a similar initiative that will lead to a
worldwide celebration and focus on health and
wellness.
At this juncture, it is worth mentioning that the
initiative to establish a regional sports academy in
Suriname was received with appreciation by
CARICOM at its twenty-second intersessional
meeting, held in February. The establishment of such
an academy has also gained international support with
respect to football, tennis, track and field, and cricket,
particularly considering the important role such a
facility could play in addressing NCDs.
In the view of CARICOM States, the Declaration
falls somewhat short of our original expectations. The
reasons include: no clear goal or corresponding road
map for the global NCD campaign; a lack of strong
commitments on targets, resources and a global
collaborative NCD mechanism; and strong reservations
as to the use of the term “epidemic” in relation to the
global spread of NCDs. Yet we see it as a significant
stimulus for the prevention and control of NCDs
through, inter alia, the reorientation and strengthening
of national health systems, universal access to

10

available medicines, and the technology to prevent and
treat these diseases.
We believe that, if scrupulously implemented,
this instrument could contribute in meaningful ways to
achieving the internationally agreed development
goals. However, our work in the context of establishing
a firm normative and operational platform is far from
complete. There is still a need to agree on ambitious
global targets and indicators, a monitoring framework
and a clear mechanism that will allow all stakeholders
to engage in joint endeavours to address the impacts of
NCDs through a meaningful partnership. We are
hopeful that by the time we gather to undertake a
comprehensive review and assessment of the progress
made on NCDs, in 2014, the picture will be a much
more positive one.
As the level of participation in the activities and
initiatives of the High-level Meeting confirms, concern
about addressing NCDs is immense and growing. This
has stimulated a commendable activism within and
among countries and regions. CARICOM welcomes
the variety and intensity of these efforts. In this regard,
I wish to pay special tribute to the invaluable
contributions of the World Health Organization and the
Pan American Health Organization and also express
our confidence that they will provide strengthened
leadership to deal with all dimensions of the issue of
NCDs in future. Credit is also due to the Healthy
Caribbean Coalition, whose initiatives have been
pursued within as well as outside the region of the
Americas. We believe that the momentum generated by
this High-level Meeting should be sustained. Just as the
United Nations gives attention to the fight against
AIDS, malaria, special attention should also be given
to the fight against NCDs. A helpful action might be
the appointment of an envoy or representative of the
Secretary-General on NCDs who could facilitate
continued attention by and collaboration among all
stakeholders.
CARICOM is willing to share its experience and
successes in confronting the NCD challenge. Once
again, we invite the rest of the world to share our
passion and join us in our continued efforts to prevent
or reduce the incidence of morbidity and mortality
from NCDs and subsequently to reduce its negative
impact on development.
Before closing, I should like to add a special
personal note. The seriousness of these illnesses and

11-50343

A/66/PV.3

the ensuing impact on our development warrant
universal access to medicines and technology. We
therefore emphasize once again that agreements such
as the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights will not prevent us from
taking measures to protect public health. Such
agreements should thus be interpreted and
implemented in a manner that is aimed at protecting
health in general and in particular at promoting access
to medicines for all.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Danilo Türk,
President of the Republic of Slovenia.
President Türk: We gather today for a unique
meeting with a uniquely important purpose — to put in
place an effective global front against the spread of
non-communicable diseases and to start eliminating
some of the major threats to human life in our era. We
owe gratitude to all those who made this meeting
possible: the Secretary-General, the President of the
General Assembly, the World Health Organization
(WHO) secretariat and, above, all the Caribbean States
for their timely and wise initiative.
We have seen the figures on non-communicable
diseases and resulting deaths, and we rightly take note
of them. I am convinced that these figures will be
quoted often these days — and they should be. The
world must become better aware of the major threats to
humankind. There is no doubt that non-communicable
diseases constitute such a threat.
But there is also a paradox here. This is only the
second time in the history of the United Nations that
the General Assembly has convened a meeting with the
participation of Heads of State and Government on a
set of dramatic global health issues with major and
very adverse consequences for social and economic
development.
We should think and ask ourselves why this is so.
Perhaps our global understanding of development
remains too limited and excessively driven by
economic technicalities. Perhaps health issues are still
seen as a matter for experts and not for global
policymakers. This has to change. As successful
campaigns against polio, small pox and HIV/AIDS
have demonstrated in the past, the world can succeed.
In the framework of the European Union,
Slovenia has been among the initiators of the European

11-50343

Partnership for Action against Cancer, a campaign for
the most effective prevention and successful treatment
of cancer diseases. International cooperation is vital for
its success.
But there is a fundamental problem here. Those
words require more effort and more resources —
medical, technical, financial and organizational — and
we need multisectoral strategies, a system of most
appropriate indicators to measure progress, and an
institutional mechanism that will enable effective
coordination at the global level.
We have a long way to go. WHO leadership —
with the full participation of Member States — will be
necessary in the process of implementing the Political
Declaration just adopted (resolution 66/2, annex). The
Secretary-General will have a crucial role to play in the
preparation of an effective strategy for multisectoral
action, and all of us must participate.
The United Nations should take advantage of the
existing partnerships among civil society, professional
organizations and the business sector. Those
partnerships must be strengthened and made more
effective and set up with a multisectoral approach;
through such a coordinated fashion, we can win. Let us
work for the next years and perhaps decades and
change the world for the better.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by Her Excellency Ms. Dilma
Rousseff, President of the Federative Republic of
Brazil.
President Rousseff (spoke in Portuguese;
English text provided by the delegation): I would like
to congratulate the United Nations and the World
Health Organization (WHO) on having convened this
High-level Meeting on chronic non-communicable
diseases. The success we have achieved in past
meetings continues to encourage us to move forward
on the global health agenda. Today, our agenda is
focused on those who suffer from diseases such as
hypertension, diabetes, cancer and respiratory diseases.
The driving force behind our determination and
commitment to curbing these diseases is the premature
loss of life and the suffering of people and their
families. In my country, 72 per cent of non-violent
deaths among those less than 70 years of age are due to
these diseases.

11

A/66/PV.3

Brazil supports access to medication as part of
the human right to health. We know that it is a strategic
element in fostering social inclusion, building equality
and strengthening public health care systems. One of
my Government’s very first actions was to increase
access to medication through the unified health system,
in particular to patients with hypertension and diabetes,
thus ensuring that access to these medications is free of
charge. Our “Health is Priceless” programme
distributes those free medications through partnerships
with over 20,000 public and private pharmacies.
Advocating access to medicine must go hand in
hand with promoting health care and strengthening
prevention. Brazil respects its intellectual property
commitments, but we are convinced that the
flexibilities contained in the World Trade Organization
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights (TRIPS), the Doha Declaration on the
TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, and the WHO
Global Strategy on Diet, Physical Activity and Health
are key and indispensable to policies to guarantee the
right to health.
In Brazil, we are currently intensifying our fight
against the risk factors with the greatest influence on
the onset of chronic non-communicable diseases, such
as tobacco use, alcohol abuse, lack of physical activity
and unhealthy diets. We are promoting the
reformulation of urban spaces in large urban centres of
Brazil. Our Healthy Gym Programme envisions the
creation of 4,000 new centres dedicated to supervised
physical activity. The Brazilian Government has also
been taking measures to guarantee better eating habits
by encouraging breastfeeding, the proper labelling of
foodstuffs and healthy eating habits in schools.
Another initiative of my Government has been to
establish voluntary agreements with the food industry
on eliminating trans-fats and reducing sodium content
in their products.
We want to go even further in combating the use
of tobacco, through fully implementing the articles of
the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control.
Women’s health is a priority for my Government. We
are strongly committed to reducing mortality rates
linked to breast cancer — the most common cancer —
and to cervical cancer, which remains a serious health
issue especially in northern Brazil, one of the more
vulnerable areas of my country. We are therefore
facilitating access to preventive examinations,

12

improving mammogram quality
treatment access for cancer victims.

and

expanding

This meeting of Heads of States from around the
world must take decisive steps towards reducing the
occurrence of chronic non-communicable diseases.
Their disproportionate incidence among the poorest
demonstrates the need for a comprehensive response to
the problem. Health policies must therefore be
coordinated with those that address the socio-economic
determinants of these diseases.
In light of this issue’s central importance for
Brazil and for the world, my country, together with the
WHO, will host the World Conference on Social
Determinants of Health. I invite all those present here
today to participate in the Conference, to be held from
19 to 21 October in Rio de Janeiro.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Marcus
Stephen, President of the Republic of Nauru, who will
speak on behalf of the Pacific small island developing
States.
President Stephen: Non-communicable diseases
(NCDs) are among the most underappreciated barriers
to sustainable development. I commend the General
Assembly for adopting resolution 64/265 and view this
High-level Meeting as an important milestone in the
global effort to address NCDs. I would also like to
thank His Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his informative report on the matter (A/66/83).
Nauru is all too familiar with this growing crisis.
The prevalence of diabetes in my country approaches
14 per cent, which is more than double the global
average. In Nauru, NCDs remove people from the
workforce and drive up family spending on healthrelated expenses. I know the same is true in other
countries.
NCDs are also a rapidly increasing burden on our
domestic budget and test our Government’s
commitment to providing health care and social
services to all of our citizens. For a small country like
Nauru, they also undermine our good governance and
political stability by robbing some of our community
leaders of their most productive years. The current
trajectory is not sustainable. Therefore, addressing
NCDs must be a part of the international community’s
sustainable development agenda.

11-50343

A/66/PV.3

Regrettably, the issue has not received the
attention it deserves, and international resources
dedicated to addressing the problem have been
inadequate. Perhaps this is because of engrained
societal prejudices and the view that NCDs are solely
an issue of personal responsibility. However, I am
heartened by the growing recognition that this is a
complex issue with many causes and requires a
comprehensive response at the national, regional and
international levels, in addition to the individual level.
Nauru has responded with a number of domestic
initiatives. For example, we enacted the Tobacco
Control Act of 2009, increased taxes on tobacco and
alcohol, introduced a sugar tax and begun building
modest district sports courts. We have also started a
number of exercise and nutrition programmes to
educate our citizens and encourage a healthier lifestyle.
We have also actively engaged in regional
initiatives. The Pacific Ministers of Health concluded
that NCDs have reached epidemic proportions in the
region and are creating an unprecedented human, social
and economic crisis requiring an urgent and
comprehensive response.
We have also benefited from such international
efforts as the World Health Organization STEPS survey
about trends in NCDs. I am reminded of the
importance of the first global conference on AIDS and
how it spawned awareness and positive spin-off
initiatives to address the crisis. The time has come for
a similar global commitment to meeting the challenges
of NCDs.
Nauru is not alone in its struggle with NCDs, but
we confront our own set of challenges. As a small
Pacific Island nation, we occupy a unique niche in the
global economy. Geographically isolated and
possessing little land suitable for agriculture, we
cannot hope to compete with larger countries and their
industrial food production. As a result, cheap and often
unhealthy food is routinely dumped on our domestic
markets. Nutritious food is a luxury that most of my
people cannot afford.
Climate change and ocean acidification are
adding new barriers to healthy eating. For centuries,
our ancestors harvested healthy fruits and vegetables
on land and caught fresh fish from the sea, but today
the impacts of climate change are threatening our longterm food security.

11-50343

Expanding domestic food production is
important, and we are thankful for the assistance
provided by development partners in this regard.
Additional investment in our port facilities and our
water storage and delivery systems would also help
increase our food security. We must take the steps
necessary to make low-cost, high-nutrition foods
readily available to families.
As Chair of the Pacific small island developing
States, I would like to conclude with some startling
numbers that illustrate just how severe the NCD crisis
is in the Pacific region. Last year, 75 per cent of deaths
from natural causes in our region were attributable to
NCDs. Obesity rates top 90 per cent in some of our
countries, and diabetes has hit epidemic levels regionwide. Nearly 45 per cent of our adults have high
cholesterol and one-quarter suffer from hypertension.
Some 70 per cent of Pacific women smoke, with male
smoking rates close behind, and our children are three
to four times more likely to use tobacco than their
peers in developed countries.
Let us make no mistake — NCDs are as much a
threat to our region as AIDS, malaria and dysentery are
in other parts of the developing world. The good news
is that, by implementing education programmes and
giving our people access to healthy choices in diet and
lifestyle, we can reverse these trends and build stronger
communities for our children. A holistic development
approach must be at the core of our actions to address
NCDs.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Pál Schmitt,
President of the Republic of Hungary.
President Schmitt: It is an honour and pleasure
for me to represent the Republic of Hungary at this
High-level Meeting on non-communicable diseases
(NCDs). Allow me to emphasize that Hungary aligns
itself with the views expressed on behalf of the
European Union.
During recent years, we have all witnessed the
rapid global spread of non-communicable diseases,
which today represent a leading threat to human health
and sustainable development. Even worse, this is
happening when the economic climate is uncertain and
fragile, putting pressure on our limited resources.
Especially alarming is the fact that non-communicable
diseases are spreading rapidly to those parts of the
world where their prevalence had been relatively

13

A/66/PV.3

moderate, and where this growing burden poses a real
social and economic threat.
We need innovative solutions. New models of
care are needed, instead of the present hospital-centric
ones. Clearly, such innovation should include
comprehensive programmes for integrated actions for
prevention,
early
detection
and
control
of
non-communicable diseases. There is also a pressing
need for investment in the prevention of NCDs as an
integral
part
of
sustainable
socio-economic
development.
I would like to emphasize the strong commitment
of Hungary to contribute to the global fight against
NCDs. We still have a lot to do in our own country,
where there are persistently high levels of morbidity and
mortality due to non-communicable diseases. While
Hungary has been successful in fighting communicable
diseases — for instance, in controlling tuberculosis and
in operating comprehensive childhood immunization
programmes — we have not yet been able to reach the
breakthrough we would like to see in discouraging
unhealthy lifestyles among our population. Developing
comprehensive non-communicable disease control
programmes deserves attention.
Hungarians have a long history of, and successes
in, knowledge-sharing and providing educational and
training programmes for students and experts from all
over the world. We have accumulated experiences in
designing and implementing health-sector programmes
adapted to local needs and tailored to the scarcity of
resources, thereby ensuring their sustainability. Let me
here make the point that we need to stop the so-called
brain-drain of health professionals, which also
contributes to inequities in the provision of care among
regions and countries.
In conclusion, as a former Olympian, I know very
well that for our dreams to come true and our goals to
be achieved requires not only identifying the target but
a long-term comprehensive strategy as well, broken
down into action plans and achieved through hard dayto-day work. It requires commitment, enthusiasm,
patience, continuous support, well-established team
work and, of course, sometimes luck. That is the way
to win the game. Our target should be to win the global
game in the fight against non-communicable diseases.
We cannot be satisfied with less. I am convinced that
we can do it if we join forces.

14

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Hifikepunye
Pohamba, President of the Republic of Namibia.
President Pohamba: Like other countries around
the world, Namibia faces growing incidences of
non-communicable
diseases.
These
include
cardiovascular diseases, cancers of various types,
chronic lung diseases, such as asthma, and diabetes.
Namibia has also documented high rates of tobacco
smoking, alcohol abuse and obesity. We are concerned
about the impact of these diseases on the lives of our
people, the socio-economic development of our
country in general and on our public health system in
particular.
In that context, our Government has taken a
number of steps to address those challenges. For
example, we have adopted the World Health
Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco
Control. We have also enacted our tobacco products
control act, which prohibits smoking in public places.
Other measures adopted by Namibia in the fight
against non-communicable diseases include restrictions
on access to alcohol outlets by persons under the age of
18 years and limits on the times and days of the week
during which alcohol may be sold. Although those
measures are in place, their enforcement has proved
challenging, especially in rural areas and informal
settlements. More work therefore needs to be done in
order to ensure greater compliance.
Our Government also provides social grants to
orphans, pensioners and people with disabilities in
order to reduce extreme poverty and their vulnerability
to non-communicable diseases. Another practical
measure adopted by our Government is the
implementation of the Green Scheme programme, to
improve national food security and enhance families’
access to healthier diets. Our Government has also
expanded public literacy programmes, as tools to fight
non-communicable diseases. Since independence, adult
literacy in Namibia has increased from 70 per cent to
91 per cent.
Given the gravity of this challenge, developing
countries have adopted a two-pronged approach to
fight both communicable and non-communicable
diseases. In that regard, Namibia appeals for
international support, both financial and technical, in
order to overcome these challenges. As a country, we
would like to see more intersectoral collaboration —

11-50343

A/66/PV.3

that is, public/private partnerships — to discourage
harmful advertisements and the marketing of tobacco,
alcohol and unhealthy food.
I reiterate Namibia’s full support for the efforts of
the Secretary-General and his staff to raise awareness
about the importance of preventing and controlling
non-communicable diseases. That will go a long way to
prevent premature deaths and ensure better quality of
life for all humankind. Together, we can make it, and
we can make a difference.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Robert Gabriel
Mugabe, President of the Republic of Zimbabwe.
President Mugabe: I would like to begin by
thanking the President of the General Assembly for
having organized this pioneering meeting of the
General Assembly on the prevention and control of
non-communicable diseases. May I assure the
President that my delegation attaches great importance
to the outcomes of this High-level Meeting. It is my
hope that the Meeting will generate the necessary
political will to combat the growing danger posed by
non-communicable diseases (NCDs).
As leaders, we have for a long time focused our
attention on other diseases such as HIV and AIDS,
tuberculosis and malaria, and, in the process, have
overlooked the growing threat posed by NCDs to
humankind. Our meeting today awakens us to the
reality that NCDs have now surpassed HIV and AIDS
as the leading cause of death worldwide. They
accounted for 63 per cent of all global deaths in 2008.
We are alarmed by the statistics from the World
Health Organization (WHO) that NCDs are expected to
affect 52 million people by 2030. This must surely spur
us to take urgent mitigation measures. I understand that
the majority of new cases will be recorded in
developing countries. Undoubtedly, this will further
strain our already overburdened health delivery
systems in the developing world, and this, I am sure,
will scuttle the realization of one of the main
Millennium Development Goals.
I am informed that WHO projects the burden of
NCDs to increase 17 per cent globally and that the
greatest increase, of 29 per cent, is expected to be in
the African region. It is common cause that Africa is
the least developed continent, and consequently the
least able to cope with such a scourge. This must be

11-50343

taken in the context of the devastation caused to the
continent by the HIV and AIDS pandemic. I therefore
call upon the international community, especially
developed countries, to increase their assistance, in
particular to Africa, towards preventing and controlling
NCDs.
The scourge of NCDs in developing countries
places an enormous social and economic burden on
fragile health delivery systems. Consequently, the
availability of drugs to our people is compromised and,
inevitably, the rate of mortality increases. My country
conducted a NCD risk factor assessment in 2005 and
established prevalence rates of 10 and 27 per cent for
diabetes and hypertension, respectively. Furthermore,
the 2010 WHO Global Status Report on
Non-Communicable Diseases in Zimbabwe revealed an
estimated age-standardized death rate for all in 2008 to
be nearly 698 per 100,000 for males and 533 per
100,000 for females.
There are several questions that we have to
address at this conference. Are we doing enough in our
efforts to address the modifiable factors contributing to
the increase of NCDs? Are we capacitated to provide
treatment and research on new ways to strengthen our
efforts to curb the scourge of NCDs? These are the
challenges confronting us today and it is imperative
that we harness our collective efforts towards a united
and common objective.
My Government continues to prioritize health
issues, including NCDs. To that end, we have
established a national mechanism to combat
non-communicable diseases through raising awareness
of the magnitude of this scourge in our country. In
addition, we have put in place programmes for the
training of our NCD health services personnel.
Furthermore, Zimbabwe’s second NCD risk
factor surveillance will be conducted in 2012 to
augment our database on diseases. We expect the
surveillance to complement our yearly NCDs
awareness campaign targeting the diseases under the
four main NCDs whose modifiable factors include
raised blood sugar level, high blood pressure, obesity,
excessive alcohol and tobacco consumption, unhealthy
diets and lack of physical exercise.
Global food agencies such as the World Food
Programme and the Food and Agriculture Organization
have noted that many families in developing countries
suffer from the lack of a balanced diet, rendering them

15

A/66/PV.3

susceptible to NCDs. Yes, many developing countries,
including Zimbabwe, have had their challenges with
abuse of tobacco and alcohol, but such factors are only
attributable to a small percentage of any country’s
population. The major challenge in many of our
countries is to reduce poverty, which restricts many
families to a rigid and unbalanced diet.
Zimbabwe welcomes the Political Declaration
(resolution 66/2, annex) just adopted at this meeting,
which outlines the first collective attempt to provide a
way forward in finding a solution to the NCD
epidemic. Unfortunately, the document does not
adequately address some of the core challenges facing
developing countries as they grapple with this scourge.
We therefore call on developed countries to make
concrete commitments that are time-bound so as to
ensure access to medicines, appropriate technology
transfer and further training for our health personnel on
NCDs.
My delegation is concerned that in the quest to
protect trade-related aspects of intellectual property
rights, the human face is lost. There is a tendency to
forget that this is a life and death situation for our
affected people. We reiterate that human survival must
be more important than all else. My delegation calls on
international partners to grant flexibilities that will
allow pharmaceutical companies in countries of the
South to manufacture generic drugs that treat NCDs,
just as they did for HIV and AIDS drugs over the past
few years. We believe that this would go a long way to
ensuring the availability and affordability of treatment.
I would like to conclude by saying that we have
before us a challenge to make a historic decision in the
global fight against the NCD scourge. It is our
collective responsibility as leaders to make this
meeting a success for the benefit of all humankind.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by Her Excellency Ms. Micheline
Calmy-Rey, President of the Swiss Confederation.
President Calmy-Rey (spoke in French):
Non-communicable diseases have become not just an
urgent public health problem, but a major political
issue because of their impact on our societies and
economies. These diseases pose a global challenge that
concerns us all, whether in developing, emerging or
developed countries, and which we must tackle
together. As the specialized agency of the United
Nations responsible for global health, the World Health

16

Organization has a key role to play in coordinating
global measures to combat non-communicable
diseases.
The main causes of non-communicable diseases
are linked to lifestyles and living conditions. A
substantial proportion of the premature deaths they
cause could be avoided. These factors are vital in
determining the actions we must take to confront this
scourge.
In Switzerland, we have adopted a pre-emptive
approach through targeted preventive and healthpromotion measures in the fight against smoking and
alcohol abuse, and through promoting balanced
nutrition and exercise. We have developed mechanisms
that enable us to work closely and innovatively with
the private sector, research entities and civil society,
with the involvement of various public authorities in
order to better direct our activities towards at-risk
populations.
In the context of our development cooperation
activities, we adopt a similar approach by emphasizing
the strengthening of health care systems by promoting
health, prevention, education and social protection. We
intend to step up our efforts in the area of
non-communicable diseases without taking resources
away from the important area of communicable
diseases. On the contrary, synergies between these two
areas must be found.
Above all, we need to bring about a change in
mindsets, which is a long-term task that will require
sustained political commitment. There is an urgent
need to act and to commit ourselves over the long haul
so that preventive measures can take effect before the
consequences of non-communicable diseases catch up
with us all. Let us devise innovative solutions that
make use of the potential synergies between
governmental actors, civil society, the private sector,
the research sector and international organizations. We
must ensure that our prevention and health-promotion
measures will benefit everyone, rich and poor, in all
countries. Let us use the World Health Organization
and take advantage of its ongoing reform process to
give it the responsibility for coordinating our response
to non-communicable diseases.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye
Wade, President of the Republic of Senegal.

11-50343

A/66/PV.3

President Wade (spoke in French): The initiative
taken by the United Nations to convene this High-level
Meeting on the Prevention and Control of
Non-communicable Diseases demonstrates the farreaching impact of such infections and the need to
ensure that our people understand them better.
Before coming here, I asked our Minister of
Health what a head of State who knows nothing of
medicine could say that might be of interest to share
with the Assembly on this issue. I ultimately
understood that there are two categories of diseases —
that is, diseases that can be transmitted by bacteria and
viruses, against which we fight very effectively in
Senegal, although this entails much spending, and
other diseases, which are the subject of our meeting
today.
What I understood and what I intend to apply
when we return to Senegal is that the second category
of disease covers those that have to do with the
functioning of organs and that are not due to external
causes. They have to do, rather, with the development
of the individual, which is practically out of our
control. I would note that, according to statistics, while
35 per cent of deaths are currently due to these
non-communicable diseases, 30 years from now that
figure will rise to 75 per cent. This means that we must
take a different approach to this issue than we have
taken until now. While 75 per cent of deaths represents
a great loss of human life, it also means substantial
financial costs, which we cannot afford.
Bearing all of this in mind, and to keep my
remarks brief, I will quickly tell the Assembly about
how we respond to health issues in Senegal and about
the concrete steps we will take with respect to this
issue.
Senegal took the issue of AIDS very seriously at
an early stage. It is for that reason that we have one of
the lowest prevalence rates in Africa, namely, 0.7 per
cent. Senegal was also an early adopter of e-medicine,
although today we may not be at the head of the pack.
When it comes to the issue we are discussing, I
would like to say that we believe that the most
important thing is for people to understand what causes
these illnesses, and this has to do with the overall issue
of prevention. Prevention has to do with individual
responsibility, and hence the need for education and
raising awareness at the individual level. That is why,
in our Ministry of Health, we have placed great

11-50343

emphasis on medical prevention and preventive public
health measures, including through several initiatives.
Finally, I would like to say that I have noted that
the treatment for these diseases requires more or less
sophisticated equipment, which is very costly. We must
therefore consider the issue of how to acquire such
equipment — perhaps by producing such equipment
locally in our countries in Africa or in the subregion —
and the issue of increasing the number of specialists on
these issues.
Regardless of the viewpoint adopted in dealing
with health issues, we in Senegal always reach the
same conclusion, namely, that what we need is
prevention, in general and at the individual level. That
is why we propose that the coming decade be declared
be the decade of prevention.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Alexandre Manguele, Minister for
Health of the Republic of Mozambique.
Mr. Manguele (Mozambique): In my country, the
main public health problems are still related to
communicable diseases. The burden of malaria, HIV
and AIDS, tuberculosis and related diseases is quite
high, resulting in high mortality rates. However, in
recent years, due to environmental factors, lifestyle
changes, development and increasing urbanization,
among others, we are seeing an increase in
non-communicable diseases. This situation is critical
and constitutes a major challenge not only for the
health sector, but also for the development of the
country.
Aware of this growing problem, we conducted in
2005 the first assessment of risk factors for chronic
non-communicable diseases, which has already shown
worrying figures. These diseases affect Mozambican
citizens at an early stage of their lives, endangering
their participation in the production processes of the
country and creating for families and the Government a
huge economic burden.
The poorest countries and countries in great need,
such as Mozambique, cannot treat these new diseases,
which are chronic and extremely costly. Only a timely
policy to wage an integrated fight against common risk
factors for these diseases in the direction of changing
incorrect lifestyles would contribute to the primary
prevention and reduction of their impact in the near
future.

17

A/66/PV.3

Mozambique has decided to include the fight
against these diseases in our health sector policy and in
the Government’s five-year plan. Since 2002, the
Ministry of Health has had a department that is
responsible for this area. A national strategic plan for
the prevention and control of non-communicable
diseases in Mozambique was approved in 2008. Due to
the shortage of resources that the country is facing, an
integrated approach to implementing the plan was
adopted that allows for profitability in terms of both
financial and technical resources, which we think is the
best strategy in current conditions. We also intend to
intensify action to promote health and implement, at
the primary health-care level and in a systematic way,
screenings
for
risk
factors
for
chronic
non-communicable diseases.
In conclusion, allow me to stress that, in order to
contribute to reducing the exposure to and degree of
prevalence of risk factors for non-communicable
diseases, as well as to reduce mortality and improve
the quality of life for Mozambican citizens, the
Government of Mozambique is fully committed to
implementing the Brazzaville and Moscow statements.
Thus, we hope that in this meeting, non-communicable
diseases — including cardiovascular diseases, chronic
respiratory diseases, diabetes mellitus and cancer —
should be declared a global priority and included in
internationally agreed goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Ali Bongo
Ondimba, President of the Gabonese Republic.
President Bongo Ondimba (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate Ambassador
Nassir Abdulaziz Al-Nasser on his election to the
presidency of the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth
session, and to commend the excellent job done by his
predecessor, Mr. Joseph Deiss. I also congratulate
Mr. Ban Ki-moon on his re-election as SecretaryGeneral and wish him a successful term.
Since the adoption of the 2008 Libreville
Declaration on Health and Environment in Africa,
Gabon has been firmly committed to preventing and
reducing the impact of non-communicable diseases by
developing capacities and creating monitoring systems.
The Government of Gabon has assessed the problem,
and our public health policies focus on the quality of
life of our people.

18

In our national strategies and programmes,
together with the private sector and civil society, we
have focused on prevention and education with respect
to healthy lifestyles. Significant measures are in place,
such as free screening for diabetes and high blood
pressure, a ban on smoking in public places, and
limiting alcohol consumption.
With the private sector, and in the spirit of the
Brazzaville and Moscow declarations, we are
experimenting with the SMS diabetes project, with the
goal of providing users of cell phones with information
on diabetes awareness and its management. We have
also planned national control mechanisms, including a
cancer institute to open in 2012. Furthermore,
operational research efforts are under way on sickle
cell anaemia at the International Centre for Medical
Research in Franceville.
Many challenges remain. Gabon needs greater
visibility in terms of statistics in order to guide our
programmes. Moreover, Gabon calls for more effective
epidemiological monitoring systems in order to ensure
better follow-up with respect to non-communicable
diseases in the health, social and economic areas.
Similarly, we would draw the attention of the
international community to the links that could exist
between chemical products and the development of
cancer, and we again appeal to the sense of
responsibility of the major companies that produce
alcohol and tobacco.
In conclusion, I commend the holding of this
High-level Meeting. It gives us the opportunity to
reach a consensus on the partnership platform that
must be set up so that the goals of prevention and
control of non-communicable diseases are achieved by
the low- and medium-income countries by 2015. To
that end, my country supports the declaration of the
Group of 77 and China and commends the SecretaryGeneral for his report on NCDs. Gabon supports the
recommendations that he has made with respect to our
common actions.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Naman Keita, Minister of Health of
the Republic of Guinea.
Mr. Keita (Guinea) (spoke in French): Along
with specific issues related to maternal and child
health, non-communicable diseases (NCDs) represent
for our countries a heavy emerging burden in addition

11-50343

A/66/PV.3

to the burden of contagious or infectious diseases such
as malaria, HIV and tuberculosis.

Bissessar, Prime Minister of the Republic of Trinidad
and Tobago.

The situation in our country, Guinea, relating to
the main NCDs is as follows. The incidence of diabetes
among the population is 5.7 per cent in the city of
Conakry and 5.6 and 4.6 per cent, respectively, in the
urban and rural areas of Basse-Guinée. Three fourths
of those cases have not been diagnosed, and most
cases, even when diagnosed, are not treated. As a result
of the lack of adequate diagnostic mechanisms and
treatment modalities, diabetic comas account for half
of the deaths among those who suffer from that illness.
In addition, diabetes is the culprit in half of all limb
amputations. High blood pressure affects 35 per cent of
the population.

Mrs. Persad-Bissessar (Trinidad and Tobago): I
have a question for those who are participating in this
High-level Meeting today. I would like to know, by
show of hands, how many here suffer from one of these
non-communicable diseases (NCDs), or have close
family members who do. The fact that a number of
people raised their hand underscores the significance of
this very important discussion we are having here
today.

The prevalence rates of the main types of cancer
are as follows: cancer of the uterus, 48 cases per
100,000 women; breast cancer, 14 cases per 100,000
women; liver cancer, 32 cases per 100,000 persons; and
prostate cancer, 16 cases per 100,000 men. The
incidence of bronchial asthma is 12 per cent in schools
and 5 per cent among the general population. Sicklecell anaemia, diagnosed by means of Emmel’s test, is
detected in 12 per cent of screenings. Nor is it unusual
for a patient to have more than one NCD. These
diseases, while not lethal, result in high medical
transport costs — an ineffective approach given that
we are talking about chronic illnesses.
Given the high rates of NCDs and their impact on
development, the Government of Guinea, together with
its technical partners, in particular the World Health
Organization, has taken the following priority actions:
an overall commitment by and concertation among the
Government; support for the national integrated
programme for the prevention and treatment of NCDs
in the form of human, material and financial resources;
and the mobilization of financial resources within our
national budget that are commensurate with the burden
of NCDs.
We hope that this High-level Meeting will
provide a strong impetus for improving the situation
with respect to NCDs, through, inter alia, a reduction
in the number of deaths, comas, amputations and cases
of paralysis. We are counting on agreed measures to
ensure that we are successful in the long term in
combating NCDs. Long live international cooperation!
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by Her Excellency Mrs. Kamla Persad-

11-50343

At this gathering of world leaders, diplomats,
intergovernmental organizations and representatives of
civil society, we underscore the importance of
formulating a global strategy to address the most
urgent challenges posed by NCDs.
The impact of NCDs on our populations can no
longer be viewed solely as a health crisis. The
Government of Trinidad and Tobago recognizes this
challenge, and we have therefore put in place measures
to prevent and treat persons affected by these NCDs.
We have experienced some successes and made
strides in the area of public health. We have been able
to reduce infant mortality, eradicate polio and virtually
eliminate childhood diseases such as measles and
diphtheria as major causes of infant morbidity and
mortality through our robust primary-care programmes.
Nevertheless, over the past decade, our statistics
have shown that heart disease remains the number one
cause of death, accounting for 25 per cent of deaths.
The incidence of diabetes has remained fairly constant,
accounting for just under 14 per cent. Cancers have
increased slightly, from 12.7 per cent to 13.8 per cent.
In the case of strokes, however, there has been a 1 per
cent decline, from 10 to 9 per cent.
A significant portion of our gross domestic
product is being utilized to provide care for persons
with NCDs. Added to this economic cost is the social
burden placed on families and communities that must
cope with the numerous problems caused by these
diseases. These include disabilities, the inability to
work and the provision of care for the ill and the
vulnerable, as well as the social risk factors linked to
culture, education, environment, urbanization and
employment, all of which increase susceptibility to
developing NCDs.

19

A/66/PV.3

Trinidad and Tobago has been at the forefront in
advocating for national, regional and international
action to focus on NCDs as a developmental issue of
global concern. Trinidad and Tobago took the political
initiative and proposed to this body that a high-level
meeting be convened to address the matter.
Subsequently, our delegation at the United Nations
participated
actively
along
with
delegations
representing the Caribbean Community and other
Member States in the deliberations which laid the
groundwork for this meeting. However, we view our
efforts at the multilateral level as only complementary
to what we are obligated to do domestically.
At the national level, we have devised a number
of programmes in the fight against NCDs. Only last
Friday, we appointed new members to the Partners
Forum Working Committee for Action on Chronic
Non-communicable Diseases. The goal of this
Committee is to act as both a catalyst and a mechanism
for multisectoral action to promote health and reduce
the burden of chronic diseases.
We have also formulated schemes to ensure that
all segments of the population, especially the most
vulnerable, are provided with medications. These are
provided at no cost to the population under our Chronic
Disease Assistance Programme.
As a State party to the World Health Organization
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, we have
implemented legislation which, among other things,
bans smoking in enclosed public spaces; forbids the
advertising, promoting and sponsoring of tobacco
products; and prohibits the sale of tobacco products to
minors.
In closing, I would ask, what must we do? We are
serious about this; that is why we are here, and why the
Meeting is taking place. What can we do? I propose the
following. We need to recognize that NCD risks do not
have a medical origin and therefore require, in addition
to
medical
solutions,
non-medical
solutions.
Consequently, we must redefine the problem. We need
to change the dialogue and focus on the social
determinants of health in order to win the war against
NCDs. For these reasons, we submit that Member
States should strengthen the systems and services for
early detection, treatment and rehabilitation. Emphasis
must also be placed on research on the man-made
causes of NCDs, the reduction of risk factors and a
shift towards protecting the future of our children.

20

My country strongly endorses the development of
a global strategy for the prevention and control of
NCDs. This can be achieved if the United Nations
partners with Member States to reduce the incidence
and prevalence of NCDs among our populations. This
requires the harnessing of financial and other resources
that are not readily available to many developing
countries. In order to achieve these objectives, I urge
the General Assembly to adopt the following proposals.
The first is to support the establishment of global
targets for NCD prevention and control, with a possible
target of reducing NCDs by 25 per cent by 2025. The
second is to redefine NCDs in terms of the conditions
that drive the risk factors for development. The third is
to commission a scientific and technical working group
to develop a research agenda for NCDs and establish
the framework within which the global community can
respond and measure the efficacy of the response at all
levels. In that regard, the Secretary-General may
consider the appointment of a special envoy on NCDs.
Finally, the Government of Trinidad and Tobago
remains committed to working with the United
Nations, other intergovernmental organizations,
members of civil society and other partners to
implement any agreed global strategy aimed at
preventing and controlling the incidence of NCDs.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by Her Excellency Sheikh Hasina,
Prime Minister of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh.
Sheikh Hasina (Bangladesh): I am happy to
speak before the General Assembly on the issue of
non-communicable diseases (NCDs), which are a
growing development challenge in Bangladesh and the
world alike. I hope that our meeting today will help to
raise concern and enhance our work towards
developing common approaches to non-communicable
diseases.
The steady growth of humankind and its strivings
towards economic prosperity sometimes leaves little
space for environmental and health considerations, at
great cost to our populations’ health. The ever-growing
requirements on agriculture and industry have led to
the unsustainable exploitation of natural resources,
pollution, urbanization and ecological degradation.
These changing conditions have, in turn, given rise to
the growth of NCDs, such as cardiovascular diseases,
diabetes, pulmonary ailments and cancer. NCDs now

11-50343

A/66/PV.3

account for 60 per cent of global mortality and 61 per
cent of national mortality in Bangladesh.

community-based mental health promotion
blindness prevention programmes in rural areas.

Sadly, NCD prevention and control programmes
have remained a low priority for national and
international engagement. It is increasingly clear,
however, that we can no longer ignore these problems.
As part and parcel of efforts to combat NCDs, we need
to pay more attention to the use of food additives,
chemicals, residual pollutants, enzymes and hormones,
and even try to curb the excessive use of antibiotics.

We are also developing specialized hospitals and
offering incentives to the private sector to build
modern health facilities. We have also taken important
steps to integrate autism and other developmental
disorders into our existing health-care programme.

NCDs affect the rich and the poor alike, but their
worst impact can be seen in working adults, to the
extent that they place a great social and economic
burden on families. Deaths are usually premature and
follow a period of prolonged suffering. This entails
additional expenditures, which families cover by
reducing essential consumption, borrowing money and
selling assets. Squeezed for money, affected
households often need to lower the quality of their
food, which then has an impact on the overall
development of their children. This silent epidemic
plunges people into poverty, which in turn slows
economic growth, especially in poor countries like
ours.
Thankfully, there are some very concise steps that
we can take to control NCDs. We need tobacco control
and the regulation of the unfettered food and beverage
industries. We also need to distribute information on
what constitutes a healthy diet, as well as to encourage
physical activity. Pollution control, clean technologies
and environmentally friendly waste management
practices are equally important, as is the availability of
health facilities.
In the developing world, our health systems are
limited to primary health care, with some referral
hospitals where doctors can look after patients with
NCDs. Private health centres offer services that are
either inadequate or prohibitively expensive. There is a
need, therefore, for more health facilities and
specialized hospitals focusing on specific and major
NCDs, including cancer, heart and lung diseases and
mental health.
In recent years, Bangladesh has started to commit
additional resources to control NCDs, imposing higher
taxes on tobacco, banning smoking in public places,
setting up diabetic associations in towns and initiating

11-50343

and

In July, we held a high-level international
conference on autism in Dhaka and also created a
regional coalition. The Dhaka Declaration calls for
immediate action to increase access to services and
ensure adequate and timely treatment and care. It also
calls for the mobilization of increased human and
financial resources for the health care of children with
developmental disorders.
The challenges of NCDs require matching
resources, which can be generated by public-private
partnerships. The 2010 World Health Report has aptly
covered the issues of innovative financing and health
insurance. Despite all of that, the fact remains that we
need unqualified support and enhanced resources from
all of our development partners. High on the list are the
easy transfer of technology and access to medicines at
affordable prices. Indeed, by actually rising above
national considerations, together we can prevent and
control NCDs and realize our common goals in health
and development.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Ralph E.
Gonsalves, Prime Minister of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines.
Mr. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines): Saint Vincent and the Grenadines aligns
itself fully with the statement delivered on behalf of
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) by His
Excellency the President of the Republic of Suriname.
Given the limited time allotted to speakers in this
High-level Meeting, I will not seek to be exhaustive in
my remarks, but merely add to those who have spoken
before me on this important issue.
Mr. Thomson (Fiji), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
Four years ago, the statement I prepared for the
general debate of the sixty-second session of the
General Assembly included the following:

21

A/66/PV.3

“The costs associated with treating the
chronic non-communicable disease epidemic are
staggering and constitute a serious threat to our
already strained health care budgets. Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines has therefore
declared war on chronic non-communicable
diseases, and is in the embryonic stages of
developing a comprehensive strategy to elaborate
a wellness revolution among and by our citizens.
This is part of a well-articulated regional strategy
by members of CARICOM. To that end, we urge
the World Health Organization and the Pan
American Health Organization to partner with
Caribbean nations in devising effective strategies
to combat these debilitating lifestyle diseases.”
Today, I am pleased to address a high-level
meeting dedicated specifically to the non-communicable
disease (NCD) epidemic. I am grateful for the
perseverance of my fellow CARICOM Heads of State
and Government in bringing this matter to the forefront
of the international agenda. In September 2007, we
issued a declaration entitled “Uniting to Stop the
Epidemic of Chronic NCDs”, which preceded the firstever Heads of Government summit devoted solely to
NCDs. I also appreciate the solidarity and foresight of
the Heads of Government of the Commonwealth, who
issued an important Statement on Commonwealth
Action to Combat Non-Communicable Diseases during
our 2009 meeting in Trinidad and Tobago. The
excellent speech delivered a short while ago by the
Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago reflected some
of these considerations and concerns.
The Ambassadors of Luxembourg and our sister
island of Jamaica are also deserving of our
commendation for the strong work they did in
co-facilitating the negotiating process that led to our
Political Declaration on NCDs (resolution 66/2,
annex).
The Government and people of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines also express their deepest thanks to
those Governments that have assisted us in the
formulation and implementation of our own wellness
revolution. In particular, we thank the European Union
and the Governments of Cuba and Taiwan, whose
recent successful efforts to participate in the World
Health Assembly reflect their deeply held commitment
to international health issues.

22

But this is not a time for congratulatory backslapping. It is a time for the international community to
roll up our collective sleeves in order to confront an
epidemic that is correctable, reversible and treatable.
This high-level event is not the culmination of an
effort, but merely the beginning of intense, focused and
coordinated actions to address the health and
development impacts of NCDs, particularly in poor and
middle-income countries.
There is a reason that this meeting is being held
here in the General Assembly in New York and not at
the World Health Organization headquarters in
Switzerland. That reason is the fact that the fallout of
the NCD epidemic is much wider than the health sector
or the health of those individuals tragically afflicted
with non-communicable diseases. The development
aspects of this epidemic must be highlighted and
addressed. In particular, we must confront the
tremendous strain that NCD treatment places on the
health care budgets of developing countries. We cannot
ignore, either, the disproportionate impact of this
epidemic on poor people and developing States, or its
obvious negative impact on the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals. Our response to the
NCD epidemic must therefore be multifaceted and
coordinated.
In that regard, while I am heartened by our
international consensus on the Political Declaration
emanating from this meeting, it is not enough. Our
political consensus today must give impetus to a robust
follow-up process and a detailed plan of action that
will provide assistance to local hospitals and primary
care facilities; acknowledge that the flexibilities
inherent in the World Trade Organization Agreement
on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights can and must be applied to the NCD epidemic;
dedicate development assistance to strengthening NCD
prevention and treatment; and collaborate on education
and public awareness efforts in combating these
diseases.
We must also consider the role of the State and
civil society in promoting healthy lifestyles and
protecting local citizens from environmental harm and
trade imbalances that make an imported hamburger,
French fries and a carbonated beverage cheaper and
more readily available than a nutritious, locally
produced meal.

11-50343

A/66/PV.3

Hippocrates once said, “A wise man should
consider that health is the greatest of human
blessings”. If we can collectively protect and preserve
this blessing, the benefits will go well beyond the
longevity and productivity of individual citizens. They
will have a knock-on effect on the economies, societies
and development prospects of countries and regions. I
wish all success to this High-level Meeting.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Freundel Stuart,
Prime Minister and Minister for National Security of
Barbados.
Mr. Stuart (Barbados): It is my special privilege
to address this High-level Meeting of the General
Assembly on the Prevention and Control of
Non-communicable Diseases (NCDs), a subject of
critical concern to Barbados and the countries of the
Caribbean. The Caribbean is the region of the Americas
worst affected by the epidemic of NCDs. These
diseases are responsible for over two-thirds of all
deaths, much sickness and ill health, resulting in an
unsustainable burden on our fragile economies. The
economic and social gains made in the Caribbean
region over the past five decades are in grave danger of
being reversed without immediate, effective and
aggressive intervention.
Grave concern about this situation propelled
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) leaders to
convene an unprecedented summit on chronic
non-communicable diseases in 2007, which led to the
adoption of the Declaration of Port-of-Spain: Uniting
to Stop the Epidemic of Chronic NCDs. Further, it was
the impetus for CARICOM member States to place the
issue of non-communicable diseases on the agenda of
the United Nations.
It is estimated that one in every four Barbadians
is affected by at least one of the NCDs. Rising rates of
obesity, poor nutrition, low levels of physical activity
and other risk factors associated with a cultural shift in
our lifestyle are projected to contribute to increasing
the incidence of NCDs to one in every three
individuals by 2025. That reality, coupled with an ever
increasing elderly population, makes it critical for a
small island developing State like Barbados to set
achievable goals and objectives for attaining targets in
non-communicable disease prevention and control.
Galvanized by the significant health and
socio-economic challenges posed by NCDs, the

11-50343

Government of Barbados has, over the past five years,
taken specific, targeted actions. Barbados has
established a chronic non-communicable disease unit.
The financial resources dedicated to fighting lifestylerelated diseases — including diabetes, hypertension,
heart disease, respiratory disease and cancer — have
been increased by over 50 per cent. Our surveillance
capacity for chronic disease has been significantly
improved through the establishment of the Barbados
National Registry, the first of its kind in the Eastern
Caribbean. This population-based registry will
document all new cases of stroke, acute coronary
events and cancer, and will be a vital tool in making
informed policy and programme decisions.
Policy actions in relation to diet include the
development of nutritional guidelines for healthy and
nutritious food in schools and the implementation of a
National Nutrition Improvement and Population Salt
Reduction Programme. Consultations have started with
the manufacturers in the food and beverage industry in
an effort to have more wholesome and healthy options
available to our citizens.
Barbados is committed to working with the
private sector and civil society on these issues and
strongly supports the establishment of mechanisms to
permit civil society to be significantly involved
globally in responding to non-communicable diseases
and in the setting of time-bound targets.
Our commitment to the World Health
Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco
Control remains firm, as seen in the enactment of
legislation to ban smoking in public places and to
prohibit the sale of tobacco products to minors.
The process that started at the 2007 summit in
Port-of-Spain has succeeded in placing non-communicable
diseases on the global development agenda. There is
now a greater acknowledgement of the enormity of the
epidemic and its devastating impact on socio-economic
development,
particularly
the
socio-economic
development of developing countries.
The Political Declaration that we have just
adopted (resolution 66/2, annex) does not fully reflect
our expectations. However, it provides a good platform
for ongoing consideration by the General Assembly of
the developmental and other impacts of NCDs. It is our
hope that out of this process, developing countries like
Barbados will be able to benefit from international
cooperation as we continue to address the economic

23

A/66/PV.3

burden of these diseases, which, as long ago as a
decade, accounted for 5.3 per cent of our gross
domestic product. Support for training, research and
development, quality control and monitoring and
evaluation will greatly assist Barbados and other small
island developing States in our response to the
challenges of chronic non-communicable diseases.
Urgent
multisectoral
action
and
policy
coordination are needed to achieve the prevention and
control of NCDs. I should like to emphasize that it is
imperative that, as we go forward, critical decisions are
made that include accountability, reporting and
systematic feedback of outcomes. We need to accord
greater priority to non-communicable diseases on the
development agenda. Barbados looks forward to
collaborating with our partners in our ongoing
interventions against this epidemic.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Commodore
Bainimarama, Prime Minister of the Republic of Fiji.
Mr. Bainimarama (Fiji): As we gather for this
High-level Meeting on the Prevention and Control of
Non-communicable Diseases (NCDs), it is clear that
NCDs are a global health epidemic. They are a leading
cause of death worldwide. The statistics are staggering:
NCDs account for over 63 per cent of deaths globally.
In the Western Pacific region, 30,000 die every day due
to NCDs. In my own country, Fiji, 80 per cent of
illness, disability and deaths are attributed to NCDs.
Those figures speak for themselves. It is also
apparent that premature deaths caused by NCDs reduce
productivity, curtail economic growth and pose
significant social challenges in most countries. NCDs
are therefore not just a health concern, but also a
development and economic concern.
The Pacific region, including Fiji, has declared
NCDs a crisis requiring urgent action. We are aware of
the rising burden of NCDs and their socio-economic
impacts upon our nations. We recognize, however, that
national Governments bear the primary responsibility
for responding to this global epidemic.
Our recognition of that fact spurred the Fiji
Government to put in place an NCD Strategic Plan for
2010-2014 entitled “From womb to tomb with a
double-edged sword — everyone’s business”. Fiji has
adopted the “3M” model — mouth, muscle, medicine — to
NCD prevention and control, with strategic health

24

communication and social determinants forming the
base of the model.
Our womb-to-tomb approach, together with
emphasis on Millennium Development Goals 4 and 5
in our health delivery system, also supports the
Government’s road map for ensuring that women and
children have access to quality health service. Our
strategic activities include intervention in policy,
physical environment, lifestyle and clinical services
with enhanced advocacy, monitoring and evaluation.
This strategic approach is multisectoral in nature,
engaging the whole of Government and the whole of
society.
As a nation, Fiji is committed to this
multisectoral plan and its full implementation over the
next few years. By addressing the prevention and
control of NCDs in-country, we recognize that we are
contributing to addressing NCDs worldwide. To that
end, Fiji is one of the first countries in the world to be
given an award by the World Health Organization
(WHO) for our tobacco-free initiatives in communities.
We now have four such communities in place.
Additionally, Fiji is one of the first countries in the
world to have carried out the first and second WHO
STEPS surveys on NCDs.
We believe that it is essential for the global
community to work together to support national efforts.
Not all countries possess the same capacity to tackle
NCDs. There is a need for strengthened international
cooperation. The support of relevant international
organizations and partners to increase technical
assistance, transfer of technology, capacity-building
and access to high quality generic medicines would
enhance national efforts in tackling NCDs.
Fiji trusts that the Political Declaration
(resolution 66/2, annex) adopted at this High-level
Meeting sets us, as a global community, on track to
effectively address and curtail the peril of
non-communicable diseases.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Hubert
Alexander Ingraham, Prime Minister and Minister of
Finance of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas.
Mr. Ingraham (Bahamas): My Government is
pleased to participate in this historic High-level
Meeting as the Assembly recognizes for the first time

11-50343

A/66/PV.3

the growing burden of non-communicable diseases
(NCDs) and their socio-economic impact.

global health challenges facing us. We owe it to future
generations.

NCDs constitute an epidemic in my country, the
Bahamas. The epidemic is putting increased strain on
our health-care system. In the Bahamas, one-half of all
public hospital beds are occupied by people suffering
from NCDs, with an average length of stay of seven
days. Eighty per cent of the drug costs for our national
prescription drug plan are spent on treating
hypertension and diabetes. Half of the deaths of
individuals 45 years and older and 60 per cent of all
deaths are caused by this epidemic of NCDs. The
health and related socio-economic costs associated are
enormous.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Sibusiso
Barnabas Dlamini, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of
Swaziland.

The dual burden of NCDs and communicable
diseases has led my Government to strengthen primary
health-care services by integrating family medicine
specialists at the primary health-care clinics; increase
access to medications to control NCDs with the
implementation of a national prescription drug plan;
promote healthy living and demonstrate that increased
physical activity and a balanced diet can lead to
reduced dependence on prescription medication;
facilitate patient self-management programmes; partner
with non-governmental and faith-based organizations
to conduct worksite and community-based wellness
programmes; develop a national food and nutrition
policy and guidelines; and improve the coordination of
services through the appointment of an NCD focal
point and a stakeholder committee.
While we recognize the important leadership role
of the United Nations and the World Health
Organization in supporting efforts to decrease the
prevalence of NCDs, we strongly recommend an
increase in international and regional budgetary
allocations; increased access to training in policy
formulation,
monitoring
and
evaluation,
and
coordination across health systems; policy changes for
intersectoral involvement in the NCD prevention
initiative; and the sharing of best practices in trade and
industry.
To stem and redirect the course of the epidemic,
we must promote and encourage changes to our
lifestyles and make healthy behaviour and appropriate
food choices for our children. My Government
applauds initiatives undertaken to curb the increasing
rate of childhood obesity. We must continue to fight the

11-50343

Mr. Dlamini (Swaziland): It is an honour for me,
on behalf of His Majesty King Mswati III, Head of
State of the Kingdom of Swaziland, to address this
Assembly and share our views and experiences on the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases
(NCDs).
In Swaziland, the situation of NCDs is quite
alarming. According to the 2009 annual statistical
report of the Ministry of Health, outpatient data from
all health facilities indicate that hypertension and heart
disease were responsible for more than 33,000 and
3,000 consultations, respectively. Forty-three per cent
of hypertension cases were diagnosed in primary
health-care facilities, whereas 39 per cent of heart
disease was diagnosed in tertiary health-care facilities.
Approximately 15 per cent of our population is living
with diabetes.
The STEPS survey conducted in 2008, with the
support of the World Health Organization (WHO),
indicated that Swazi citizens in the 25-to-35 age group
had a 32 per cent risk of NCDs, while the 45-to-55 age
group had a 50 per cent risk. The survey also revealed
that blood pressure levels are rising in the younger
population, and obesity levels were found to be at
26 per cent. Indeed, this situation demands urgent
attention.
Despite several challenges, the Kingdom of
Swaziland is committed to achieving the six objectives
of the 2008-2013 Action Plan for the Global Strategy
for the Prevention and Control of Non-communicable
Diseases. In this regard, we have established an NCD
national programme, focusing on public awareness and
the improvement of case management. Our national
programme includes health promotion interventions
focusing on the reduction of risk factors and
encouraging healthy lifestyles through mass media,
community activities and networking with relevant
stakeholders. The Ministry of Health is also currently
developing the NCD National Policy and the NCD
Strategic Plan. The key pillars on which future
interventions will be centred are surveillance,
promoting public awareness, targeted interventions,

25

A/66/PV.3

early detection, better case management, palliative care
and research.
Partnership is an essential component of the
successful implementation of our NCD Programme. All
sectors will be encouraged to form a multisectoral
approach, with the Ministry of Health assuming the
role of coordinator. Development partners, including
United Nations agencies, will be requested to give
technical, financial and capacity-building support to
this important Government initiative.
One of the most committed partners of the
Kingdom of Swaziland is Taiwan, and we laud the
positive step taken by WHO to invite Taiwan to
participate in the World Health Assembly (WHA) as an
Observer
since
2009.
Taiwan’s
professional
participation in the WHA over the past three years has
helped to strengthen the international health and
medical network.
I would like to conclude with a quote, which I
believe in and fully support, from the WHO 2008-2013
Action Plan for the Global Strategy for the Prevention
and Control of NCDs:
“We know what works, we know what it costs
and we know that all countries are at risk. We
have an Action Plan to avert millions of
premature deaths and help promote a better
quality of life for millions more.”
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Lord Tu’ivakano of
Nukunuku, Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Kingdom of Tonga.
Lord Tu’ivakano (Tonga): Sadly, for many
Pacific island countries and territories, including Tonga,
75 per cent of deaths attributable to non-communicable
diseases (NCDs) is a reality today. In The World Health
Report 2002, the World Health Organization (WHO)
estimated that 60 per cent of all deaths in 2005 would
be from NCDs. That figure was projected to increase to
75 per cent by 2020.
The Pacific countries are among the top
10 nations on a number of indicators that no nation
should be proud of or aspire to. These indicators
include the most obese nations and those with the
highest prevalence of diabetes. Changes to the
environment in which we live have led to changes in
lifestyles and given rise to a crisis of NCDs.

26

At the recent meeting of leaders of the Pacific
Islands Forum in Auckland, New Zealand, the
statement on NCDs expressed the latest deep concern
that NCDs have reached epidemic proportions and
become a human, social and economic crisis requiring
an urgent and comprehensive response. This echoes the
Honiara Communiqué on the Pacific NCD crisis, in
which Pacific Ministers of Health expressed their grave
concern over the rapid increase of NCDs in the Pacific
countries and stated the need for urgent attention.
In Tonga, NCDs are very much our main public
health problem. Ninety per cent of adult Tongans are
overweight or obese, and 40 per cent have either
diabetes or pre-diabetes. Four of the top five causes of
death are due to NCDs. Recent evidence also indicates
that NCDs have caused a significant reduction in life
expectancy in recent years.
The Government of Tonga has recognized the
burden of NCDs and the implications of not doing
anything, and has responded with the following.
First, it has given NCDs due prioritization at the
national level. NCDs have been included in the
Government’s nine priority objectives of Tonga’s
strategic development framework, which is part of our
efforts to achieve the relevant Millennium
Development Goals.
Secondly, strategies and policies to address the
NCDs assist with the establishment of a framework
aimed at system-strengthening policy initiatives,
research and evidence-based practices, and infrastructure
and human resource development. Many of these areas
cannot be effectively and efficiently implemented
without external assistance.
Thirdly, sustainable funding mechanisms are an
issue for most if not all developing countries, such as
Tonga. We have been successful in establishing the
Tonga Health Promotion Foundation. At the global
level, a fund for NCDs, similar to the Global Fund to
fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, would certainly
be helpful.
The fourth concern relates to the development
and strengthening of partnerships, as trying to address
NCDs in developing nations without partnerships will
be impossible. To date, we have developed good
working partnerships both locally and with development
partners, including regional organizations.

11-50343

A/66/PV.3

Tonga, at this important meeting, is willing to
work with all Member States in support of the Political
Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the General
Assembly on the Prevention and Control of
Non-communicable Diseases (resolution 66/2, annex).
This High-level Meeting is a significant step in the
right direction, and it is imperative that it not be
limited to an exchange of ideas and experiences.
Encouraging a whole-of-Government and a whole-ofsociety approach is crucial.
Strengthening international cooperation and
better coordination among partners will improve our
chances of success, especially when the issues that are
significantly related to NCDs — including the world
economic downturn, trade and cross-border issues and
climate change — are beyond the control of small
nations such as Tonga.
A more global approach is needed to supplement
the groundwork already started in our struggling island
nations, such as advocating the accelerated
implementation of good policies. The WHO
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control is an
important example, as its accelerated implementation
would enhance previous commitments to the
Convention by many Member States. We must also go
further and link our declarations to set targets in our
concerted efforts to combat NCDs. Developing nations
must be helped further in building system capacities
and strengthening infrastructure and human resource
development with measures that ensure sustainable
funding, targeted research and evidence-based
practices.
In conclusion, doing nothing is not an option —
not for today’s generation and certainly not for
tomorrow’s generation.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Mohammed Waheed, VicePresident of the Republic of Maldives.
Mr. Waheed (Maldives): Worldwide, substantial
gains have been achieved in economic growth, health
and living standards in the past century. That progress
is now threatened by crises of our own making,
namely, climate change, the international financial
crisis,
food
insecurity
and
the
crisis
in
non-communicable diseases (NCDs) — principally
heart disease, stroke, diabetes, cancers and chronic
respiratory diseases.

11-50343

The increase in non-communicable diseases
represents a global crisis. In almost all countries, and
particularly in developing nations, in all income
groups, men, women and children are all at risk of
these diseases. That creates a major barrier to
development and to the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals. We are appalled by the statistics
revealed here by Dr. Margaret Chan, the DirectorGeneral of the World Health Organization (WHO). We
applaud the work of WHO and other United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations for their
tireless efforts to mobilize the international community.
The main risk factors for NCDs are well known
and are similar across all countries. The high-risk
factors for NCDs, such as the consumption of tobacco
and foods high in saturated and trans-fats, salt and
sugar, are all within our control. The first key action
for success is therefore strong and sustained political
leadership at the highest level. The top priority of this
high-level summit on non-communicable diseases
should be to strengthen political resolve for
accelerating the implementation of all aspects of the
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control and other
measures needed to achieve a world essentially free of
tobacco. We should direct greater effort to
strengthening health systems, with a focus on primary
health care and access to cost-effective preventive
measures.
The prevention of NCDs is also inextricably
linked to climate change and the need for low-carbon
policies, which Maldives continue to emphasize on
international platforms. Healthy living conditions and
lifestyles are part of a sustainable approach to
development linked to preventing and adapting to the
adverse effects of climate change. At the national level,
we are committed to strengthening our health systems,
generating resources and earmarking funds for
universal access to the prevention and control of NCDs
through multisectoral collaboration. At the national,
regional and global levels we must take responsibility
and be accountable for monitoring progress at regular
intervals, based on targets for preventing and
controlling NCDs.
The geographic dispersion of our small population, in
200 islands scattered over 1,000 kilometres of the Indian
Ocean, poses particularly difficult challenges.
However, we have successfully eradicated polio,
malaria and many other childhood diseases. We are
confident that we will be able to substantially reduce

27

A/66/PV.3

the burden of NCDs on our health system in the years
to come. We recently introduced tele-medicine in about
40 islands in order to promote early detection and
treatment. We have introduced new legislation to
control the sale and use of tobacco. We are redesigning
our urban zones to create recreational areas, and we are
working with civil society to raise awareness and
promote healthy lifestyles. The support we have
received from the United Nations and the international
community has contributed immensely to the success
in the area of public health in the Maldives. Such
support will be important to our continuing efforts to
prevent and control NCDs.
The global community should not lose this
opportunity, but should sustain momentum towards
achieving the goal of reducing premature death and
disability from NCDs, thus improving global health in
the years to come. This is an obligation we have to our
future generations. I thank the Assembly for its
unanimous support for the Political Declaration on the
Prevention and Control of Non-communicable
Diseases (resolution 66/2, annex).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by Her Excellency Ms. Cissé Mariam
Kaïdama Sidibé, Prime Minister of the Republic of
Mali.
Ms. Sidibé (Mali) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by expressing the Mali delegation’s warm
congratulations to the President of the sixty-sixth
session of the General Assembly. I also wish to thank
the Secretary-General for having organized this Highlevel Meeting dedicated to the fight against
non-communicable diseases. Allow me also, on behalf
of the President of the Republic of Mali, His
Excellency Mr. Amadou Toumani Touré, to express my
country’s deep appreciation for the organization by the
United Nations of this High-level Meeting on an issue
as important as non-communicable diseases.
As we know, enormous progress has been made
in combating the AIDS pandemic and emerging
diseases such as malaria and tuberculosis under the
leadership of the United Nations and its specialized
agencies, with the cooperation of the donor community
and the sincere commitment of every country in the
world. The results achieved have thus been thanks to
the vision of a strategy on a global scale for the battle
waged by the United Nations, which for years has
laboured tirelessly side by side with our Governments

28

to lift the fight against the AIDS pandemic to the level
of a global priority, recognized and implemented by
all.
Non-communicable diseases are increasing
rapidly worldwide, and particularly in underdeveloped
countries. We note with deep concern the emergence of
cancers, cardiovascular disease, chronic kidney
diseases, those linked to the toxicity and of pesticides
in the food chain, and new allergic illnesses in some
regions related to air quality, to mention only a few.
For a long time we have understood the epidemiology
of such chronic non-communicable diseases and the
seriousness of the global trends in their human,
economic, health and environmental impact in
countries with poor and deprived populations who
adopt lifestyles and diets that were once the preserve of
prosperous societies — societies that possessed the
means of diagnosis and treatment as well as the
capacity to monitor public health. Such factors thus
also demonstrate increasingly that these chronic
non-communicable diseases are not merely medical
problems for the victims but, far more, a development
issue confronting the entire international community.
We are bearing the burden of these diseases. We
in developing countries do not have the means
adequate to controlling them, hence the dire necessity
for more active international solidarity. If strong
measures are not taken to deal with current indicators,
at present experts estimate that in the medium term it
will be impossible to erect efficient barriers against
these diseases. We know that smoking, alcohol abuse,
sedentary lifestyles, lack of physical exercise and many
others figure among the risk factors.
Today, we know that the pressures are enormous,
quality control is difficult and political pressure to
open markets is massive. Media marketing of low-cost
consumption are beginning to take hold in our country.
Mali welcomes the adoption of resolution 66/2 on
non-communicable diseases; it is a major step towards
halting the advance of chronic disease here and now.
We are convinced that fighting these serious diseases
affecting our societies is of the highest priority. That is
why we have decided to provide diagnosis and
treatment of female cancers, including screening and
anti-cancer medications, free of charge, as well as
access to surgery and radiotherapy for cancer patients
in Mali.

11-50343

A/66/PV.3

Furthermore, by the end of the year the
Government will adopt a national prevention policy for
fighting non-communicable diseases. I am happy to
announce before this Assembly the involvement of civil
society in the fight against these non-communicable
diseases. That is why we make a solemn appeal for a
worldwide multisectoral programme to prevent and
fight non-communicable diseases, based on a sense of
urgency and under the banner of the grand vision of the
United Nations. We need greater solidarity and synergy of
action to overcome this epidemic of non-communicable
diseases.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Salomón
Nguema Owono, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Health and Social Welfare of Equatorial Guinea.
Mr. Nguema Owono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): We should first and foremost rejoice in the
interest shown in a major public health issue, chronic
diseases, and in the international cooperation to
coordinate our efforts and harmonize our actions.
Chronic non-communicable diseases are a health-care
issue that slows development all over the world,
particularly in our countries of the World Health
Organization (WHO) African Region, where the
situation is worsening with the challenges presented by
infectious diseases, for which we continue to pay a
heavy price despite the considerable efforts we deploy.
Indeed, our countries are faced with a growing
epidemic of cardiovascular disease, heart attacks,
cancers, diabetes and other chronic diseases. Currently,
it is recognized that 80 per cent of deaths caused by
chronic diseases occur in low- and middle-income
countries and affect men and women in similar
proportions. It is also recognized that the threat of
non-communicable diseases is one of the greatest
challenges to development in our times.
In other words, this meeting is taking place at a
timely moment as the Governments and the agencies of
the United Nations and their development partners seek
appropriate solutions to address these challenges. The
fight against disease and disabilities fits perfectly
within the work of achieving the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs).
Today, we are at a crossroads in the prevention of
and fight against non-communicable diseases. The
resolutions that emerge from our work will be the fruit
of the lessons learned and decisions taken at the

11-50343

international and region levels. That is particularly true
for countries involved in consultations organized at various
levels in the course of 2011. Indeed, the Global Strategy for
the Prevention and Control of Non-communicable
Diseases was approved by the World Health Assembly
in May 2000. It was followed up by other resolutions,
such as the Framework Convention on Tobacco
Control, approved by the World Health Assembly in
2003 and the Global Strategy on Diet, Physical
Activity and Health in 2004.
In 2008, the Action Plan for the Global Strategy
for the Prevention and Control of Non-communicable
Diseases was adopted by the World Health Assembly.
In the WHO African Region, we commend the
Brazzaville meetings on non-communicable diseases
that were held in April 2011 and defined our needs in
those areas and reflected in the Brazzaville Declaration
on Non-communicable Diseases. These consultations
came about after a number of different initiatives were
taken at the regional level, such as the Conference on
Health and Environment in Africa, which culminated in
the adoption of the Libreville Declaration in 2008.
In Equatorial Guinea, health-care problems such
as diabetes and cardiovascular diseases remain
inadequately documented but have an enormous impact
on health care in the country due to the rapid changes
in lifestyle and the rapid increase in life expectancy.
Our strategic plan for fighting non-communicable
diseases focuses on objectives designed to reduce the
morbidity and mortality rates of non-communicable
diseases in Equatorial Guinea and is in keeping with
our goal of health for all under our Horizon 2020
programme. With regard to this commitment to health
for all, we strongly welcome the health and
development survey currently taking place in our
country, from which we hope to obtain reliable results
that will point us to act objectively and consistently in
meeting the health-care goals set forth in the MDGs.
We are also proud in that regard of the efforts
undertaken by the Government in the framework of
poverty reduction and the mitigation of inequality in
public housing investment in order to meet the basic
needs of the people. One of the determining factors the
good health of the people is the provision of potable
water in large urban population centres.
We must take action now. The Governments of
countries in the WHO African Region followed up on
their commitment with the adoption of the Brazzaville

29

A/66/PV.3

Declaration in April during the regional meetings set
up by our WHO Regional Office. We are aware that, in
the light of the epidemic of non-communicable
diseases, our health-care systems and medical and
technical equipment must necessarily be adapted and
strengthened in order to fight these conditions. We
must also finalize our reflections on the financing of
health-care policies, on the one hand, and strive to
ensure the mobilization of the additional resources
necessary to implement our policies and actions, on the
other. That will ensure the broadest participation
possible, including all public sectors in partnership
with civil society, the private sector and local
communities.
We are aware that we are participating in an
historic moment. We must indeed decide to work
towards the prevention and control of non-communicable
diseases for which our peoples continue to pay a very
high price. In other words, we must not simply decide
to adopt good resolutions that will allow us to start to
save the lives of millions of suffering people; we must
also make a commit to working towards the effective
implementation of these resolutions to achieve our
goals, and include the fight against non-communicable
diseases in global development agenda. We must
formulate a strategy for collective efforts to effectively
counter the consequences of chronic disease.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Her Royal Highness Princess Ghida Talal, Special
Envoy of His Majesty King Abdullah II and
Chairperson of the King Hussein Cancer Foundation of
Jordan.
Princess Ghida Talal (Jordan): Cancer, heart
disease, diabetes, respiratory illnesses — individually,
each one of those words is enough to send instant
shivers down our spine and wreak havoc in our lives.
Together, they claim the lives of 36 million people
annually all over the world.
Why is the world community allowing these
culprits to hold our lives hostage? We do not have a
minute to waste. Too much time has already been
wasted. Too many people have died, too many families
have been destroyed and too many communities have
been decimated.
Hiding under the seemingly innocuous name of
non-communicable diseases (NCDs), these four
plagues, formerly close companions of the developed
world, have migrated in full force to a highly

30

vulnerable developing world. By doing so, they have
invaded a world already crippled by the most
rudimentary medical landscape, with no adequate
resources and no proper infrastructure to deal with
such a disastrous crisis.
With infectious diseases rampant, developing
countries struggle with all kinds of shortages and a
total lack of insurance schemes. In my own country,
Jordan, we have had reason to hope that change can be
effected and lives can be saved. I would like to share
with the General Assembly a success story right from
the heart of the developing world.
Ten years ago, when I was first asked by His
Majesty King Abdullah II to chair the King Hussein
Cancer Foundation and Centre, the landscape for
cancer care in Jordan was extremely bleak, at best.
Quality cancer treatment was almost non-existent.
Only the privileged few could afford to seek lifesaving treatment abroad. I myself was one of those
privileged few, able to seek treatment for my husband
at a cancer centre of excellence in the United States.
He had just been diagnosed with non-Hodgkins
lymphoma at the young age of 26. Had I been less
fortunate, a probable death sentence would have
awaited us.
The questions haunted me. Did other wives not
share my anxieties and my fears about their own
husbands and children? Did they not shed the same
tears and endure the same sleepless nights? Of course
they did. With the blessing and constant support of His
Majesty King Abdullah, I was determined to give them
the same chance that was given to me and to my
family.
Ten years on, I stand before the Assembly today
and can proudly proclaim that the centre that bears the
name of our late King Hussein is the only
comprehensive cancer centre in the entire Middle East
region, and is the only cancer centre in the developing
world to earn accreditation by the Joint Commission on
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations as a cancerspecific disease centre.
What were the key reasons for our success? We
understood the need to prioritize. We could not take on
the whole spectrum of cancer control, from prevention
and treatment to research and palliative care. We
poured all our efforts and resources into our number
one priority, namely, providing life-saving treatment to
our patients. In order to achieve that goal, we partnered

11-50343

A/66/PV.3

with the very best institutions worldwide in cancer
care.
Once we had achieved this immediate goal, we
were ready to tackle the important issues of early
detection and prevention. Only then would people be
willing to listen to our messages of prevention. Why
would anyone be interested in learning about the
disease or trying to prevent it, if there was no access to
treatment in the first place?
I urge everyone present here today to take action
now, before we have a catastrophe of epic proportions
on our hands. It is not a choice or an option. It is not a
whim or a luxury.
For our part, we in Jordan are committed to this
meeting’s Political Declaration (resolution 66/2, annex)
and to implementing one national framework for NCD
risk factors control. But we cannot succeed if the world
community does not dedicate a global fund to assist
developing countries in implementing their NCD plans.
Failing that, our ambitious plans to conquer NCDs will
remain but a footnote.
Is not the figure of 350 million people dying in
the next decade terrifying enough? Do we not have a
moral responsibility to give a voice to those who do
not have one? If anyone can do it, all of us sitting here
in the Hall can. We are under obligation to it, in the
name of equality, in the name of justice and in the
name of humanity.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Ms. Cecilia Morel de Piñera, Special Envoy of the
President of Chile and First Lady.
Ms. Morel de Piñera (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the President for having convened
this High-level Meeting to discuss one of this century’s
major health scourges, the so-called non-communicable
diseases, whose impact is felt in global, cross-cutting
and interregional terms.
I am grateful for this opportunity to represent my
country, Chile, and to all those who have been working
for years to improve health throughout the world,
especially those working to that end in my country. It
is a great honour to be able to speak to the General
Assembly about one of our major concerns and a
priority for the Government of President Sebastian
Piñera Echeñique.

11-50343

The
twenty-first
century
has
brought
unprecedented challenges in the area of health. The
epidemic of chronic non-communicable diseases is
undermining the advances in overall well-being and
reducing inequalities that we have spent so much effort
to achieve in our countries. It may also cause spending
on health to rise to unexpected levels. This is more
than enough reason for convening this meeting. I
congratulate the Secretary-General most sincerely on
this initiative.
Chile, a country of 17 million people, is
experiencing a sharp increase in chronic diseases and
their risk factors. The latest surveys confirm this. What
worries us most is that these figures are increasing year
after year, with the greatest impact on women and
those already vulnerable.
For this reason, our health goals for the decade
2011-2020 focus on improving lifestyles, controlling
risk factors and stressing prevention, so as to
concentrate not only on properly treating those who are
already sick but also on ensuring that those who are
still healthy remain so.
This is an ambitious goal. Whereas in previous
decades medical matters were the exclusive purview of
the health sector, achieving these new goals today will
require intense intersectoral work in such distinct areas
as health, education, housing and agriculture, to
mention but a few. Therefore, it is essential for public
and private agencies alike to be involved in this effort
to build a new culture.
The President of the Republic of Chile,
Mr. Sebastian Piñera Echeñique, has the clear political
resolve to tackle this new scenario by personally
leading this crusade and establishing a mandate
involving specific tasks, financing and coordination.
The Government of Chile considers the rising
incidence of these diseases and their risk factors to be a
social problem and a major priority for the country.
We have called this initiative “Choose to live
healthy”. Its goal is to implement a cross-cutting and
intersectoral public policy that involves all private and
public stakeholders and promotes civic participation.
Using social, educational and health strategies, we
want to promote healthy lifestyles and effectively
manage risk factors. The campaign was launched this
year and, in this first phase, is being managed by the
office of which I am the head.

31

A/66/PV.3

We are engaged in a proactive programme to
motivate citizens to make four commitments so as to
improve their quality of life: a healthy diet, physical
exercise, enjoyment of family and outdoor activity. We
have set important and specific targets to reduce
smoking, obesity, sedentary lifestyles and excessive
alcohol consumption, as well as to control diabetes and
high blood pressure.
Like President Al-Nasser, we firmly believe that
the challenge raised at this meeting is of vital
importance for our countries. In the belief that each
and every citizen deserves a better, more prosperous
and healthier life, we have embarked on the path of
choosing to live healthy and improving health through
prevention. In so doing, we hope to overcome a
scourge that is hindering equal opportunity and human
development. We are totally committed and the
chances of success are good. Let us work together.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Mr. John Dalli, European Commissioner for Health and
Consumer Policy.
Mr. Dalli (European Union): I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
I would like to convey the appreciation of the EU
and its member States to the Secretary-General, the
President of the General Assembly, the World Health
Organization (WHO) secretariat and the co-facilitators
from Luxembourg and Jamaica for all their hard work
in preparing this High-level Meeting on the prevention
and control of non-communicable diseases (NCDs).
The High-level Meeting is a very important step
forward for everyone concerned about health at the
local, national and international levels. By highlighting
the growing burden of non-communicable diseases and
stimulating the action needed to prevent and control
them, it has the potential to lead to enormous gains in
health for the peoples of the world in the years to
come, and to help to accelerate the process of social
and economic development everywhere. The
enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health
is one of the fundamental rights of every human being.
The burden of preventable non-communicable
diseases, preventable deaths and disability, and the loss
of human potential has a very negative impact on
development in all countries. Much of that burden can
be prevented by taking action on common risk factors

32

and determinants, such as tobacco use, unhealthy diet,
lack of physical activity and harmful alcohol
consumption, as well as by addressing underlying
social, economic and environmental determinants,
including mental disorders.
The EU and its member States recognize that the
international community and especially many lowincome countries face extraordinary challenges from the
double burden of communicable and non-communicable
diseases. The EU will support those countries in
addressing NCDs and their risk factors in accordance
with their national priorities and national and
international commitments, including the strengthening
of health and regulatory systems and the involvement
of health-related non-governmental organizations and
other civil society organizations. However, in order to
achieve results, we cannot emphasize enough the
importance of national commitment to integrating the
prevention and control of NCDs into efforts to
strengthen health systems.
The EU and its member States welcome the
Political Declaration (resolution 66/2, annex). We
welcome the emphasis on WHO leadership, with the
full participation of member States in the follow-up
and monitoring of progress made, strengthening
international
cooperation
and
working
with
stakeholders, together with a focus on an integrated
approach avoiding numerous and separate vertical
disease-specific activities. Moreover, we welcome the
focus on health promotion and prevention and on
strengthening our awareness of and commitment to
dealing with health determinants, in particular with the
aim of reducing health inequities. Both populationbased and individual targeted interventions are needed,
using a collaborative health-in-all-policies approach
involving all levels of Government and relevant
stakeholders.
The Treaty on European Union requires that we
provide a high level of health protection across all EU
policies and activities. The EU has had successes in its
work on the risk factors related to chronic diseases. We
are taking forward strategies on tobacco use, unhealthy
diet, lack of physical activity and the harmful use of
alcohol, both nationally and at the European level.
The European Union has ratified the Framework
Convention on Tobacco Control and is committed to its
implementation in the EU and globally. Many EU
member States are taking steps towards enacting

11-50343

A/66/PV.3

comprehensive
smoke-free
legislation.
Food
reformulation is high on our agenda, notably through
strategies to reduce salt, caloric intake, saturated and
trans-fats and added sugars. Alcohol-related harm is a
major concern, particularly among young people.
Poland, which currently holds the presidency of the
Council of the European Union, has initiated a new,
broad-based process to reflect on innovative
approaches to chronic non-communicable diseases in
public health and health-care systems.
The Political Declaration will give support and
impetus to our actions in these and other areas. We
need stronger health systems that can implement
appropriate
public
health
policies,
provide
interventions to prevent NCDs and deliver effective
disease management. The prevention and control of
NCDs must be appropriately integrated into the
structures and functions of health systems, especially
primary health-care services, and include, above all,
health promotion. In addition, health systems should
monitor NCDs and their underlying risk factors for
informed decision-making.
Let me conclude by saying that the EU and its
member States look forward to working closely with
WHO, other relevant United Nations agencies and
Member States to implement the actions defined in the
Declaration, and to considering what further activities
should be carried out in the light of the reports and
associated work that will be undertaken over the next
three years, as described in the Declaration.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Xavier Bertrand, Minister for
Labour, Employment and Health of France.
Mr. Bertrand (France) (spoke in French):
Non-communicable diseases (NCDs) constitute one of
the leading challenges facing our health-care systems
today. We know the number of victims — 36 million.
We know the ambitious goals — a 25 per cent
reduction. Let me say, however, that this will be
impossible to achieve unless we wake up, change our
behaviour, take more binding measures and seek
innovative financing.
NCDs are a challenge because, unlike
communicable diseases, they have multiple causes that
are not only health-related but also cultural and social.
Certain lifestyles and behaviours — such as tobacco
use, a sedentary lifestyle, alcohol abuse and an
unbalanced diet — are to blame. A health-care

11-50343

response alone is therefore not adequate. Curing is not
enough; we must also prevent.
The fight against obesity, for example, is a
scourge with various causes and we must fight it on
several fronts. Before treating obese people medically,
we should educate to change behaviours, encourage
healthy eating habits and promote physical activity at
all ages. Fighting social inequality also plays a crucial
role in relation to the problem of obesity. Efforts
should also encompass action on the food supply to
ensure access to a balanced diet. This is the approach
of the obesity plan being carried out in France,
alongside the national health nutrition programme.
It must be said that, while advocacy is good, we
must also work on more binding measures if we want
to see a change in behaviour, including that of
manufacturers. In this regard, the World Health
Organization (WHO) recommendations regarding the
taxation of sugar-rich drinks and products to change
behaviour is another avenue that we must explore.
Similarly, the French cancer plan seeks to address all
aspects of the issue: fighting the multiple causes,
screening, care, support, health providers and, of
course, research. I commend the role of the WHO in
coordinating this action with all the international
organizations — be they in the areas of work,
environment, development and education — that play a
key role in prevention.
I had the opportunity to say this in Geneva at the
WHO last May, and I will say it again today: We must
act to ensure that all countries wake up to the scope of
NCDs and include this problem on the global
development agenda. Let us be clear. Everything
matters when it comes to health — not only health
security and infectious diseases, but non-communicable
diseases too must be included at the heart of our
agenda by providing access to prevention and basic
health services. I believe that the WHO Framework
Convention on Tobacco Control is exemplary in that
regard, but while signing a convention may be a
positive step, implementing a strong convention is
even better.
We know what has to be done. In 2006 in France,
I sought to ban smoking in public places in order to
fight against passive smoking. But to change
behaviour, we must go even further. Moreover, the
fight against non-communicable diseases is also
integral to one of the priorities of the Group of 20, and,
under the auspices of the French presidency, we want

33

A/66/PV.3

to strengthen social protection by developing social
protection ceilings adapted to the conditions of each
country.

in my view, a taboo question. If we do not also move
ahead along these lines, the means committed so far
will not be adequate to meet these challenges.

It is quite clear that we have sizeable needs and
that we need more sizeable means to address them. We
must work on innovative funding. I said that
everything is important when it comes to health, but
given the constraints countries face in increasing
public assistance, we all know that innovative
financing will be a necessity tomorrow and in the
future. For example, the WHO concept of a
contribution payable by tobacco manufacturers is not,

The role of the international community is to
provide access to basic services and essential
treatments to all and to seek the best responses to
prevent and combat non-communicable diseases.
Together with the WHO, the responsibility falls to us
as ministers to act to that end.

34

The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

11-50343
