United Nations

S/PV.5432

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-first year

5432

nd meeting
Friday, 5 May 2006, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ikouebe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Congo)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Apparicio da Silva
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Ms. Løj
Mr. De La Sablière
Nana Effah-Apenteng
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Oshima
Mr. De Rivero
Mr. Al-Nasser
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Burian
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Mahiga
Mr. Brencick

Agenda
The situation in Timor-Leste
End of mandate report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Office
in Timor-Leste (S/2006/251)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

06-33983 (E)

*0633983*

S/PV.5432

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
begin this meeting by paying tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Wang Guangya,
Permanent Representative of China, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of
April 2006. I am sure that I speak for all members of
the Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Wang for the great diplomatic skill with
which he conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Timor-Leste
End of mandate report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste
(S/2006/251)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Austria, Brazil, Indonesia,
Malaysia, New Zealand, Portugal, Singapore, Thailand
and Timor-Leste in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to Mr. José Ramos-Horta, Senior Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Timor-Leste.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. RamosHorta (Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council
table; the representatives of the other
aforementioned countries took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Council agrees to

2

extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for TimorLeste and Head of Mission of the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Hasegawa to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/251, which contains the end of
mandate report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste.
I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2006/230, containing the text of a letter
dated 10 April 2006 from the Chargé d’affaires ad
interim of the Permanent Mission of Timor-Leste
addressed to the Secretary-General.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for TimorLeste and Head of Mission of the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste.
I now give him the floor.
Mr. Hasegawa: It is my privilege to address the
Security Council as it considers the SecretaryGeneral’s end of mandate report on the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL). I wish at the outset
to acknowledge the presence today of Mr. José RamosHorta, Senior Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Timor-Leste, who has made a
special effort to come to New York in the midst of the
crisis that Timor-Leste is going through.
This Security Council meeting is indeed critically
important for Timor-Leste, as the Council is expected
to decide on how best to respond to the requests for
continued United Nations assistance, as set forth in
three separate letters addressed to the SecretaryGeneral by Timorese leaders. As the situation in
Timor-Leste has undergone a rapid change since the
Secretary-General’s report was issued two weeks ago,
it is also pertinent for Council members to adjust their
perceptions and assumptions. It was very helpful of the

S/PV.5432

Council to decide a week ago to postpone the meeting
to enable Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta to appear
before it to personally provide an insight into the
recent political and security developments and the
future requirements for international assistance to
Timor-Leste.
This morning I wish first to provide the Council
with a brief overview and the context of the most
recent security and political developments; secondly, to
inform it about the arrangements and progress made for
a smooth transition to a sustainable development
assistance framework; and finally, to set out the
rationale for establishing an integrated office after
UNOTIL completes its mandate in order to meet the
electoral security and political requirements identified
by the Timorese leaders.
I would like to start with a brief account of the
latest security and political developments in TimorLeste relating to the dismissal since mid-March of 594
soldiers — more than one third of the armed forces —
from the Timorese defence force (F-FDTL). The
dismissed soldiers staged a demonstration demanding
that an independent commission be established to
address the issue of discrimination and to seek a fair
investigation into their grievances. The 594 former
members of the F-FDTL remained peaceful throughout
the duration of the demonstrations, over four days.
However, on Friday last week, a mob of “non-594”
youths and some political elements broke off from the
camping group and attacked the Government office
building. As the Policia National de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) force was not able to deal with the situation
and retreated, the Government decided to deploy the
military to restore law and order.
During the riots, Government offices were
damaged and numerous properties — including cars,
shops and houses — were destroyed. According to the
Government’s estimate, 45 houses were totally
destroyed and 116 were damaged. While the physical
damage caused to properties was minuscule in
comparison with the destruction that took place in
1999, the psychological impact on the people proved to
be immense. As many as 14,000 became internally
displaced persons as they sought refuge in churches
and other public buildings at various locations
throughout Dili. Thousands of people have also started
to move out of the capital city, Dili, and into the
surrounding mountains and outer districts. That has
also had an impact on UNOTIL itself. More than 1,000

people — families of local staff members — have
come to take refuge at the UNOTIL headquarters
compound.
According to a UNOTIL estimate, five persons
have been killed and at least 60 injured by firearms,
stone throwing or stabbing. However, there have also
been repeated assertions by the leader of the 594 group
that the number of deaths caused by the deployment of
the F-FDTL on 28 and 29 April was far larger than
officially announced. While the UNOTIL Human
Rights Unit and police advisers have visited the sites
and checked with local residents, they have not found
any credible evidence to date that supports those
allegations.
UNOTIL human rights officers will continue to
monitor the human rights situation. Yet I agree with the
President on the need, as expressed in his letter of 2
April to the Secretary-General (S/2006/230, annex), to
address
grievances
through
the
independent
commission and to strengthen the institutional
foundations of the Ministry of Defence and the
F-FDTL and their capacity to manage their human
resources development. For that reason, the United
Nations should respond to the President’s request and
provide civilian advisers to assist in the drafting and
implementation of the organic law and in setting up
management mechanisms for the Ministry of Defence
and the F-FDTL.
Let me now turn to the implementation of
UNOTIL’s capacity-building programme for State
institutions, mandated in resolution 1599 (2005). The
programme has been largely successful. The transition
to a sustainable development assistance framework has
been completed in almost all areas. I am pleased to
report that, out of the 45 positions that the Security
Council established a year ago, the Government and
other State institutions have identified bilateral and
multilateral development partners to take over all but
one of 40 positions and Timorese nationals have
acquired sufficient expertise to take over the remaining
five. Even in the most challenging justice sector,
international legal advisers have been successful in
providing cross-ministerial legal training for 32
national legal officers, including 11 judges, nine
prosecutors and seven public defence lawyers, who are
now fit to practice in their respective positions.
For the development of the PNTL, UNOTIL
police training advisers have completed a series of

3

S/PV.5432

training programmes and have assisted in developing
19 operational and training manuals on the conduct of
community police and specialized police forces. While
a great deal of progress has been made in enhancing
the professionalism of the Timorese police officers,
there is still the need, as shown by the 28 April
incident, for further intensive training so that they can
acquire the required levels of professionalism and
competency. Furthermore, there is a need to strengthen
the PNTL’s Professional Ethics Office and other human
rights mechanisms that will serve to curb the potential
for the abuse of power. I call upon the international
community to provide further assistance for that
purpose.
Our military training advisers, together with
United Nations police training advisers, have also
worked successfully towards the transfer of individual
border management skills to the Border Patrol Unit —
the UPF (Unidade de Patrulhamento de Fronteira), as it
is called officially. However, the UPF will continue to
struggle with the task of managing a 172-kilometrelong border with the insufficient number of only 296
officers having rudimentary equipment and limited
experience and formal education. The UPF officers are
expected to face challenges during the 2007 electoral
period and would benefit from additional international
assistance to prevent tensions and conflicts arising
along the border during that crucial period.
On the issue of human rights, I wish to commend
the Government of Timor-Leste for several important
accomplishments. The Office of the Provedor for
Human Rights and Justice, an independent national
institution entrusted with the legal mandate to monitor
and investigate human rights violations, opened its
doors to the public on 20 March this year. Another
major achievement is the ratification of all seven
human rights treaties by the Government, which is now
in the process of completing reports under two of those
Conventions. These are clear signs that this newly
independent democracy is committed to fulfilling its
human rights obligations at both the national and
international levels.
Allow me now to present the rationale for
establishing a small integrated office after the
completion of UNOTIL’s mandate. It is my view that
such a United Nations presence would be of the utmost
importance in assisting and supporting Timor-Leste in
maintaining peace and stability, which constitute the

4

enabling environment essential for the conduct of free
and fair national elections in 2007.
In the preparations for the 2007 parliamentary
and presidential elections, the Government has moved
swiftly, with the assistance of international advisers,
towards finalizing the draft electoral laws for
submission to the Parliament. As the time left for the
first post-independence national elections grows short,
additional support should be provided in a systematic
manner to all State institutions involved in the electoral
process, including the Secretariat for the Technical
Administration of the Elections, the independent
National Electoral Commission (CNE), the Court of
Appeal and other organs. In order to ensure a credible
process, the CNE in particular needs adequate
resources — both human and material — for
monitoring and voter education throughout the 13
districts. The transparency of the electoral process will
directly affect the legitimacy of the outcome of the
elections and the prospects for the development of a
healthy multiparty democratic system in Timor-Leste.
In aspiring to free and fair elections, I wish to
emphasize that the continued presence of the United
Nations police will be essential to ensure that law and
order and respect for human rights are maintained
before and during the electoral campaign period. The
impartiality of the Timorese police cannot be
guaranteed in a tense political electoral environment.
United Nations police training and advisory personnel
will be required to train the Timorese police on
electoral policing procedures and practices, including
security responsibilities during and immediately
following the elections, and to assist in the monitoring
of and the reporting on the conduct of elections and in
the
development
and
implementation
of
a
comprehensive election security plan, thereby
forestalling the development of volatile and possibly
violent situations. The Secretary-General proposed a
phased deployment with 25 United Nations police —
15 trainers and 10 advisers — during the initial period,
subject to changes as the electoral campaigns intensify.
The maladies afflicting the F-FDTL internally,
which are mirrored by the tragic events last week,
indicate an acute need to develop the F-FDTL
managerial capacity. Given the latest developments, the
Secretary-General’s recommendation for 10 military
officers is particularly relevant. They could support the
Ministry of Defence and the F-FDTL in the
implementation of policies, rules and regulations,

S/PV.5432

instructions, procedures and principles governing all
areas of defence and military services, such as
personnel administration, personnel services, training
and doctrinal development, operations, logistic
systems,
combat
arms,
communications
and
engineering. Those military officers would be needed
in addition to the three civilian advisers who will assist
the Ministry of Defence in the development of organic
law and other statutory instruments governing military
services. Additionally, the military officers could
advise the UPF, the border patrol unit, in management
of the border security operations.
With the proposed four human rights officers and
the two human rights advisers under the civilian
advisory group, the Human Rights Support Section will
be engaged in activities to promote respect for human
rights within State institutions and civil society,
through capacity-building, advice and training, before,
during and after the elections. The provision of an
adequate number of human rights officers and advisers
should be considered as an absolute necessity,
particularly during the period leading up to the 2007
elections.
Lastly, the Secretary-General recommends the
retention of a small Civilian Advisory Section. While
the main focus of the integrated office will be electoral
assistance, the new office is expected to play a more
active role in interacting with the Timorese authorities,
including on the issue of a reliable justice system and
respect for human rights. To this end, it is essential that
the international community continue to foster the
genuine national commitment to justice and human
rights that exists in the Government, in civil society
and among the Timorese people. The 10 civilian
advisory support positions include those to support the
Ministry of Defence, as alluded to earlier, three public
prosecutors to assist in the coordination of the
prosecution services, one legal adviser to the Prime
Minister and the Chief Justice of the Court of Appeal,
and two human rights advisers, just mentioned, at the
Office of the Provedor for Human Rights and Justice
and at the National Parliament.
In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that, while the
leaders and the people of Timor-Leste have made
significant achievements over the past five years in
consolidating peace and democracy, State institutions
are increasingly challenged to address the grievances
of various groups and the rising expectations of the
people, as well as the potential risks associated with

the conduct of the first post-independence presidential
and parliamentary elections. The latest developments
have reminded us that not only is democracy in TimorLeste still fragile, but also that the internal security
situation is easily assailable.
As Einstein once said “the significant problems
we face cannot be solved at the same level of thinking
we were at when we created them”. With regard to
Timor-Leste, the country that was given birth by the
United Nations in 1999, what is required of us now is a
change in our perceptions, assumptions, or the lens
through which we view this country in crisis. The
leaders and the people are calling for our assistance to
help them solve the problems that we did not intend to
create when the United Nations helped restore their
independence in 2002.
As I close this presentation, I wish to express my
appreciation for the trust and confidence that the
leaders and the people have shown in the United
Nations. We have been learning from the Timorese
people as much as they are learning from us. Finally, I
wish to express my sincere appreciation to all the
civilian police and military staff of UNOTIL, who have
worked so hard in discharging their mandate. They are
now set to return to their home countries, leaving
behind a legacy of dedication, commitment and passion
for peace, stability and the development of TimorLeste.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
invite the Senior Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste, Mr. José
Ramos-Horta, to make a statement.
Mr. Ramos-Horta (Timor-Leste): I am here
again before the Council to argue for a modest yet
robust United Nations presence in Timor-Leste from
May 2006 to May 2007. I am doing so against the
background of the most recent developments in my
country.
I will be candid in offering a sober analysis of the
problems we are facing, the risks ahead, and the
possibilities of continuing progress in consolidating
our still fragile democracy.
In September 1999, those serving in this Council,
acting swiftly on the advice of our esteemed SecretaryGeneral, ended the violence in Timor-Leste that
followed the United Nations-sponsored referendum of

5

S/PV.5432

30 August 1999. That was one of the United Nations
finest moments.
The Council and others in the United Nations
family responded to the calls of our people and of
millions around the world and took swift action. Within
days of the Council’s historic decision to authorize the
International Force, East Timor (INTERFET),
Australian Hercules planes began to roar over the
mountains of the rugged island, and hundreds of brave
men and women in uniform disembarked.
While the Council was not able to prevent a
thorough destruction of the country, it did prevent a
greater human tragedy. Its decisive action saved many
thousands of lives. The United Nations humanitarian
agencies, coordinated by the late Sérgio Vieira de
Mello, also acted swiftly and a much-feared
humanitarian disaster did not materialize.
Timor-Leste remains one of the United Nations
finest success stories. With Timor-Leste in 1999, the
Organization entered a new and unexplored experiment
in nation-building. The Report of the Panel on United
Nations Peace Operations — the Brahimi report —
(S/2000/809) and the Secretary-General’s High-level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change eloquently
elaborated on the complexities of post-conflict periods
and nation-building and made convincing arguments
that for peace to be durable the international
community must stay resolutely engaged.
While we must all be cognizant of the political
and financial constraints that militate against ideal
solutions, I nevertheless believe that a long-term plan
and commitment are most effective in securing peace,
and are much less costly. Our experience shows that
short-term missions are inefficient and costly.
We are grateful that, following the deployment of
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) and the restoration of Timor-Leste’s
independence, in 2002, the members of the Council
authorized successive missions, namely, the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
and the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste
(UNOTIL). Those consolidation missions were crucial
in ensuring the functioning of vital State institutions
and the enhancement of peace.
On separate occasions earlier this year, my
President, the Prime Minister and I have requested the
Secretary-General to establish a special political office

6

comprising four main components: an electoral
assistance component, United Nations police advisers,
military liaison officers and civilian advisers. The
Secretary-General responded positively to our request
and recommended the establishment of a small
integrated United Nations office for a period of 12
months, starting on 21 May this year. I very much hope
that the members of this body will give due
consideration to the request we have placed before
them.
I will be candid with the members of the Council.
The incidents in Dili last week were a wake-up call to
us, the East Timorese leadership, as well as to the
international community, that we must not take for
granted the apparent tranquillity in the country and that
urgent preventive measures must be taken in a resolute
manner to prevent a relapse into the past of violence
and instability.
I would now like to share my perception of the
recent political and security developments in TimorLeste and of the remaining requirements for the
continued presence and support of the United Nations
for one year, leading to the first presidential and
parliamentary elections since the restoration of
independence, five years ago.
As UNOTIL’s mandate draws to a close, TimorLeste is preparing for the holding of the first postindependence national elections. The Government of
Timor-Leste and its people are determined, at this
crucial juncture in our country’s history, to ensure that
the presidential and parliamentary elections are held in
a free, fair and credible manner. However, recent
developments indicate that threats remain to our fragile
peace and stability. Let me provide the Council with
more detailed background of recent political and
security developments.
On 8 February, around 300 members of the armed
forces demonstrated in front of the President’s office,
demanding a response to their petition of 15 January
concerning alleged discrimination in promotions and
ill-treatment. On 9 February, those soldiers agreed to
return to their military base. However, although a
commission of inquiry had been established, no
progress was made towards resolving the issue.
In mid-March, the situation culminated in the
mass dismissal of 591 soldiers, representing 40 per
cent of the armed forces. On 12 April, President
Xanana Gusmão held separate meetings with Prime

S/PV.5432

Minister Alkatiri and Brigadier Taur Matan Ruak. It
was agreed to end the impasse by reinstating the
salaries of the, now, 594 soldiers until their final status
was decided, conducting a formal legal process on a
case-by-case basis, not discriminating against those
who were formally discharged in the competition for
jobs — for instance, if they were to apply to join the
national police force — and by providing Government
assistance in the search for gainful employment.
On 24 April, members of the group of soldiers,
along with members of their families and sympathizers,
began their planned five-day march and demonstration
from Tasi Tolu, west of Dili, to the cultural centre of
Uma Fukun. About 1,000 to 2,000 persons participated
in the demonstration on the first day.
On 25 April, the group continued to hold
demonstrations, from around 8 a.m. onwards, at which
an estimated 1,000 demonstrators participated. Unlike
the first day, the tone of the protesters became more
critical towards the Government and they requested a
political solution to the demand of the 594 dismissed
soldiers.
On 26 April, speeches continued, with a more
anti-Government content, including by a member of
the Timor-Leste armed forces (F-FDTL) in full
uniform, who provocatively warned that if the problem
were not resolved there would be bloodshed and that
elected leaders should be removed if they could not
resolve such issues. On the same day, the group’s
leader, Lieutenant Salsinha, accepted the Government
proposal that I personally had conveyed to him.
However, he also reiterated that the position of the
group was that there should be resolution of their
demands, otherwise they would call for a general
strike.
On 27 April, Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri, with
President Xanana Gusmão at his side, announced the
establishment of an investigation commission to look
into the allegations contained in the petition of the
former
F-FDTL
members.
The
investigation
commission was due to commence its work on
Tuesday, 2 May. We assured the protesters that it
would complete its mandate within 90 days. Prime
Minister Mari Alkatiri subsequently pledged to
Mr. Salsinha and his group that the Commission would
complete the investigation and present its conclusions
and recommendations much earlier, within one month.

The Government has appointed Senior Minister
and Minister of State Administration Ms. Ana Pessoa
and Vice-Minister for the Interior Alcino Barris as its
representatives to serve in the investigation
commission. The presidency of the Republic, the
National Parliament and the judiciary have all
nominated their respective representatives. The
Bishops of Dili and Baucau and the NGO Forum have
nominated advisers to the commission. I was informed
late last night, New York time, by Prime Minister
Alkatiri that the commission of investigation would
began its work at once.
In the course of several days prior to 28 April, I
personally held conversations with the leader of the exF-FDTL members, Mr. Gastão Salsinha. He stated to
me that his group would accept the conclusions and
recommendations of the commission. Subsequently, the
senior leadership of the defence forces also stated that
they would abide by the commission’s conclusions and
recommendations.
Following the announcement of the establishment
of the commission, the group’s demonstration
continued, yet with no more than 800 protestors
present and no more than 200 of the ex-F-FDTL
soldiers present. The main speaker, Osório Leki —
who is not a member of the group but a sympathetic
relative, as well as the Secretary General of the PDRT
party — told the demonstrators that the objective of the
demonstration was not to establish a commission but to
find an immediate solution to the issues. He rejected
the proposal, arguing that 90 days were too long to
wait for a resolution.
Here, I would like to clarify for members of the
Council that I personally spent many hours — in fact,
several days — in dialogue with the leaders of the
military group. While they seemed to show willingness
and flexibility to find a peaceful solution to the
problem with the Government, I also conveyed to the
military group my perception and feeling that they had
seemed to have lost control of the demonstrations.
Being politically inexperienced and having never
organized a political demonstration, the military
allowed a particular group — Coliman 2000 — to
hijack their demonstration and their agenda. That was
when the ex-military lost control and that group, which
is essentially a mob of hooligans that were known way
back in the time of UNTAET in 1999 and 2000, took
control of the demonstration.

7

S/PV.5432

From then on it was next to impossible, short of
swift police intervention, to engage in further dialogue
with the military, because the military itself was no
longer able to regain leadership of the demonstration.
That was the reality in the days leading to the outbreak
of violence.
No major damage was done in the ensuing
violence that took place in the afternoon of 28 April.
Subsequently, the mob broke into smaller groups and
went in different directions, triggering rioting, fighting
and arson in the outskirts of the city, but it was the
poor neighbourhood of Tasitolu and the Taibessi
market that bore the brunt of the acts of vandalism.
Most elements of the ex-military did not join in
the violence and actually dispersed to various
destinations. By Friday evening, five persons were
reported killed and more than 30 injured, including
four policemen, one of whom critically. Forty-five
shacks were destroyed and 116 partially destroyed, all
belonging to the poorest people living in the suburbs.
No foreign national, embassy, United Nations property
or major business was attacked, even though all such
businesses and some embassies, including the
Australian embassy, are on the main road used by the
demonstrators as they left the city towards the west.
On the first day of the intervention by the defence
force — which was called in to intervene by the Prime
Minister in view of the failure of the police to
intervene — 100 people were detained. Having
detained them, the F-FDTL handed them over to the
police. At no time did the F-FDTL keep any individual
in detention. In the absence of any evidence of their
involvement in the riots, all 100 detainees were ordered
to be released by the Dili district court, which reviewed
their cases on Sunday, 30 April. All 100 were released,
including several former F-FDTL elements who were
also in detention.
There have been unsubstantiated allegations and
rumours that many more people were killed by the FFDTL. Figures mentioned in those rumours and
allegations vary from 20 to 60. However, I have
personally made every effort to find out if there is any
basis to such allegations. Upon hearing the first
rumours about the number of people killed beyond
what had been established by the police, I personally
spoke at length with the F-FDTL commander,
Brigadier-General Taur Matan Ruak, Interior Minister
Rogerio Lobato and Police Commissioner Paulo

8

Martins. All three emphatically denied the allegations.
I also urged General Taur Matan Ruak to immediately
visit the President, which he did at his private
residence at about 1.00 a.m. on 30 April. The General
promptly went to see the President as I had asked him
to do and the two met for two hours, during which the
General was able to explain to the President the
absurdity and the malicious nature of those rumours.
In response to the allegations that many more
than five individuals had been killed during the 28
April incidents, the Government established a
commission for the verification of data on the dead and
wounded. In addition, as Special Representative
Hasegawa has just briefed the members of the Council,
the UNOTIL Human Rights Unit, the Ombudsman and
the National Red Cross were all able to carry out
immediate investigations into the allegations and have
found no evidence.
However, I can state here that, if all the
assurances given by my Government and the initiatives
it has taken, such as the establishment of a commission
to look into the allegations, as well as other separate
investigations referred to above, are not sufficient, as
Minister for Foreign Affairs I am issuing an invitation
to appropriate United Nations rapporteurs — possibly
the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions — to visit the country and carry
out a thorough investigation into those and other
allegations.
The situation has since calmed down. However,
rumours and panic have caused an exodus from Dili to
the districts. An estimated 10,000 to 15,000 Dili
residents have left Dili for the rural areas. Dili has at
least 180,000 people; at least 5,000 more are sheltered
in churches, the UNOTIL compound, schools and so
on. The central Government in Dili and the district
authorities have been doing their best to deliver basic
services to the people.
A positive development yesterday, 4 May, was
that President Xanana Gusmão spoke on the phone
with Lieutenant Salsinha, who reiterated that his group
would abide by the commission’s findings and
recommendations. Lieutenant Salsinha has also told the
President that he is seeking assurances about his safety
and is ready do return to Dili. According to Prime
Minister Alkatiri, Lieutenant Salsinha’s safety is
assured. Prime Minister Alkatiri told me last night that

S/PV.5432

many former F-FDTL soldiers have made contact with
the authorities in their respective districts.
The Government has established another
commission to look into the losses incurred by
individuals and to propose ways to assist them.
As I speak today, Dili is on edge. Fear is palpable
among a people traumatized by past violence. There
are concerns about the ability of the PNTL to maintain
law and order. There is concern about cohesion within
the remaining F-FDTL forces. However, I wish to
assure the Council that the same leadership that guided
our people through the past 30 years is united and
determined to overcome this new challenge.
President Xanana Gusmão and Prime Minister
Alkatiri have held regular consultations and there have
been frequent consultations between the two leaders
with the leadership of the defence and police forces.
The Government is in full control of the situation and
public administration continues to function, though at a
much slower pace, as many civil servants have left
town. The F-FDTL has now completely returned to the
barracks. The PNTL is charge of law and order.
I have personally been in regular touch with the
church hierarchy and I can inform the Council that next
week, upon my return, a meeting will be held involving
the two bishops, President Xanana Gusmão, the Prime
Minister and the other Government ministers. The
meeting will serve to take stock of the situation in the
country and look at ways for the State and the church
to enhance relations and cooperate to ensure peace and
stability.
Notwithstanding
the
recent
security
developments, the Government is moving swiftly to
prepare for the upcoming elections. The draft electoral
laws on the presidential and parliamentary elections
were submitted to the Council of Ministers, which
approved them on 26 April. The draft laws will now be
sent to the national Parliament for a broad public
debate, and we expect the law to be approved by the
national Parliament after its recess in September.
Having consulted internally and having taken due
consideration of concerns raised by civil society, the
church and other stakeholders, we have called upon the
international community to assist us in that endeavour.
I wish now to outline the four most pertinent
reasons for establishing an integrated office following
the completion of the current UNOTIL mandate.

First, on the political environment, I wish to
reiterate that the country is still in a consolidation
phase and that democracy and peace remain fragile. As
mentioned earlier, representatives from civil society
organizations, the church and opposition political
parties with whom I have consulted have indicated
their concerns that the law enforcement agency, the
PNTL, has not reached the level of maturity or attained
the professionalism to fully resist political party
influences. The transparency of the electoral process
will directly affect the legitimacy of the outcome of the
elections and the prospects for the development of a
healthy, multiparty democratic system in Timor-Leste.
As concerns the timing of the elections and with
the aim of precluding any unnecessary delays, the
President and the Government have agreed to hold both
the parliamentary and the presidential elections before
or by May 2007 in order to swear in the new
parliament and president by 20 May 2007.
While the Technical Secretariat for the
Administration of Elections will take the lead in
organizing and administering the elections, including
logistics and operational activities, the National
Electoral Commission will supervise electoral
preparatory activities, voter education and electoral
campaigns.
The United Nations electoral needs assessment
mission that visited Timor-Leste in November last year
has provided valuable guidance to the Government in
its discussions on the electoral laws and procedures.
We greatly acknowledge the important role that the
National Electoral Commission will play in monitoring
the electoral process and in providing voter education
throughout the 13 districts. To that end, the
Commission will have to be provided with sufficient
financial and human resources, which naturally calls
for an independent source such as the United Nations
in order to ensure impartiality, transparency and
fairness.
Secondly, I wish briefly to elaborate on the
challenge of upholding internal stability, the rule of
law and respect for human rights before, during and
after the elections. While the national police force has
been trained by United Nations police and bilateral
partners and has the basic know-how to do routine
policing, recent events demonstrated the inability of
the PNTL to act decisively and swiftly in crisis
situations. Its impartiality in a tense political

9

S/PV.5432

environment may not always be guaranteed,
particularly in dealing with the first nationwide
elections.

from time to time because of misunderstandings. Such
a presence can provide impartial feedback and advice
so as to reduce the possibility of conflict.

The presence of United Nations police will be
vital to advise and support the national police in
planning and carrying out their electorally related
security responsibilities, including through training and
assistance in the development and implementation of a
comprehensive election security plan aimed at
forestalling the development of volatile and possibly
violent situations.

Fourthly, there remains an acute need for
continued international assistance to the justice sector.
While the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) has successfully developed a justice support
programme, the funds made available are not sufficient
to provide the support needed for the Office of the
Prosecutor-General. Also, a significant number of
human rights officers are needed to support the Office
of the Ombudsman and the national Parliament to
ensure that human rights considerations are fully
respected in preparation for the national elections.

The main focus of the integrated office will be
electoral assistance. However, other support elements
will be of equal importance in ensuring a free and fair
electoral process, hence our request for continued
civilian advisory and human rights support. While
United Nations agencies and bilateral partners have
agreed to take over most of the civilian advisory posts,
we feel that there is a need to strengthen the
institutional foundations of the Ministry of Defence
and the F-FDTL through the drafting and
implementation of the organic law and other
instruments for effective management. As the President
stated in his letter of 2 April, Timor-Leste requires
advisers who can lay the legal and institutional
foundations of the security agencies.
Thirdly, the creation of a secure environment
prior to, during and after the elections is of equal
importance in the border region. That would require
the engagement of impartial United Nations military
liaison officers to monitor and advise on the security
situation, and to liaise with our own Border Patrol Unit
and the Indonesian military as required. Possible
security risks at the border with Indonesia prior to and
during the elections would certainly be mitigated
through an impartial United Nations presence and
professional advice on effective border management.
A small number of military liaison officers would
be able to provide advice and assistance to the
Timorese Government, particularly the PNTL, in
liaising with our own Border Patrol Unit and the
Indonesian military in the planning and conduct of
proper border security operations and in monitoring the
border security situation. Their presence will certainly
promote a secure and peaceful environment for the
conduct of elections. In the past, a United Nations
presence on an international border has also proved to
be an effective way of easing the tensions that arise

10

As I stated in my letter of 2 March to SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan, the type of assistance needed to
ensure an environment that is conducive to the
successful conduct of elections in Timor-Leste includes
“support and facilitation, as appropriate, in key
areas relevant to our political consolidation,
including in the areas of reconciliation and
human rights.”
On the issue of establishing a reliable justice
system and fostering respect for human rights, it is
crucial that the international community remain
committed to fostering the genuine commitment to
justice and human rights that exists in the Government,
in civil society and among the Timorese people.
In the light of the political and security situation
and the latest developments, and in response to our
modest request, the Secretary-General proposed the
establishment of an integrated office, as outlined in his
recent report.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the fact that the
proposal contained in the Secretary-General’s report
represents the bare minimum that Timor-Leste
requires. In the light of the latest developments, the
Prime Minister, the President and I consider it
desirable to have once again a robust international
police force during the period leading to the national
elections. Such a force, of at least a company strength,
with appropriate logistical means, is required given the
volatility and fragility of the situation. As it was in
1999, the decision is in the hands of the Security
Council — a decision that will decisively influence the
course of events in my country, for good or for ill.

S/PV.5432

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Senior Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Timor-Leste for his statement.
Mr. Apparicio da Silva (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): Mr. President, on behalf of the Argentine
delegation, I should like sincerely to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May. We would like also to
congratulate the Chinese delegation for the excellent
manner in which it guided the Security Council’s work
during the month of April.
Mr. President, allow me to begin by
congratulating you for having taken the initiative to
hold an open meeting on the situation in Timor-Leste.
Argentina is particularly grateful for the detailed
presentation on the current situation in Timor-Leste
given by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa.
The Argentine delegation also wishes to
acknowledge the presence of the Senior Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Mr. José
Ramos-Horta, at this meeting, which demonstrates the
Timorese Government’s acknowledgement of the
invaluable support provided by the Council to TimorLeste in recent years. We wish to reiterate Mr. RamosHorta’s message to the effect that the Council should
not forget the Timorese people during the historic
times they are living through today. Argentina, through
Mr. Ramos-Horta, conveys its recognition to the brave
and steadfast people of Timor-Leste.
Minister Ramos-Horta’s presentation provided us
with information that will help the Council better to
understand the current situation in Timor-Leste and
enhance its decision-making process with respect to the
future of the United Nations presence in the country.
The mandate of the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) is nearing its end, and the
report of the Special Representative contains a clear
message: peace and democracy have not yet been
consolidated in Timor-Leste, and, under those
circumstances, it is fundamental to secure a continued
United Nations presence in the country through the
establishment of an integrated office.
The elections to be held in 2007 will represent a
new phase for Timor-Leste. They will be the first
elections to be held after the country gained its
independence
and
will
require
broad-based

international support. We wish to underline the
importance of the elections being held before 20 May
2007. We must not forget that disturbances might occur
that could negatively affect the peacebuilding process
and the construction of a democratic State in TimorLeste. Given these circumstances, it is indispensable
that we support the country in addressing possible
attempts at destabilization during the election period.
We must recognize that security remains
precarious in Timor-Leste. The threat posed by militias
has not yet been totally eliminated. The unrest within
the armed forces and recent violent protests indicate
that the progress achieved to date, which has been
considerable, has not resolved the country’s
difficulties.
The establishment of the security sector requires
further support by the United Nations, supplementing
the major bilateral projects under way. In that respect,
we would like to ask Minister Ramos-Horta and Mr.
Hasegawa to provide us with further information on the
root causes of the recent incidents in Dili.
Regarding the border with West Timor, we hope
that Timor-Leste and Indonesia can soon achieve a
border management agreement. We welcome the good
relations between the two countries in recent years,
which prove that it will not be difficult to resolve
outstanding issues. We believe that the continued
presence of United Nations liaison officers is
important, especially considering that border
demarcation is not complete and that there is no formal
agreement on border management. In that context, it is
also necessary to better train the Timor-Leste Border
Patrol Unit. We are sure that a United Nations mission
including a police adviser component will contribute to
strengthening Timorese police institutions.
Another challenge that is no less important to
building peace and democracy in Timor-Leste relates
to strengthening the legal system. As the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2006/251) indicates, there is still
a need to strengthen the institutions in this field. In
Timor-Leste, the police and the legal system are at a
nascent stage and complementary, and they must
continue receiving United Nations support. The
creation of effective institutions and mechanisms
geared towards the promotion and protection of human
rights is something else to which Argentine attaches
particular importance. My country looks forward to the
report on justice and reconciliation that the Secretary-

11

S/PV.5432

General is preparing in line with paragraph 9 of
resolution 1599 (2005). We reiterate our view that
reconciliation must not be attained at the cost of
justice.
A third group of challenges is the fight against
poverty and the promotion of development. Here, the
support of the international community will continue to
be essential. Specifically, it will be fundamental to
promote economic growth in Timor-Leste at levels
making it possible to effectively fight poverty and
ensure better distribution of the benefits of
development between the country’s urban and rural
populations.
With scarce resources, Timor-Leste has in recent
years achieved impressive progress in the fields of
education and health. But 41 per cent of the population
still lives below the poverty line. Here, we welcome
the fact that the Timor Government’s budget will grow
75.5 per cent in the fiscal year 2006-2007 and that
nearly all public expenditure will be allocated to
infrastructure projects, such as the construction of
schools, health centres and roads.
Argentina recognizes the considerable progress
that Timor-Leste has made since the previous report of
the Secretary-General. The Timorese people continue
on their path towards peace and democracy. However,
the challenges to such process are still immense, and
we therefore believe that the Security Council should
support the establishment of a new United Nations
mission in Timor-Leste by adopting a resolution on the
basis of the report before it.
The new United Nations presence should include
elements such as those requested by the Timorese
Government in several communications to the
Secretary General: electoral assistance, civilian
advisers, police training and liaison officers for the
borders and to assist in security matters. Also to be
considered are elements related to capacity-building
and national mechanisms for the promotion and
protection of human rights as well as the promotion of
justice and reconciliation in Timor-Leste. It could also
provide support for development initiatives and
coordinate the various bilateral cooperation projects.
In that context, we support the recommendations
of the Secretary-General on the creation of an
integrated United Nations office. We believe that with
35 police and civilian advisers — UNOTIL has 75 —
and 10 liaison officers, of which there are currently 15

12

in the framework of UNOTIL, such an office could
meet at least the minimum needs indicated by the
Timor authorities and pointed out by Mr. Hasegawa.
To conclude, we believe that, one year away from
the 2007 elections and as a culmination of the Security
Council’s support and involvement over the years, a
new United Nations mission would focus international
attention on peacebuilding in Timor-Leste, on building
democracy and on promoting sustainable development.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French): I
am pleased to welcome Mr. Ramos-Horta to the
Council Chamber. We listened attentively to his
statement, and we thank him for it. Our thanks go also
to Mr. Hasegawa for his most interesting and thorough
briefing.
I wish at the outset to convey my condolences to
Mr. Ramos-Horta and to the Timorese people in the
wake of the recent rioting, which claimed five lives.
Such tragic events show that, notwithstanding the
success of the democratic transition in Timor-Leste, the
situation remains fragile. It is regrettable that it took
such painful circumstances to make us realize that Mr.
Ramos-Horta, Mr. Alkatiri and Mr. Gusmão have been
right to underscore the fragility of the security situation
in their country and, in recent letters to the SecretaryGeneral, to request that a United Nations political
mission be maintained.
The Permanent Representative of Austria will
soon make a statement on behalf of the presidency of
the European Union, which I fully endorse. For my
part, I wish to make a number of comments.
I note first of all that, in spite of what I have just
said, the situation in Timor-Leste appears to be
generally stable, and that the successive United
Nations missions seem to have been an outstanding
success for the Organization. We welcome the
approach of a gradual United Nations drawdown,
which made possible a smooth transition without any
break in continuity. That approach, which is consistent
with the international consensus on the peacebuilding
phase, needs to continue. At the same time, the gains
need to be preserved.
Uncertainties remain with respect to the future,
including in the following areas: preparations for the
2007 elections; demonstrations of frustration, including
within the armed forces; the fight against impunity;
and border control issues.

S/PV.5432

Thus, it is clear that international support
continues to be necessary, as shown by the recent
events to which I have referred. We cannot ignore the
request by the Timorese authorities for continuation of
this support.
We have carefully studied the Secretary-General’s
proposals on maintaining a United Nations presence in
Timor-Leste. We believe that those proposals are
consistent with the requests made by the Timorese
authorities, and we can endorse them. Thus, we favour
the establishment of a follow-on United Nations office
with electoral, political, security and civilian
components and a human rights section. We view that
latter aspect as being of particular importance, in
particular to ensure follow-up of issues related to
reconciliation. In that regard, we look forward to the
Secretary-General’s recommendations on solutions in
the areas of justice and reconciliation; we hope that the
new United Nations office will be able, if necessary, to
provide follow-up on such questions.
Finally, I believe it important to stress that, in this
peacebuilding phase, the United Nations should not act
alone. First of all, the Timorese authorities must
maintain their commitment, without which there can be
no peacebuilding. The many bilateral, regional and
multilateral partners — I am thinking in particular of
the international financial institutions — must
strengthen their support so as to facilitate a smooth
transition to complete stability.
In conclusion, as UNOTIL prepares to finalize its
withdrawal, we must acknowledge the tremendous
progress that it has made possible since its inception a
year ago. The stabilization process is not yet fully
complete, but it is well under way. It is certainly true
that much remains to be done, and a United Nations
presence will be necessary for some time to come. But
Timor-Leste is clearly another example of United
Nations success in peacebuilding, and I would like that
to be noted.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): Thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this public meeting today on the
situation in Timor-Leste, as the mandate of the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) nears its end.
We are very pleased by the presence in this Chamber of
the Foreign Minister of Timor-Leste, Mr. Ramos-Horta,
and thank him for his detailed briefing. We also
welcome
Mr.
Sukehiro
Hasegawa,
Special

Representative of the Secretary-General, and thank him
for his briefing.
We note with satisfaction that nation-building
efforts continue to make steady progress as TimorLeste moves towards greater self-reliance, with the
Government and the people working together, assisted
in their efforts by the international community. We
recognize that UNOTIL has been a valuable and trusted
partner in those endeavours and has been playing an
important role in providing advice and material
assistance, particularly in the areas of security,
governance and capacity-building. We therefore pay
tribute to Mr. Hasegawa and his team on the ground for
their dedication and leadership in that regard.
We also note with satisfaction the reference in the
Secretary-General’s report to the fact that the tasks of
UNOTIL have been gradually and smoothly transferred
to the Government of Timor-Leste, with the support, in
the process, of bilateral and multilateral donors and
other players in the international community.
We believe that peacebuilding and nationbuilding in Timor-Leste — as, indeed, in any other
country — will be most successful if they are pursued
with a firm belief in and with actual implementation of
the concept of ownership. In our view, that is being
actively, and generally successfully, pursued in TimorLeste. The complementary assistance efforts being
made by bilateral and multilateral donors, including
support from the United Nations, have helped promote
ownership by the people of Timor-Leste of the nationbuilding process, and that should continue to
consolidate the gains achieved so far. We are
determined to do all that is necessary to make TimorLeste a proud success story of United Nations
engagement in peacebuilding.
Although Timor-Leste has made encouraging,
steady progress towards self-reliance, a certain degree
of fragility remains in society, as the recent violent
incidents in the area of Dili have clearly shown. Those
incidents have occurred just as the consolidation of
peace in Timor-Leste is about to take root and as the
transfer of tasks from UNOTIL accelerates. We must
view that as a matter of serious concern. Japan is of the
view that all the efforts over the past six years of
international assistance to and cooperation in TimorLeste, and the tangible gains that those efforts have
produced, must not be wasted in the final stages of
international engagement. To that end, as the mandate

13

S/PV.5432

of UNOTIL is about to expire, the Council needs to
take speedy action — action that can adequately and
appropriately address the requirements on the ground
in Timor-Leste at this critical juncture.
The presidential and parliamentary elections
planned for 2007 will be the first general elections
since independence, and are thus critically important
for the further consolidation of democracy in the
country. That is why we believe that appropriate
support is needed from the United Nations and the
international community, with a view to ensuring that
the elections will be free and fair and conducted in a
safe and secure environment. Japan understands and in
principle
supports
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendation to establish an integrated United
Nations office that has election assistance as its central
function. The establishment of a special political
mission that focuses on electoral assistance should
fully respect the ownership of the Government of
Timor-Leste.
In conclusion, Japan stands ready to work with
other members of the Council to forge a consensus
towards the best possible approach with a view to the
creation of a follow-on United Nations office, as
proposed by the Secretary-General, paying due
attention to the opinions of key countries that have
been deeply involved in this issue in the region and
beyond and of other regional actors.
I would also like to state that, as a major donor
country, Japan will continue to be actively involved in
bilateral development cooperation with Timor-Leste,
including for the preparation of the forthcoming
elections, in the interests of economic and social
development and greater self-reliance and resilience in
Timor-Leste. We urge all Member States to join in
those efforts.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like at the outset to thank Mr. Hasegawa,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste, for his briefing to the Council. I
commend him and the staff of the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) for their efforts
towards consolidating peace and democracy in that
nation, which gained its independence so recently.
Let me also welcome Mr. Ramos-Horta, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste,
who has so graciously joined us today. I would like to

14

thank him for his excellent briefing on the situation in
his country.
The journey taken to date by Timor-Leste
provides excellent proof that the resources and efforts
invested by the United Nations in that country are
beginning to bear fruit. That justifies our confidence in
the efforts of the various United Nations bodies present
in the country, particularly UNOTIL, which has helped
the country to make considerable progress in the areas
of governance, institution-building, capacity-building
and the strengthening of human rights.
We are carefully considering the proposals set out
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2006/251), which
we believe will assist the country in taking the final
step towards peace, understanding, democracy and
prosperity. The first general elections since
independence are expected to take place in 2007, and
Timor-Leste will clearly have great need of United
Nations expertise, acquired over recent years, in
preparing for elections. In addition, the Timorese
police force, which is still a nascent force, does not yet
have sufficient resources or expertise, particularly with
respect to command. Given the forthcoming
presidential
and
parliamentary
elections,
the
secondment of police advisers from the United Nations
to the country and their impartial presence will be a
key factor. From that perspective, we believe that the
Secretary-General’s proposal is very constructive.
In the past we have heard Mr. Gusmão, President
of Timor-Leste, and today we heard Mr. Ramos-Horta,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, speak about the need for
the United Nations to help Timor-Leste prepare for
successful elections. Given the Secretary-General’s
assessments, we believe that establishing an integrated
United Nations office to ensure follow-up would be in
keeping with that effort. We would like the
Government to set the dates for the elections as soon as
possible.
We must also have the support of bilateral and
multilateral donors and must strengthen our
coordination with them in terms of current and future
assistance to Timor-Leste in the area of peacebuilding.
We would like to see the demarcation of the land
border between Timor-Leste and Indonesia completed.
In that connection, we welcome the recent high-level
meeting between the President of Timor-Leste and the
President of Indonesia to consider the report of the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation.

S/PV.5432

In the next phase, we will be able to assess the
United Nations efforts in Timor-Leste. May the
example of Timor-Leste attest to the Organization’s
success.
Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes Mr. José Ramos-Horta, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste, and thanks him for
his comprehensive and frank briefing on the situation
in his country. I also wish to thank Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Timor-Leste, for the important work he has
accomplished as head of the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL). In addition, we welcome the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2006/251), which
contains recommendations and options with regard to
how the United Nations could assist Timor-Leste after
UNOTIL’s mandate expires, on 20 May 2006.
First, Peru wishes to express its support for the
Government of Timor-Leste in the search for ways to
ensure a viable State and a sustainable democracy. I
wish to stress the progress that Timor-Leste has made
in recent years in strengthening democracy, the rule of
law and respect for human rights in demarcating the
land border with Indonesia and in reaching agreement
with Australia on sharing maritime natural resources.
However, despite that progress, there are still few
prospects for the economic viability of Timor-Leste.
Four years after its independence, it remains one of the
least developed countries in the world, with high rates
of poverty and extreme poverty — a country where the
annual per capita income is $370 and declining, half
the population has no potable water, child mortality is
high and life expectancy is only 55 years. That
information is detailed in the 2006 national human
development report published in Dili two months ago
by the Government of Timor-Leste and the United
Nations Development Programme.
With those economic and social indicators, it
comes as no surprise that there is no political stability
in Timor-Leste. That is why we regret the incidents
that occurred last week. This morning, international
news media reported that Dili’s population continues to
fear a repetition of the violence.
For those reasons, Peru believes that Timor-Leste
needs a compact whereby the United Nations, the
friends of Timor-Leste and the international
community would provide resources to ensure the
country’s stability. For such a compact, it is important

that the Government of Timor-Leste prepare a realistic
development plan that would establish a system for
distributing the income that could come from future
petroleum and gas resources in order to fight poverty
through programmes and plans covering areas
including, in particular, the health, education and
agricultural development sectors. The Government
must ensure that wealth is managed in such a way that
the general population is the beneficiary. In that
connection, we welcome the fact that last year, the
Parliament approved the creation of a petroleum fund
as a single account in which all income derived from
petroleum sales is to be deposited — income allocated
for the country’s development. That is major progress,
and we support it.
Before concluding, and in the light of what was
indicated earlier, my delegation wishes to state that it
supports the Secretary-General’s recommendations, in
particular regarding the establishment of a small
integrated United Nations office, for a 12-month period
beginning on 21 May 2006, comprising civilian, police
and military elements. That office would be mandated
to help the Government of Timor-Leste, inter alia,
organize the 2007 presidential and parliamentary
elections, assist the leadership of the national police in
planning for election-related security and continue
promoting the capacity of State and governmental
institutions and of national human rights protection
mechanisms.
We believe those last two elements to be of
particular importance, bearing in mind that although
Timor-Leste has made progress in establishing basic
public administration institutions, the majority of those
institutions lack trained staff. Moreover, strengthening
the capacities of national mechanisms to protect human
rights and to promote justice and reconciliation will be
crucial in the work of implementing the
recommendations of the Commission for Truth — in
particular regarding the acknowledgement of victims
and the denial of impunity to those responsible for
human rights violations. That would enable citizens to
be in a better position to reconcile and integrate into a
democratic and stable society.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the presence at today’s meeting
of Mr. José Ramos-Horta, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Timor-Leste. We listened closely to his very
substantive statement. We also thank Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, Special Representative of the Secretary-

15

S/PV.5432

General for Timor-Leste, for presenting the SecretaryGeneral’s end of mandate report on the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) (S/2006/251) and for
his useful briefing.
Russia welcomes the steady progress made in
Timor-Leste in the area of nation-building. We are
pleased at the continued strengthening of State
institutions, including law enforcement agencies, and
the consolidation of the legislative infrastructure.
At the same time, we must acknowledge that
Timor-Leste’s potential for nationhood is still far from
being sufficiently solid and that the country continues
to need multifaceted international assistance in order to
ensure security, stability and sustainable development.
This was reaffirmed by the recent rioting in Dili, which
unfortunately had tragic consequences. We sincerely
hope that the Timorese authorities will find a
universally acceptable solution to the conflict in the
army in order to prevent a destabilization of the
situation in the country. In that regard, we listened very
closely to Mr. Ramos-Horta’s assessment.
Russia
commends
the
development
of
cooperation between Timor-Leste and Indonesia. We
note the importance of the bilateral Commission for
Truth and Friendship and anticipate that the
Commission will successfully discharge its duties and
that it will contribute to a further strengthening of the
relationship between Indonesia and Timor-Leste,
including by addressing issues related to human rights
violations in Timor-Leste during the years of its fight
for independence.
We welcome the activities of the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste, headed by Mr. Hasegawa. We
note the important role of other United Nations
agencies and the donor community.
Given the ongoing process of the establishment
of Timorese State institutions, including the defence
and security structures, and the need to ensure the
successful
organization
of
presidential
and
parliamentary elections in 2007, and taking into
account the urgent request from the Timorese
leadership to maintain a United Nations presence in
that country, the Russian Federation supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to establish
for 12 months a small follow-on integrated United
Nations office, replacing UNOTIL, within the
parameters proposed by the Secretary-General.

16

Mr. Brencick (United States of America): We
welcome as well the presence of Foreign Minister
Ramos-Horta with us today and appreciate the briefing
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Hasegawa, and his continuing efforts to build a
lasting peace and the basis for sustainable development
in Timor-Leste. We are, like others around this table,
concerned by recent developments in Timor-Leste. We
urge all parties to settle their disagreements by
peaceful dialogue, to protect the lives and property of
all persons in Timor-Leste and to maintain strict
adherence to the Constitution and laws.
In that context, and given the very recent unrest
and violence and lingering fears of perhaps more, and
despite the current calm, we do not believe that the
proposed follow-on plan for a post-UNOTIL special
political mission, however well thought out, is, at this
point, timely. My delegation suggests that the Security
Council consider and approve a simple one month
rollover of the existing mandate of the UNOTIL
mission until 20 June. This one-month extension will
give the situation in East Timor fully enough time to
settle and will allow Council members to get a better
idea of exactly what may be needed in any follow-on
mission and discuss how best to provide it.
Mr. Burian (Slovakia): I too would like to thank
Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa for his comprehensive
briefing. I also would like to welcome His Excellency
Mr. José Ramos-Horta, Foreign Minister of TimorLeste, to the Council and to thank him for his
important contribution to our debate.
Since the representative of Austria will shortly
make a statement on behalf of the European Union, and
since Slovakia fully associates itself with that
statement, I will make only a few additional comments.
We commend the progress Timor-Leste has made
in many areas of State-building with the support of the
United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL). At
the same time, we understand that the Government of
Timor-Leste still faces formidable challenges in its
drive to consolidate peace and democracy in the
country. Those challenges were clearly identified by
the Secretary-General in his report (S/2006/251).
The recent eruption of violence in the capital,
Dili, is a sad reminder of the terrible history and of the
ordeal that the people of Timor-Leste went through in
1999 and a warning that peace and stability in the
country are far from guaranteed if the people of Timor-

S/PV.5432

Leste do not achieve an improvement in their difficult
economic and social situation and if the fragile
democracy is not strengthened. Therefore, we believe
that the United Nations should continue to pay close
attention to Timor-Leste and provide focused
assistance in order to consolidate the investments that
the Organization has already made over the past six
years. In this regard, we support the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal for extending the United Nations
presence in Timor-Leste by establishing a small
follow-on integrated office for a period of 12 months
after the UNOTIL mandate expires.
We agree with the Secretary-General that the
primary task of the integrated United Nations office
should be to create favourable conditions and a level
playing field for truly free and democratic elections in
the country. It should also exert a stabilizing influence
on all segments of society throughout the period
leading to elections. Besides providing electoral
support to relevant State institutions, the new office
should continue to assist the Government of TimorLeste in addressing problems of security-sector reform,
strengthening judicial capacities, protecting human
rights and promoting justice in Timor-Leste. Further
strengthening and development of critical State
institutions is a task of utmost importance and thus
must be properly supported by the donor community.
Last but not least, we welcome the positive
developments in the relations between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia. We believe that it is important that both
countries resolve the problems of border management
as soon as possible. In that regard, we would like to
encourage both sides to complete the process of
delineating the borders and to conclude an agreement
on border management in the near future. This could
substantially strengthen security and help to avoid
dangerous incidents in the border area.
We also would like to see tangible progress
achieved in the process of justice and reconciliation in
Timor-Leste in order to bring the perpetrators of
serious crimes and atrocities committed in the 1990s to
justice and to close this sad chapter in the history of
Timor-Leste.
In closing, we wish the people of Timor-Leste
every success and would like once again to assure them
of our continued support in the critical years ahead.
Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Like others, I would
like to thank the Special Representative of the

Secretary-General, Mr. Hasegawa, for introducing the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2006/251) and updating
the Council on the current situation in Timor-Leste.
Furthermore, I would like to welcome His Excellency
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste,
Mr. José Ramos-Horta, and to thank him for his
excellent and inspiring presentation.
Greece aligns itself with the statement to be made
shortly by the Permanent Representative of Austria on
behalf of the European Union.
In the period under review, there were positive
developments but also some worrisome setbacks in the
overall internal situation in Timor-Leste. We are
pleased to see the full operation of the Office of the
Provedor for Human Rights and Justice as well as the
drafting of a national human rights action plan, to be
adopted this month. However, dealing with fighting
impunity for human rights crimes and abuses
committed in 1999 remains an open issue. We therefore
look forward to the relevant report of the SecretaryGeneral’s as requested by the Security Council.
On the other hand, the dismissal of nearly 600
soldiers and the ensuing demonstrations and violent
incidents clearly show the fragile security situation and
the need to reinforce the capacity of the Timorese
defence institutions.
The mandate of the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) is coming to a successful end
on 20 May. Over the past 12 months, UNOTIL has
greatly contributed to providing the Government of
Timor-Leste with effective assistance in building the
State’s capacity in all sectors.
In his report, the Secretary-General clearly
identifies the remaining serious challenges in the fields
of defence, police, justice, human rights, public
administration and border control, especially in the
light of the preparations for, and holding of, next year’s
first presidential and parliamentary elections since the
country’s independence in 2002.
We acknowledge and appreciate the important
contributions made by bilateral donors and United
Nations specialized agencies such as the United
Nations Development Programme, and by institutions
such as the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund. We are also pleased to note that the SecretaryGeneral’s report underlines all activities related to the
transfer of certain UNOTIL tasks to other international

17

S/PV.5432

actors on the ground. The question, though, is whether
that kind of arrangement in providing further
international assistance is sufficient for the next crucial
one-year period.
The President, the Government and the political
parties of Timor-Leste have asked for the establishment
of a new United Nations office. Upon the request of the
Security Council, the Secretary-General has presented
his proposals in that regard. Greece has carefully
examined the Secretary-General’s proposals, and
believes that they are well-structured and are tailored
not only to the challenges of organizing and holding
Timor-Leste’s first national elections but also to the
need for further strengthening State institutions and the
human-resource capacity of the country. The latter is
indispensable to the viability of a new democratic
State.
Having considered every aspect of the needs in
Timor-Leste under the present circumstances, Greece
fully supports the establishment of an integrated United
Nations office along the lines proposed by the
Secretary-General. My delegation looks forward to
working with the other members of the Council
towards achieving consensus in that regard.
In conclusion, I wish to express our thanks and
deep appreciation to Mr. Hasegawa and the personnel
of UNOTIL for their hard work, dedication and
efficiency in accomplishing the tasks of their mandate.
UNOTIL, along with all previous United Nations
missions in the country, has contributed to making
Timor-Leste a success story of the United Nations. The
people of Timor-Leste deserve a peaceful, democratic
and prosperous future, and they have our full support.

towards a smooth transition from peacebuilding to
sustainable development.
I fully associate myself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Austria on behalf of the
European Union. I shall only add a few points.
A major next step will be the upcoming
parliamentary and presidential elections in 2007, which
will require continued international support to ensure
that democracy in Timor-Leste can be further
consolidated. We therefore support Timor-Leste’s
request for a continued United Nations political
presence. However, given that many of the functions of
the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL)
are already being taken over by bilateral and
multilateral development partners, the size of that
presence should be limited, leaving the Timorese in the
driver’s seat.
We support the elements for the new mission
proposed
in
the
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2006/251). They include in particular the electoral,
political and human rights elements; the size of the
security component and the number of civilian advisers
should be carefully considered in the light of the
already considerable bilateral and multilateral
commitments that have been made to Timor-Leste.

Ms. Løj (Denmark): I would like to join my
colleagues in welcoming Foreign Minister RamosHorta and Special Representative Hasegawa to the
Council. I thank both of them for their statements.

We look forward to the Secretary-General’s
report on the issue of justice and reconciliation
requested by the Security Council in September 2005.
As stated previously, we had hoped that the report
could be released in time to guide the Council in the
post-UNOTIL period. We hope it will be released as
soon as possible. In that respect, we support the
suggestion contained in the Secretary-General’s present
report that, as part of its human rights mandate, the
proposed United Nations mission should assist in
strengthening national capacity and mechanisms for
promoting justice and reconciliation.

In terms of peacebuilding, Timor-Leste has been
one of the United Nations success stories, and we all
hope it will remain so. In that regard, I would in
particular like to thank the Foreign Minister for his
honest account of the recent unrest and difficulties in
Timor-Leste. It shows that, while the overall situation
in Timor-Leste has greatly improved in recent years,
we cannot afford to lose sight of the tasks still ahead.
We express the hope that the present difficulties will
only delay, but not alter, the previous steady course

The success of the elections in 2007 will be
crucial to secure a democratic future in Timor-Leste.
Continued international assistance will be required.
The Government of Timor-Leste, the United Nations
and other bilateral and multilateral development
partners will have to work hand in hand to ensure that
peace, development and democracy are further
consolidated. I think we all sense the strong
commitment of the Government of Timor-Leste to take
charge, as well as to form a better, more prosperous

18

S/PV.5432

and democratic future for its people. We strongly
welcome and support that.

the more incumbent upon us to see further efforts made
in a number of areas.

Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Allow
me to thank Special Representative Hasegawa for his
briefing. In addition, and in particular at this difficult
time, I would like to express our gratitude to Foreign
Minister Ramos-Horta for being with us today and for
his frank assessment of the current situation in TimorLeste.

It would appear, for example, that the recent
problems were caused — or at least exacerbated — by
failures within State institutions, including the military
and the police. Those are areas in which key bilateral
partners will no doubt be looking to bolster their
support and build on what they have already been
providing. In particular, however, we need to do that
with an eye to the presidential and parliamentary
elections in 2007.

I wish to align myself with the statement to be
made shortly by the representative of Austria on behalf
of the European Union.
Like the other members of the Council, the
United Kingdom is extremely concerned by the events
of recent days, and in particular by the loss of life
about which we have heard. Those events highlight the
challenges that Timor-Leste continues to face. They
also remind us, as the Foreign Minister has said, that
we should not in any way take for granted the
remarkable progress that was being made in TimorLeste since the very difficult beginning. What is clear
now is that the international community has to
intensify its support for that country and for the
Government, as well as to play the role that is
necessary to permit Timor-Leste to respond to the
challenges and to move towards lasting peace and
stability. Despite the darkness of the present hour, we
have to send the message loud and clear: that we stand
by Timor-Leste at this time.
Building peace is never easy. Given its origins, I
think that is particularly the case in Timor-Leste. I was
very struck by two sentences that the Foreign Minister
used. He said that Dili was on the edge and that fear
was palpable among a people traumatized by past
violence. That has to stay with us and remind us even
more of why we have to stay the course and be
committed and united to help the Government of
Timor-Leste as it tackles the immediate problems and
tries to address longer-term issues.
Despite the seriousness of the present situation
and the recent events, it is important that we recognize
the progress that has been made, as also set out in the
briefing we have heard. We should also be encouraged
by the steps taken to improve effective democratic
governance, the adoption of key items of legislation
and the continued cordial relationship between TimorLeste and Indonesia. But what is clear is that it is all

The most important role, it seems to us, in
resolving the current situation and in addressing the
longer-term challenges will, of course, be played by the
Government of Timor-Leste. That is why it is
imperative that the international community intensify
its support and that the United Nations efforts focused
on building and consolidating indigenous capacity
actually enable the Government to take further
responsibility for the reform process and to tackle the
very difficult situation.
That is why, like others, we are in favour of the
follow-on United Nations mission in Timor-Leste. We
have heard the arguments this morning; we do not need
any more persuasion. Given all the points in my
brief — what I would have argued in favour of it — I
am going to assume that this should happen and that
we have all been carried away by the substantive
arguments.
As to us, may I conclude by saying that we
remain committed to working with Security Council
partners, with the Secretary-General and, crucially,
with the Government of Timor-Leste to try to ensure
that, from the present difficult situation, as I said, we
shall produce a stable, peaceful and prosperous future
for the people of Timor-Leste. That must be the
abiding commitment that we stick to.
Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): We,
too, welcome the presence in the Council of Mr. José
Ramos-Horta, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of TimorLeste.
We also express our thanks to Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for presenting the Secretary-General’s end-ofmandate report on the United Nations Office in TimorLeste (UNOTIL).

19

S/PV.5432

The United Republic of Tanzania has closely
followed the impressive progress Timor-Leste has
made in capacity- and institution-building and in the
area of governance, and would wish to sincerely
commend the people and its leadership for their
perseverance and determination to succeed.
As Timor-Leste prepares to confront the
challenges ahead and to engage in the long-term
development of the country, account needs to be taken
of the reality that the country’s institutions are young
and fragile, requiring considerable support. Of
particular concern to us are the forthcoming
parliamentary and presidential elections in mid-2007,
which will mark a significant step in the process of
strengthening a delicate democracy and in the overall
political growth of the country.
The United Nations and other international actors
need to assist Timor-Leste in all aspects of the conduct
of the elections to ensure success. Special attention
should be paid to the overall organizational aspect of
the elections, especially the logistical element, which
has so often disrupted and crippled elections
elsewhere. The electoral needs of the country have to
be known well in advance and, in that regard, we
appreciate the fact that UNOTIL is already engaged in
assessing Timor-Leste’s requirements.
Given the importance of the preparatory work for
the electoral season, we fully support the establishment
of a smaller Council-mandated United Nations office
for 12 months beyond 20 May 2006 to handle the
elections and address other unfinished business. The
transparency of the electoral process and the credible
manner in which the elections are conducted, with the
maximum participation of the Timorese electorate, will
directly impact on the legitimacy of the outcome.
Equally, we urge the Government to make progress on
pending issues related to human rights and transitional
justice.
The riots in Dili last week, which left five people
dead, houses burned and other property destroyed, are
a source of grave concern to us, as they came at a time
when all of us had seen Timor-Leste as a success story
and a model of transition from conflict to stability. It is
regrettable that this potentially destabilizing incident
should come at a time when the United Nations
mission is coming to an end after five and half years of
fruitful work. It illustrates the fragility of the security
situation and the reforms of the security sector. It also

20

confirms the need for continuing support, especially in
the police and judicial sectors, as indicated in the
Secretary-General’s report.
A backslide into violence would mar what has
otherwise been a very successful process. The
Government ought to restore confidence among the
civilian population in order to encourage it to return
and help civilians to recover their property.
It is in that regard that we consider that, apart
from ensuring free, fair and credible post-independence
national elections, the follow-on office will have to
continue monitoring the still fragile security situation,
as well as other ongoing activities, including training
members of the police force, judges, prosecutors,
human rights officials, civil society leaders and
customs officials; conducting seminars and workshops
for the media on account of their pivotal role in the
development of the country as purveyors of
information; facilitating meetings between Timorese
and Indonesian community leaders to discuss issues of
common interest, including security, economic and
cultural concerns; raising awareness amongst the local
population on the agreed border area, including the
remaining segment of unresolved border, together with
working on other cross-border issues, such as family
meetings, cross-border market activities and illegal
border crossings; and working on plans and strategies
for a final smooth handover from the United Nations to
a sustained development framework.
We finally wish to underscore once again the
importance of continued international post-UNOTIL
support for Timor-Leste for the reconstruction of the
country. It must be emphasized again that a critical
requirement for peacebuilding is the need for the
continuing attention of the international community to
a country in transition in areas defined by the country
concerned. That is what Timor-Leste needs at this
juncture. We should robustly support its modest
requests.
Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes Mr. Ramos-Horta,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of TimorLeste, who has made a special trip to attend today’s
open meeting. We thank him for his detailed briefing
on the current situation in Timor-Leste.
We should also like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Hasegawa for

S/PV.5432

his briefing on the Secretary-General’s report and the
latest developments in Timor-Leste.

other members of the Council and to reaching
agreement as soon as possible.

In 15 days, Timor-Leste will celebrate the fourth
anniversary of its independence. Over the past four
years, with the strong support of the international
community, the Government and people of Timor-Leste
have registered admirable achievements. Today, the
young Timor-Leste is already firmly on the path of
peaceful nation-building. China takes this opportunity
to congratulate the people and Government of TimorLeste.

Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): Mr. President, at
the outset, I wish to join previous speakers in
welcoming the presence in our midst of Mr. José
Ramos-Horta, Senior Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste. We also thank
the Special Representative, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa,
for introducing the Secretary-General’s report. We
commend both of them for their frank presentations
and especially for the clarity and objectivity with
which the current situation in Timor-Leste has been
assessed.

We cannot forget that — from the United Nations
Mission in East Timor to the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor, from the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor to the
United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) —
the United Nations staff and the people of Timor-Leste
have, with great effort, jointly written a proud success
story and provided valuable experiences for United
Nations peacekeeping operations and post-conflict
reconstruction. As the mandate of UNOTIL draws to an
end, I wish to thank and pay tribute to all its staff,
Mr. Hasegawa and all his predecessors.
While we are pleased at the achievements made
in Timor-Leste thus far, we should also be aware of the
fact that Timor-Leste is one of the youngest and
poorest countries in the world and that the path of
peaceful nation-building remains difficult and
challenging. The presidential and parliamentary
elections scheduled for 2007 not only represent an
arduous undertaking for Timor-Leste but also
constitute a real test of the results of the support
provided that country by the international community
and the United Nations.
As stated in the report of the Secretary-General,
that test must be successful. The recent unfortunate
incidents in Timor-Leste are a warning that the
situation in Timor-Leste remains fragile, and past
experience in peacekeeping operations also tells us that
we must redouble our resolute efforts, especially when
success is in sight.
Against that backdrop, the Chinese delegation
welcomes and supports the request made by the
Government of Timor-Leste for the continued support
of the United Nations. We fully endorse the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that an
integrated United Nations office be established. We
look forward to conducting serious consultations with

There is no doubt that the efforts of the United
Nations have helped greatly in defusing the volatile
situation that prevailed in Timor-Leste on 5 May 1999,
when it launched its national independence process.
Mainly as a result of the tireless efforts of the United
Nations, together with the active support of donor
countries, Timor-Leste is poised for the next phase of
the democratic transformation that is under way. My
delegation considers it appropriate to congratulate all
those who have worked assiduously and sacrificed
time, energy and resources to make Timor-Leste an
outstanding success story in nation-building for the
international community.
In saying this, I must also emphasize that there
are invaluable lessons for us all in the Timor-Leste
experience. No price is too high to pay for peace and
stability, which, in turn, can be guaranteed most
effectively by good governance, the rule of law and
improved living conditions. At the heart of the residual
problems of instability facing the Timor-Leste
Government is the unfinished business of creating
viable institutions that will enable the State to meet the
needs of its people.
It is indeed disheartening that the recent
demonstrations involving nearly 600 dismissed
military personnel degenerated into violence, leading
to the loss of lives. We are informed that the protests
were driven by deeply felt grievances resulting from
perceived acts of discrimination against segments of
the population. We can only hope that the governance
structures being put in place will lead to greater
transparency and inclusiveness. The role of the United
Nations
in
this
crucial
endeavour
remains
indispensable, and my delegation supports the proposal

21

S/PV.5432

by the Secretary-General to establish a follow-on
integrated United Nations office.
Considering the sensitivities surrounding the
findings of the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation, it is also our view that only the United
Nations can help manage the delicate process of
balancing the imperatives of accountability with those
of positive engagement and fruitful cooperation
between Indonesia and Timor-Leste.
We welcome in this regard the determination of
Indonesia and Timor-Leste to place friendship,
cooperation and peaceful coexistence above the
bitterness of the past, and we urge them to resolve
expeditiously all outstanding issues relating to the
demarcation of their common border. In the meantime,
steps must also be taken to alleviate the suffering of the
refugees and displaced persons along the border.
Again, the sense of alienation felt by the inhabitants of
Oecussi, who apparently are cut off from the rest of the
country due to the poor infrastructure, does not augur
well for national stability and must be addressed
sooner rather than later.
Finally, while my delegation concedes that
considerable progress has been achieved in preparing
Timor-Leste for the disengagement of the United
Nations mission, we believe that the timing is crucial
and that, if we do get it wrong, all that has been
achieved could unravel. That is why we share the view
that the United Nations must remain actively engaged
beyond 2007 and see through not only the elections but
also the important capacity-building programmes that
are urgently needed to enable the people of TimorLeste to consolidate their hard-won independence. Let
it not be said that the international community left the
people of Timor-Leste in the lurch. The Security
Council should continue to support the Government
and the people of Timor-Leste and accede to the
request by the Secretary-General to establish an
integrated United Nations office along the lines set out
in his report.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a brief statement in my capacity as the
representative of the Congo.
As an old friend of the Timorese people, and on
behalf of my delegation, I would like warmly to
welcome the Senior Minister of Timor-Leste. Indeed, I
recall that, as a young civil servant, I had the honour to
meet him in Brazzaville quite some time ago. On two

22

further occasions, representatives of East Timor’s proindependence movement came to thank the Congolese
Government for supporting their cause, and the Senior
Minister present here today was a member of one of
those
delegations.
Continuing
the
excellent
relationships between our two peoples, I had the
honour to represent my Government at the festivities
that
were
held
to
celebrate
Timor-Leste’s
independence.
Thus
my
delegation
attaches
particular
importance to today’s debate, which offers the Council
the opportunity to reaffirm the international
community’s solidarity with a people whose courage
and determination are commensurate with the
magnitude of the challenges that they have faced in the
past in their quest for freedom, as well as those they
face today as they seek to consolidate a situation that
remains both complex and fragile.
While welcoming the progress achieved since the
country achieved independence, we remain concerned
by the recent incidents of armed violence as well as the
violent demonstrations, which could cause further
upheaval in that young nation, in particular given the
upcoming 2007 elections.
The Senior Minister has had the courage and the
honesty to speak in depth of those events to us and to
inform us about how his Government plans to cope
with this difficult situation. We can assure him of our
solidarity.
The international community must therefore
continue to support the efforts undertaken by the
Timorese Government in all areas where international
assistance is necessary and indispensable. That is why
my delegation supports the recommendations contained
in the report of the Secretary-General, in particular
with regard to the proposal to establish an integrated
United Nations office at the request of the Timorese
authorities. We believe that that would be the bare
minimum, as my delegation, like the Senior Minister, is
of the view that we must act in the context of a longterm plan.
Finally, my delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General for the high quality of his report and
also to thank Mr. Hasegawa, the Special
Representative, for his excellent briefing. My
delegation also congratulates the United Nations Office
in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) for its work, which must
now be consolidated.

S/PV.5432

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

assistance and support of the international community”
(Ibid.).

I give the floor to the representative of Singapore.

Timor-Leste’s leaders seem to share those views.
They have asked for a continued United Nations
presence after the completion of UNOTIL’s mandate.
Today, the Council has been privileged to hear a firsthand assessment from Mr. Ramos-Horta. In turn, the
Secretary-General has proposed a small integrated
United Nations office that would address the areas
where help is needed. We urge the Security Council to
support that recommendation. It is a realistic proposal
that takes into account Timor-Leste’s needs and current
conditions. It is not a blind continuation of a mandate.
It is the convergence between a new nation that wants
follow-up help in its nation-building and an
international community that can provide that
assistance.

Mr. Cheok (Singapore): Allow me to begin by
thanking the Secretary-General for his recent progress
report (S/2006/251) on the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL). I would like to commend
UNOTIL and to hail the leadership of Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral. Their work has been exemplary.
It is often said that successful endeavours have
many parents, while failed ones are orphans. In this
context, I am glad to note that Timor-Leste has a large
family. Since Timor-Leste attained full independence,
its story has been one of determination in the face of
adversity, perseverance and success. The Timorese
have worked hard to create the conditions for a viable
State. Their neighbours have shown foresight and
magnanimity. The international community has been
generous with its assistance and its support. The United
Nations has been invaluable.
This commitment has underpinned Timor-Leste’s
progress. But, while Timor-Leste’s development has
been impressive, we need to stay the course. As a State
that also had independence rather suddenly thrust upon
it, Singapore knows that nation-building is a fragile
thing, a delicate thing where nothing is irreversible,
especially in the formative years. That is not a cliché.
The Secretary-General’s report makes reference to the
fragile security situation. As we all know, recently
there were demonstrations in Dili involving Timorese
armed forces personnel and others. Senior Minister
Ramos-Horta and Mr. Hasegawa have given us
insightful and detailed briefings on the current
conditions.
In addition, the first parliamentary and
presidential elections are scheduled for next year.
Timor-Leste will require electoral, organizational and
security-related advice prior to the elections. The
Secretary-General’s report also mentions other areas
where the United Nations can still help in capacitybuilding. These include defence, the police, border
control, the legal system, finance and development
planning. Indeed, while commending Timor-Leste for
its “impressive progress” (S/2006/251, para. 50), the
report adds that “many of the country’s institutions are
at a nascent stage and will require the continued

This is about commitment. We should not
jeopardize what we have all achieved so far in TimorLeste. Were we to do so, the phrase “penny wise,
pound foolish” would come to mind, especially given
statistics showing how easily societies that have
experienced civil strife can return to those situations.
We all speak of successful peacebuilding. Well, this is
an opportunity for us to remain engaged and help
ensure that Timor-Leste is a continued success. If the
circumstances warrant it, Timor-Leste could even be
included in the Peacebuilding Commission’s agenda so
that it can be supported beyond the next 12 months.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Austria.
Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union and the
countries aligning themselves with this statement.
We warmly welcome the presence of the Foreign
Minister of Timor-Leste, His Excellency Mr. José
Ramos-Horta.
Since the public meeting of the Security Council
held on 23 January (see S/PV.5351), the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) has
continued to provide its invaluable support to TimorLeste. We commend UNOTIL, under the leadership of
the Special Representative, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa,
for its commitment and contribution. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
and analytical end-of-mandate report on UNOTIL
(S/2006/251).

23

S/PV.5432

The European Union is pleased to note that the
process of handing over critical State functions to the
Timorese authorities has gained speed. In particular,
we recognize the taking over of the functions of the
treasury, the first indictment for corruption by the
Office of the Inspector-General and the beginning of
the work of the Office of the Provedor for Human
Rights and Justice as welcome and important steps in
Timor-Leste’s progress towards full assumption of
State functions. We view the assumption of all
functions related to the question of international
technical advisers by the Capacity Development
Coordination Unit of the Office of the Prime Minister,
which is expected to take place after 20 May, in a
similar light.
Recent events surrounding the dispute within the
defence forces of Timor-Leste and the ensuing riots in
Dili show that the situation remains volatile. Continued
attention needs to be paid to the security sector. The
current reports concerning a mass exodus from Dili
caused by rumours about impending renewed fighting
are a worrying sign of the current security climate in
Timor-Leste. The European Union shares the
Secretary-General’s assessment that the national police
is still a nascent force lacking sufficient experience and
resources. Even though the overall performance of the
Border Patrol Unit has improved, it still faces a number
of considerable challenges, operating under even more
difficult circumstances than the police. Furthermore,
there are worrying reports about an increase in the
number of cases of mistreatment and intimidation by
the police and an inadequate or slow response to such
allegations. Much remains to be done. The
accountability and transparency of State institutions
must be ensured.
The 2007 presidential and parliamentary elections
will be at the centre of the consolidation of democracy
in Timor-Leste. Transparency, inclusiveness and, above
all, fairness in the election process will be decisive for
the legitimacy of the results. We welcome the
beginning of a dialogue on the electoral process. We
hope that the planned wide consultations on the draft
electoral laws will secure the broadest possible support
for the electoral framework. The organization of the
2007 elections and the provision of a safe environment
represent formidable challenges for Timor-Leste.
International support for the election process will be
crucial for its success.

24

It is in that context of consolidating the
remarkable achievements in reconstruction and Statebuilding and in laying the groundwork for successful
elections in 2007 that the question of the future United
Nations presence after the end of UNOTIL’s mandate
arises. The European Union believes that the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations for the establishment of a
small integrated United Nations office for one year are
a good starting point for discussion on the nature of a
follow-on mission, taking into account the wishes
expressed in that regard by the Government of TimorLeste and the requirements set out by the Security
Council in the letter by its President of 28 March
(S/2006/196). The establishment of a follow-on
mission would go a long way in securing the
international community’s considerable investment
over the past seven years and in supporting the
Government at this critical juncture.
We are convinced that justice regarding the
serious human rights violations in Timor-Leste in 1999
must be achieved. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
intention to submit soon a report on justice and
reconciliation for Timor-Leste with a practically
feasible approach, including possible support by the
United Nations. We are pleased to note that the
preservation of copies of the records of the serious
crimes process has been ensured as a basis for possible
future steps to ensure accountability for the crimes of
1999.
The long-term success of Timor-Leste will, to a
large degree, depend on success in the economic field.
The determined efforts by Timor-Leste to attain the
Millennium Development Goals warrant the continued
full support of the country’s multilateral and bilateral
partners. We welcome the efforts to enhance the
coordination and integration of the activities of
UNOTIL and the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes. We support the envisaged elaboration of a
common country programme, while taking account of
the contributions of bilateral donors and the
international financial institutions.
Since 1999, the European Union and its member
States have been reliable development partners for
Timor-Leste, contributing more than €700 million,
which amounts to half of all the external assistance
provided. Today, we would like to congratulate TimorLeste on completing the ratification process of the
Cotonou Agreement, by which it became a full member
of the African, Caribbean and Pacific group of

S/PV.5432

countries. Timor-Leste is now a member of a political
and economic body in which 14 other Pacific island
countries, 63 African and Caribbean countries and 25
European Union members cooperate politically,
economically and in the field of trade. That new
partnership reinforces the central cooperation objective
of poverty reduction and adds a political dimension
and an innovative trade relationship. Timor-Leste will
now benefit from EU support in the framework of the
European Development Fund.
As previous speakers have said, Timor-Leste is a
true success story of United Nations peacebuilding.
There are, of course, considerable challenges ahead.
But the European Union is convinced that Timor-Leste
will continue to consolidate peace and democracy and
will make progress towards long-term sustainable
development. The European Union will continue to
play its part in that successful development effort.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): I would like to start by
thanking the Secretary-General for the end of mandate
report on the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste
(UNOTIL) (S/2006/251), as well as for the proposal
contained therein on the establishment of a follow-on
integrated United Nations office, in response to the
request made by Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri in his
letter of 17 January to the Secretary-General
(S/2006/39, annex), and reiterated in a letter of
2 March (S/2006/157, annex) from Foreign Minister
José Ramos-Horta, who is present today, and in a letter
of 2 April (S/2006/230, annex) from President Xanana
Gusmão.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Hasegawa, and his staff for the
excellent work they have done.
Portugal subscribes to the statement just made by
the representative of Austria on behalf of the European
Union. I would like to add a number of comments.
I congratulate the Council on having convened
this public meeting. It gives us an opportunity to hear
the views of Timor-Leste, as put forward by the
Foreign Minister, Mr. José Ramos-Horta, and of its
partners, particularly regarding the Secretary-General’s
proposal for the establishment of a follow-on
integrated United Nations office in Timor-Leste.

I think that it is fair to say that from 1999 to date,
Timor-Leste has probably been the major success story
of the United Nations. There have been other good
stories to tell in recent years in the context of the
management of international peace and security, but
none compares in terms of the degree of success
achieved in Timor-Leste thus far.
I would like to pay tribute to all those who have
been directly involved in that success, above all to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan. I also would like
to evoke the memory of Sergio Vieira de Mello, a man
who did an outstanding job in Timor-Leste and who
became a symbol for all of us. He embodied the
principles and the highest values of this Organization,
and he paid the ultimate price in its service.
As mentioned by the Secretary-General in his
report, Timor-Leste has made impressive progress in
many areas of governance, institution-building and
capacity-building, with the support of UNOTIL and
bilateral and multilateral partners. We also commend
the people and the leadership of Timor-Leste for their
perseverance and their determination to succeed. For us
that is no surprise, as the Portuguese people are keenly
aware of the suffering endured by the East Timorese
people during their struggle for self-determination. We
shared that suffering, and we celebrated together when
the moment of freedom arrived at last.
The solidarity of the Portuguese people is the
reason why Portugal remains, by far, the largest donor
to Timor-Leste. Since 1999, Portugal has contributed
more than €400 million. The Secretary-General’s
report mentions some of our contributions in the areas
of justice and electoral assistance, but our cooperation
extends to many other areas, namely, education, health,
social protection, police, the armed forces, customs and
finances. That puts us in the special position of being
able to agree with the analysis of the SecretaryGeneral, which takes into due consideration the
requests presented by the authorities of Timor-Leste:
“many of the country’s institutions are at a nascent
stage and will require the continued assistance and
support of the international community” (S/2006/251,
para. 50).
The presidential and parliamentary elections
scheduled for 2007 — the first since the country’s
independence — will be a major test and, we sincerely
hope, “a significant step forward in the process of

25

S/PV.5432

strengthening this fragile democracy” (Ibid.), as the
Secretary-General puts it.
As Security Council members recognized in the
letter of 28 March from the President of the Security
Council (S/2006/196) requesting the Secretary-General
to present options for how the United Nations can best
provide assistance to Timor-Leste following the end of
UNOTIL’s mandate, we must take into account that
peace and democracy in Timor-Leste need to be further
consolidated.
The recommendations of the Secretary-General
are based on a fair analysis of the situation on the
ground. We support the proposals regarding the
mandate and the components of a small integrated
United Nations office in Timor-Leste. Those proposals
are the minimum required to face the challenges ahead.
I must also underline the following points.
In recent weeks, we have witnessed some
disturbing developments related to the political and
security situation in Timor-Leste. The latest incidents
involving ex-soldiers and the police reveal the
existence of serious systemic problems within the
security forces. That situation requires international
support in terms of capacity-building for this critical
sector. The United Nations should provide assistance to
the Government of Timor-Leste in addressing some of
the systemic problems within the security forces. An
approach based solely on bilateral assistance
programmes will not be sufficient, given the political
sensitivity of this issue.
Portugal has a long-standing commitment to the
promotion of human rights, especially in the case of
Timor-Leste. We look forward to the report of the
Secretary-General in response to the letter dated 28
September 2005 from the President of the Security
Council (S/2005/613), which requested the SecretaryGeneral to outline a “practically feasible” approach to
the question of accountability in Timor-Leste. We
support the Secretary-General’s appeal regarding the
need to ensure that all those responsible for serious
crimes committed in Timor-Leste are held accountable
so as to respond to the legitimate desire for justice on
the part of all those affected by violence. Portugal will
continue to be supportive of the initiatives taken by the
Secretary-General in that regard.
Last August, the Secretary-General wrote that

26

“Timor-Leste still has the lowest level of human
development in East Asia and the Pacific and
remains among the 20 poorest countries in the
world. Moreover, economic growth is expected to
be modest in 2005 due to stagnant employment
opportunities, a continued downsizing of the
international presence and a decline in bilateral
and
multilateral
assistance.”
(S/2005/533,
para. 36)
I also dare to say that we should not count on any
miraculous solutions arising from the potential
revenues from oil and gas exploitation. As stated in the
same report, in the near future “the country will
continue to depend on external assistance to finance its
economic, social and human development and to
reduce overall poverty” (Ibid.).
Timor-Leste has been an investment of high
return for the Security Council. The case of TimorLeste is referred to in academia and the media as an
example of the indispensable role and the effectiveness
of this body. But the time has not yet come for TimorLeste to be off the Security Council’s radar. We should
do everything in our power to secure this investment
and strengthen the fragile democracy in the world’s
newest country.
Portugal underlines the importance of sustained
multilateral and bilateral assistance to Timor-Leste. We
recall the responsibility of the international community
and of the Security Council in relation to Timor-Leste.
Portugal will therefore remain committed to the
consolidation of peace and democracy in Timor-Leste.
May I also say that I take due note of the United
States proposal of a technical rollover for the mandate
of UNOTIL. I believe it is wise to reassess the
situation in the light of recent developments.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Hill (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to speak. I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
briefing and for the work of the United Nations Office
in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL). I would also like to thank
my friend Mr. Ramos-Horta for attending today’s
meeting as Foreign Minister of Timor-Leste and for his
statement. His frank acknowledgement of the recent
violent incidents and instability is important, as is his
communication of his Government’s commitment to a

S/PV.5432

fair and just solution. I also thank him for his personal
efforts to seek a resolution of those difficulties.
As all present at today’s meeting would
acknowledge, the role of the United Nations in TimorLeste — from stewarding the country towards
independence to assisting it in the early stages of
nation-building — has been a significant success.
However, the challenge of nation-building for new
States and those emerging from conflict is difficult and
ongoing, as recent events have illustrated.
Australia has been at the forefront of
international efforts to support Timor-Leste’s transition
to an independent and secure State. We have
contributed to all United Nations missions in TimorLeste, and we are currently contributing both military
liaison officers and civilian police advisers to
UNOTIL. Through these missions, the United Nations
has helped establish a foundation on which the people
of Timor-Leste can build a nation. We believe that
there continues to be a role for the United Nations in
assisting the world’s newest nation.
Timor-Leste continues to be a major development
partner for Australia. In 2005 and 2006, Australia
provided more than $30 million in bilateral
development assistance, including working with our
Timorese partners to improve health, provide basic
services to rural areas, improve governance and
strengthen the justice sector. Australia has provided
policing assistance, including through training and
other means of practical support, and is committed to a
significant defence cooperation programme with the
country.
In January 2006, Australia and Timor-Leste
successfully concluded a bilateral treaty on maritime
arrangements in the Timor Sea. Once ratified, TimorLeste would reap billions of dollars in extra revenue,
which could be employed to improve the lot of all its
citizens. Similarly, Australia has been greatly
encouraged by the ability of Timor-Leste to resolve
issues that have arisen along its border with Indonesia.
Indeed, both Indonesia and Timor-Leste should be
commended for their commitment to building a
productive and harmonious relationship.
I now turn to the future of United Nations
involvement in Timor-Leste. As discussed in the
Secretary-General’s end of mandate report for
UNOTIL dated 20 April 2006 (S/2006/251), it is
important that the international community remain

willing to assist Timor-Leste in facing the many
challenges ahead. It is essential to recognize that those
challenges are domestic in nature, and our assistance
should be focused on helping the people of TimorLeste to develop sustainable institutions and policies
that support Timor-Leste’s new democracy, its political
stability, the rule of law, the future security of its
people and economic growth. It is important, both
symbolically and practically, that the United Nations
and the international community stand beside TimorLeste in that work.
Australia has been a long-time supporter of
international efforts in Timor-Leste and of United
Nations involvement and assistance to the Timorese
people. Through that commitment, Australia has
always sought to provide a foundation upon which the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste might
assume control and management of their own affairs.
That should continue to be the guiding principle in
determining how we might best continue to assist.
Australia is aware of the diversity of views held
by members of the Security Council and the core group
about the best way to deliver continuing assistance to
the Timorese people and how the United Nations might
best manage its engagement with Timor-Leste. It is
clearly not the preference of Timor-Leste that the
United Nations conclude a Security Council-mandated
presence at the current time. We should consider those
wishes carefully. If the Security Council decides that a
specially mandated successor mission to UNOTIL is
required for a limited time, that mission should be
focused and properly staffed to complement ongoing
cooperation. It should be funded from the regular
budget. If such a mission is agreed, Australia would of
course consider making a contribution.
As I have said, the goal of the international
community in Timor-Leste should be the people of
Timor-Leste taking full control of the country’s own
affairs.
Australia recognizes that the international
community has made a considerable investment in
Timor-Leste’s progress as a nation. We would
encourage Timor-Leste’s many international supporters
to maintain their bilateral and other forms of
multilateral assistance in order to ensure Timor-Leste
continues along its path to a stable and sustainable
future.

27

S/PV.5432

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Ms. Banks (New Zealand): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for the latest report on the
situation in Timor-Leste and for his recommendations
on future United Nations involvement.
New Zealand commends the progress made in
Timor-Leste to date through the work of the TimorLeste Government, the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) and through the commitment
of international donors who continue to support these
efforts. But as we have witnessed over the last days in
Dili, Timor-Leste remains fragile. We are grateful for
the presentations given this morning by the Senior
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. José
Ramos-Horta, and by the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative, Mr. Hasegawa, to update us on the
current situation in Timor-Leste.
These developments underline the crucial role of
the international community in continuing to provide
support.
New Zealand supports the extension of the
United Nations mandate in Timor-Leste and the
establishment of a new special political mission with a
specific focus on assisting Timor-Leste in the period
leading up to next year’s elections. On that basis, New
Zealand supports the shape and scope of the mission as
recommended by the Secretary-General.
The United Nations role in Timor-Leste is in
transition from the full-scale operations of the past to
the current UNOTIL arrangements, and now to the
proposed integrated United Nations office. However,
neither the current arrangements nor the proposed
integrated mission can guarantee domestic peace and
security in Timor-Leste. Engagement by bilateral
partners and by appropriate multilateral agencies will
be paramount in supporting the rule of law and in
building the institutions of democracy in Timor-Leste.
This includes training and support for the police and
the military, as well as helping the Government to
achieve its social and economic development goals.
New Zealand has consistently supported the work
of the Serious Crimes Unit and the special panels,
which are essential components of an internationally
supported process to see justice served for crimes
committed in East Timor in 1999. We look forward to
the report on justice and reconciliation that the

28

Secretary-General has indicated he will provide to the
Security Council, including possible support by the
United Nations.
New Zealand is a committed bilateral partner
with Timor-Leste. We will continue to provide
assistance in training and support for the police, the
military and the Government through our Overseas
Development Assistance and our Defence Force
Mutual Assistance Programme.
Looking ahead, the specialized agencies will
eventually become the long-term cornerstones of the
United Nations presence in Timor-Leste. With that in
mind, we call on those agencies to work with the
proposed United Nations office in Timor-Leste to
ensure a coordinated, system-wide approach to the
eventual transition.
We share the hope that the situation in Dili will
return to normal as quickly as possible, and that
reason, wisdom and cool heads will prevail. At this
time, it is important that the United Nations system and
all of us in the international community send the
message that we are committed to supporting and
assisting Timor-Leste for the long term.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to
welcome Foreign Minister José Ramos-Horta, whose
presence in the Security Council today is essential to
convey the will of the East Timorese people to the
entire membership of the Organization. In his
statement, Minister Ramos-Horta was quite clear about
the present situation in his country and the need for the
United Nations to retain its presence in the field.
(spoke in French)
I would also like to thank the Congolese
presidency of the Security Council for convening this
public meeting on the situation in Timor-Leste, which
remains a priority for Brazilian diplomacy.
(spoke in English)
I wish to acknowledge Ambassador Wang
Guangya and the members of the Chinese delegation
for their highly competent work in the presidency last
month.
Finally, I thank Special Representative Sukehiro
Hasegawa for his detailed and valuable presentation

S/PV.5432

and especially for his tireless dedication at the head of
the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) in
promoting the empowerment and development of
Timor-Leste.

investment made by the Organization in the last six
years was enormous and has so far obtained a very
positive return. But there is still much to be done, and
the assistance of the United Nations remains crucial.

As a country that has been assisting Timor-Leste
ever since the beginning of the crisis of 1999, Brazil is
particularly encouraged by the country’s remarkable
progress in the last six years. The ravaged scenario of
those gloomy days has changed into a hopeful nascent
nation. Brazil looks forward to the coming 2007
elections, the first since independence. We believe that
the
successful
holding
of
presidential
and
parliamentary elections will represent a major step
toward the consolidation of democratic institutions in
the country.

Brazil, alongside other partners and the East
Timorese Government, believes that the proposal
advanced in the Secretary-General’s recent report
represents the minimum necessary to ensure that
Timor-Leste continues to be a success story. The
structure proposed is meant to strengthen local
institutions and to make the security apparatus fully
functional. Thus, the Security Council should create a
new mission — an integrated office — comprising all
components proposed by the Secretary-General,
namely, military, police, civil, electoral and human
rights components.

Most of the merit of this transformation lies with
the Timorese people, who never gave up in spite of all
adversities. The international community also deserves
credit for what has been accomplished. The four
United Nations missions so far — the United Nations
Mission in East Timor (UNAMET), the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET),
the United Nations Mission of Support of East Timor
(UNMISET) and UNOTIL — were crucial in assisting
the East Timorese to stand on their feet and hold the
future in their hands. Multilateral and bilateral
cooperation in several areas is also part of the manifold
effort to ensure that Timor-Leste becomes a fullfledged State. It is our view that the United Nations
should remain engaged as long as international support
is necessary to secure a stable and sustainable
governmental structure for the country.
The Brazilian contribution to the United Nations
missions in the country is only a part of our
cooperation with Timor-Leste. We maintain bilateral
projects in such diverse areas as eradication of
illiteracy and the fight against HIV/AIDS, in
structuring the judiciary and agriculture, in
professional training and institution building. We have
recently renewed electoral cooperation with TimorLeste, which we believe is essential, at this point in
time, to strengthen the institutions for the upcoming
elections. Our cooperation with the Timorese
Government and people stems from the consciousness
of a common historic heritage and solidarity, as well as
our confidence in the principle of self-determination.
There is a consensus that Timor-Leste is meant to
be a success story for the United Nations. The

Despite its positive evolution, the situation in
Timor-Leste remains fragile. State institutions and
democratic practices are still evolving and require
assistance from the United Nations. Recent evidence
confirms that security is still a source of serious
concern. More than just bilateral cooperation will be
needed in order to enable Timor-Leste to overcome its
present difficulties. Moreover, restricting the scope of
United Nations activities will be interpreted by those
who do not abide by democratic principles and
practices as a sure sign that the United Nations might
be about to reconsider its commitment to Timor-Leste.
The boundaries between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia are yet to be fully demarcated. Military
liaison officers are needed to defuse incidents and to
promote dialogue between the Indonesian armed forces
and the Timorese Border Patrol Unit. Providing
advisers to improve the institution of Timor-Leste’s
national police is another fundamental task to ensure
the rule of law.
The United Nations and, indeed, its Member
States are not in a position to waste the human and
financial investment made in recent years by not
joining in the efforts to avoid a relapse into instability.
No budgetary savings would be justifiable if they were
to allow a predictable resumption of problems that
would entail further human suffering and future
increased expenditures. In that regard, Brazil welcomes
the initiatives proposed by Timor-Leste to investigate
the claims of the disaffected members of the military in
order to attain national reconciliation.

29

S/PV.5432

Recent outbursts of violence confirm that the
political atmosphere is still volatile and that instability
could increase in the coming months before the 2007
elections, jeopardizing our common accomplishments.
Brazil remains entirely committed to help make TimorLeste a success story — for its Government, for its
people and for the United Nations — by combining
national ownership, the rule of law and far-sighted
international support. Any hesitation on the part of the
Council would cast doubt on its steadfastness. In that
sense, piecemeal solutions are neither positive nor
viable. In our view, the Security Council must at this
time deliver a strong, unequivocal message of support
for Timor-Leste.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Hamidon (Malaysia): I offer my sincere
congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
to the Permanent Representative of China for his
stewardship of the Council last month. I would also
like to acknowledge the presence in the Chamber of
His Excellency Mr. José Ramos-Horta, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste. I welcome his valuable
contributions to the deliberations today.
My delegation is pleased to address the Security
Council on the situation in Timor-Leste at the end of
the mandate of the United Nations Office in TimorLeste (UNOTIL). We express our sincere appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his report (S/2006/251) on
the end of the mandate of UNOTIL. We also thank Mr.
Sukehiro Hasegawa, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his clear and comprehensive
presentation of the report. We commend the Special
Representative and all the men and women of UNOTIL
for their dedication in discharging the mandate
entrusted to the mission by the Security Council.
I am pleased to note that the activities carried out
by the United Nations and by the United Nations
system, as well as the contributions made by UNOTIL,
have continued to provide a window of opportunity for
progress in Timor-Leste, particularly with regard to the
transition to a sustainable development assistance
framework. The United Nations has played a
remarkable role in peacebuilding in Timor-Leste
through its various missions since 1999, initially by
providing security and facilitating the country’s
emergence from conflict and subsequently by nurturing

30

the development of political, economic, social, legal
and judicial institutions. In the past year, the United
Nations has also supported Timor-Leste’s development
needs through UNOTIL. The significant progress made
by Timor-Leste during the reporting period, from 14
January to 12 April 2006, demonstrates its firm
commitment towards the achievement of poverty
reduction and economic growth. That progress has also
strengthened the efforts made towards the attainment
of the Millennium Development Goals.
The specific activities undertaken by respective
agencies — the World Bank, the United Nations
Development Programme, the International Monetary
Fund, the Asian Development Bank, the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, the World
Food Programme, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the United Nations
Population Fund, UNICEF, UNESCO, the International
Labour Organization, the World Health Organization,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the International Organization for
Migration — with the close cooperation of the
Government, have helped Timor-Leste to achieve
impressive progress in many areas of governance,
institution-building and capacity-building, to meet its
social, economic and human development needs within
a sustainable development programme. Those advances
could not have been achieved without the full
commitment, the determination and the strong resolve
of the country’s leadership and the support of the
Timorese in general, coupled with sustained assistance
and cooperation from the international community.
Nevertheless, many of the country’s institutions
are still at a nascent stage, and will require the
continued assistance and support of the international
community. My delegation notes that, as UNOTIL’s
mandate comes to an end, one of the main challenges
facing the country relates to the need to consolidate the
progress that has been made in laying the foundations
for a democratic system. The presidential and
parliamentary elections scheduled for 2007 will be a
significant step forward. Those elections will be a test
for the maturity of democracy in Timor-Leste. That is
indeed an important point for the international
community, including the Security Council, to note.
There is a need for the continued presence of the
United Nations not only to provide impartial support
for the conduct of free and fair elections, but also as a
stabilizing influence on all segments of society

S/PV.5432

throughout the period leading to the elections. In that
regard, Malaysia supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General regarding the establishment of an
integrated United Nations office comprising civilian,
police and military elements, for a period of 12 months
commencing on 21 May 2006, to undertake the
challenges of the approaching elections.
My delegation is concerned about the troubling
developments related to the disgruntled portion of the
Timorese armed forces, as well as about how little
progress has been made towards resolving the issues.
Today it was reported that tens of thousands of
residents of Dili had fled the capital fearing new
clashes between the former soldiers and the police. We
are, however, encouraged by the steps already taken by
the Government to contain the disturbances. We hope
that it will continue to work towards an amicable
solution in order to end the impasse.
It is encouraging to note the growing relations
between Timor-Leste and Indonesia, as manifested in
the recent meeting in Bali between President Xanana
Gusmão and his Indonesian counterpart, President
Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono. The strengthening of
relations between the two neighbouring countries
augurs well for them, including in their continued
efforts to delineate the land borders between them. We
are confident that both countries will continue to be
able to resolve their bilateral issues in the spirit of
friendship and cooperation.
As a neighbour, Malaysia reiterates its
commitment to nation-building in, and the
development of, Timor-Leste. We have offered earlier
assistance bilaterally and will continue to explore new
areas of assistance with the Government of TimorLeste. We remain in full support of the United Nations
activities in post-UNOTIL assistance, especially
regarding the efforts of the Government and the people
of Timor-Leste as they prepare to meet the challenges
of their first presidential and parliamentary elections.
With their perseverance and their determination to
succeed, along with the support of the United Nations
and the international community, Malaysia is
convinced that Timor-Leste will continue to make
progress in its nation-building.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of Thailand.
Mrs. Laohaphan (Thailand): From the outset, I
would like to express my gratitude to you, Sir, and the

Security Council for allowing me to participate in this
public meeting on Timor-Leste.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge the presence of Mr. José Ramos-Horta,
Senior Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of TimorLeste, and to thank him for his detailed briefing.
My delegation wishes to commend Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral
for
Timor-Leste,
for
his
working
accomplishments in Timor-Leste and for his
comprehensive briefing on the United Nations Office
in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) to the Council.
Thailand is encouraged to learn that much
progress has been made steadily to achieve the
prosperity of Timor-Leste and the well-being of the
Timorese people. That is due to the valuable
contributions of UNOTIL, agencies of the United
Nations system, international organizations, nongovernmental organizations and international donors.
A tribute should also be paid to the Government of
Timor-Leste for its strong determination and strenuous
efforts. All parties concerned have played crucial roles
in moving forward the nation-building process in
Timor-Leste.
Although developments in Timor-Leste — be
they political, economic or social — have been
achieved on many levels, the work is not yet complete.
Timor-Leste remains in a phase of trials and
tribulations. There are challenges that the country is
meeting, and more that it will have to face in the
future. My delegation believes that Timor-Leste, as an
emerging country, has a long way to go. As an
emerging democracy, Timor-Leste is a small plant that
needs all the care and tending of us all to help it grow
into a big tree and for its roots of democracy to grow
stronger and deeper.
My delegation would like to emphasize the
importance of the development dimension of
assistance, an area to which less attention has been
paid. Its long-term benefits to Timor-Leste are equally
as important as those of the security and justice
dimensions. While there is a need to create a safe and
secure environment for the Timorese people, there is
also a need to improve their livelihoods and quality of
life. That is the human face of assistance. Capacitybuilding, training and education, we believe, will bring
out the greater and the better from Timor-Leste in the

31

S/PV.5432

long run. International assistance — any assistance —
would be meaningless without lasting security, stability
and prosperity in the country.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate Thailand’s firm commitment to continuing
its economic and technical cooperation with TimorLeste in order to further support the Timorese national
development process, especially in the field of human
resource development. In 2003, the Foreign Ministers
of Thailand and Timor-Leste signed a memorandum of
understanding on economic and technical cooperation.
Ten areas of technical cooperation between the two
countries have been pursued for the past three years,
including in capacity-building in internal security,
agriculture,
tourism,
geographical
information
technology, and sufficiency economy. Recently,
Thailand and Timor-Leste have agreed to extend the
memorandum of understanding to cover two more
years in 2006 and 2007.
Also, we wish to reaffirm Thailand’s readiness
and willingness to cooperate in rendering assistance to
and building the capacities of Timor-Leste with the
United Nations agencies, international organizations,
non-governmental organizations and international
donors. In partnership with donor countries and
international organizations, Thailand has cooperated
with the United Nations Development Programme, the
Japan International Cooperation Agency and UNICEF
in organizing capacity-building programmes for TimorLeste, especially in the fields of agriculture, HIV/AIDS
and family health.
Different views have been expressed concerning
the role of the United Nations in Timor-Leste after the
end of UNOTIL’s mandate. Thailand could not agree
more that the United Nations and the international
community will soon have to phase out their
participation, but that time has not yet come. Indeed,
while we are gradually withdrawing from Timor-Leste,
it will be some time before Timor-Leste can stand on
its own and before we can leave Timor-Leste to stand
on its own. In fact, we need to approach the phase-out
step by step.
The recent tensions in Timor-Leste have already
demonstrated that the country is fragile and its political
environment volatile. We would have failed to achieve
anything were we to leave Timor-Leste now and run
the risk of losing all the gains we have helped make
thus far in the country. The success of the presidential

32

and general elections in 2007 will be a crucial
milestone of democracy in Timor-Leste.
In that connection, my delegation wishes to
express Thailand’s support for the recommendation
made by the Secretary-General that a reduced-size
office be set up in Timor-Leste to continue the work of
the United Nations in rendering assistance to the
Timorese Government and its people so that we can
ensure that the gains made thus far will be protected
and consolidated. My delegation is of the view that this
is one of the steps of the phase-out process out and that
we should not completely withdraw from Timor-Leste.
My delegation believes that Timor-Leste is a
country with great potential. However, its promising
future can be further guaranteed only if we all help to
guarantee it. The international community needs to
actively help nurture and thereby increase the country’s
potential so that it can eventually stand firmly on its
own and prosper alongside the community of nations.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): I congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of your important responsibility as
President of the Council for this month. We are
confident that, under your able stewardship, the
Council will do productive work this month.
We thank the Secretary-General for his end-ofmandate report on the United Nations Office in TimorLeste (UNOTIL), as contained in document
S/2006/251. In that regard, my delegation expresses its
appreciation to Special Representative Hasegawa for
his useful briefing and for his leadership in bringing
the UNOTIL mandate towards a successful conclusion.
Before I continue, allow me also to join previous
speakers in welcoming Senior Minister José RamosHorta of Timor-Leste to our debate today. We have
taken note of his briefing on the internal security
situation in the country following the recent riots. We
are following it closely and hope that a quick solution
can be found in order to return the situation to normal
as soon as possible.
We take note with appreciation of the progress
made by UNOTIL in assisting Timor-Leste towards
self-sufficiency and in ensuring a smooth transition
from the current United Nations assistance to the
country towards a sustainable development framework.
Of no less importance to note is the impressive

S/PV.5432

progress made by Timor-Leste in many areas of
governance, institution-building and capacity-building,
thanks to the perseverance and determination of its
people and leadership, as acknowledged in the
Secretary-General’s report.
We recognize, however, that, as UNOTIL’s
mandate comes to an end, continued international
assistance and support are needed for Timor-Leste to
face the challenges before it, and especially to
consolidate the progress made in laying down a
stronger foundation for a democratic system. One of
the enormous challenges ahead is the preparation and
conduct of its first parliamentary and presidential
elections, which are scheduled for 2007. Indonesia, as
the world’s third largest democracy and as the closest
neighbour of Timor-Leste, is very much interested in
seeing it succeed in conducting the elections in a
peaceful, free and fair manner. We therefore believe
that the international community must respond
favourably to the needs of Timor-Leste for assistance
and support in meeting that challenge.
We are satisfied with the excellent level of our
bilateral relations with Timor-Leste. The close rapport
between leaders of the two countries continues to grow.
During this UNOTIL reporting period, President Susilo
Bambang Yudhoyono of Indonesia met once again with
his counterpart, President Gusmão of Timor-Leste, in
Bali on 17 February to discuss issues of common
interest and concern of both countries. Just last month,
Foreign Minister Hassan Wirajuda welcomed the visit
of Minister Ramos-Horta to Jakarta to address issues of
importance to both countries. That attests to the
maturity of bilateral relations that enable both
countries effectively to deal with any issues and
problems that arise between them.
The bilateral cooperation between Indonesia and
Timor-Leste also continues to deepen and expand.
Through the two countries’ joint commission and its
subsidiary mechanisms, we continue to register further
progress in various areas, including the political, legal,
economic, trade, investment, cultural, health and
education fields. Both countries also continue to make
progress in addressing effectively and conclusively the
residual issues arising from the separation of TimorLeste from Indonesia as an independent State in 1999.
With regard to cooperation on matters relating to
the border, I am pleased to inform the Council that the
delineation of the remaining 1 per cent of the land

border between both countries is expected to be
completed by August. Indonesia also looks forwards to
finalizing a new border management arrangement with
Timor-Leste to replace the military liaison arrangement
between the Indonesian military and the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), which expired in June 2005. Meanwhile,
cooperation on border security continues to be
strengthened, and the absence of incidents along the
border during this UNOTIL reporting period attests to
that.
In conclusion, Indonesia, as a neighbour which
shares a common vision with Timor-Leste based on the
principles of peaceful coexistence and forwardlooking, reconciliatory and mutually beneficial
relations, will, for its part, continue to assist TimorLeste in achieving self-sufficiency, including better
enabling it to make further progress in fostering peace,
stability and democracy in the country. In that regard,
the Government of Indonesia, on a bilateral basis, also
stands ready to be of assistance to Timor-Leste in
ensuring the smooth, peaceful, free, fair and credible
conduct of its first elections next year.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
give the floor to Mr. Hasegawa, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, to respond to the comments
made and questions raised during the discussion.
Mr. Hasegawa: I wish to express my own and
Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta’s appreciation for the
insightful and encouraging comments made by
members of the Security Council and other delegations.
I wish simply to respond to the question raised by the
Argentine representative, Mr. Apparicio da Silva, about
the root causes of the recent incidents in Dili.
I believe that the conflict that erupted two weeks
ago has three root causes.
The first is the institutional inability to address
the grievances of personnel due to the lack of a viable
vision or policy regarding human resources
management, mostly in the Timorese armed forces
(F-FDTL).
The second root cause, I believe, is the poverty
and unemployment that continue to prevail in the
country, particularly among young people, who have
nothing, and nothing to lose.
The third root cause is the mindset and tendency
of politically oriented interest groups to resort to

33

S/PV.5432

violence to incite the population and gain greater
influence. Indeed, given the nascent character of the
political system, continued assistance is needed from
the international community.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr.
Hasegawa for the clarifications he has provided.

34

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.
