S/PV.7045

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7045th meeting

Monday, 21 October 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mehdiyev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Azerbaijan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Menan
Mr. Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Security Council mission
Briefing by Security Council mission to Africa (3 to 9 October 2013)

13-52285 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1352285*

S/PV.7045

Security Council mission

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council mission
Briefing by Security Council mission to Africa
(3 to 9 October 2013)
The President: At this meeting the Security Council
will hear briefings by the following leads or co-leads of
the Security Council mission to Africa: His Excellency
Mr. Mohammed Loulichki, His Excellency Sir Mark
Lyall Grant, His Excellency Mr. Eugène-Richard
Gasana and His Excellency Mr. Jeffrey DeLaurentis.
I now give the floor to Mr. Loulichki.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to brief the Council on the Security
Council’s mission to investigate the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in the Great Lakes
region between 4 and 6 October, headed jointly by
the Deputy Permanent Representative of France,
Mr. Alexis Lamek, and myself. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Mr. Martin Kobler, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), and his whole
team for their welcome, their assistance and support
throughout that stage of the trip.
The Security Council’s entire visit to the area
occurred, as the Council is aware, in a context that
particularly favours the possibility of lasting peace in
the region, thanks to the signing by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its neighbours in Addis
Ababa, under the auspices of four international and
regional organizations, of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework Agreement for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region. The Council’s
message was focused on the implementation of the
Framework Agreement and resolution 2098 (2013), and
on a general urging to all to work to ensure the success
of the Kampala negotiations.
On the way to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo the Council made a stop in Brussels, where we
met with representatives of the Political and Security
Committee of the European Union to discuss the

2/6

21/10/2013

latest developments in the Great Lakes region, and the
political process under way and security sector reform
in particular. In Kinshasa the Council mission held
talks with all the Democratic Republic of the Congo
senior officials — the President of the Republic, the
Prime Minister, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, and
the Ministers of Defence, the Interior and Justice, as
well as the Presidents of the Senate and the House of
Representatives and the Chairs of the independent
national electoral commission and of the followup mechanism to the Framework Agreement. We
also attended the closing ceremony of the national
consultations, which have resulted in more than 200
recommendations.
On 6 October we arrived in Goma, where we
visited the site of the recent clashes in the hills around
Kibati between MONUSCO, the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo and the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23), after which we met with the Governor
of the province of North Kivu and representatives of
civil society. Finally, the Council mission concluded
this stage by visiting the Mugonga 3 displaced persons
camp, where we met with representatives of the camp
associations.
During the meetings with the Congolese
authorities, the Council acknowledged the importance
of effectively implementing the reforms that have begun
in various areas: the restoration of State authority,
democratization,
decentralization
and
national
reconciliation, the security sector and in economic
governance. Regarding the recommendations resulting
from the national consultations, the Council urged
that they be speedily translated into concrete action.
Security sector reform is particularly crucial, since
it will enable the Congolese authorities to gradually
assume responsibility for security and the defence of
territorial integrity. That was an important message
from the Council mission to the Congolese authorities.
During a meeting specifically devoted to that topic
with the Ministers of Defence, Interior and Justice, the
Council encouraged them to step up their efforts. The
coordination role that resolution 2098 (2013) granted
MONUSCO also makes it possible for it to support the
Congolese authorities in that area.
More generally, the issue of the restoration of State
authority was also raised in meetings with various
officials. The Council welcomes the fact that the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General has
decided to emphasize the eastern region, redeploying

13-52285

21/10/2013

Security Council mission

a part of the units to Goma to enforce the rule of
law. In a meeting in Kinshasa with the country team,
the Council also recalled the mandate agreed on in
resolution 2098 (2013) concerning the transfer of
certain tasks from MONUSCO to the country team.
MONUSCO should refocus on its fundamental tasks.
The country coordinator and the Special Representative
have committed to coming up with a road map to be
presented to the Council in December.
A number of speakers felt that the restoration of a
lasting peace would not be possible as long as insecurity
in the east continues, fomented as it is by outside
forces. The immediate objective should therefore be to
settle the problem raised by the M-23, the group that
is responsible for many attacks against the civilian
population in North Kivu for more than a year, which
would then make it possible to tackle the other groups,
in particular the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda and the Ugandan Allied Democratic Forces/
National Army for the Liberation of Uganda. The
Council encouraged the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to continue their discussions
under way in Kampala because the solution cannot be
only a military one. Nonetheless, the Council stressed
that a balance must be established between amnesty
and the fight against impunity for war crimes, drawing
lessons from the past to prevent a recurrence of the
same pattern of violence in the future.
Congolese authorities at all levels thanked the
Council and MONUSCO for their ongoing support.
They presented the progress made with respect to their
commitment in the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework . With respect to the Kampala process,
the same authorities said that they wanted to reach an
agreement as soon as possible. The most important
thing would be to prevent a repetition of past errors in
terms of amnesty and reintegration.
The Council’s visit also made it possible to assess
the status of resolution 2098 (2013) concerning the
deployment of the Force Intervention Brigade. The
Council was able to see the determination of the new
leadership of MONUSCO, in the persons of both the
Special Representative and Force Commander, to
implement the civilian protection mandate called for by
the resolution.
The Council also welcomed the actions taken by
MONUSCO since its arrival with the Intervention
Brigade and the North Kivu brigade alongside the

S/PV.7045

armed forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to bring an end to the M-23 attacks of the past
summer against the civilian population of Goma and
MONUSCO. The representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the Force Commander showed that they
were determined and committed to implementing the
mandate for the protection of civilians, which was that
of MONUSCO as a whole. The Intervention Brigade is
an instrument that will make it possible to move in that
direction. In meetings with civil society, the actions of
MONUSCO and the Brigade were warmly welcomed.
Finally, in all the aforementioned meetings,
whether it be with the Congolese authorities or with
the supervisors of MONUSCO or humanitarian actors
and civil society, the Council recalled the importance
of fighting against impunity. That was true in the case
of the discussions under way in Kampala, but it is
also true when it comes to the broader issue of all of
those responsible for serious crimes against humanity,
especially when it comes to sexual violence and
violence against children, including child recruitment.
The President: I thank Ambassador Loulichki for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Sir Mark Lyall Grant.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): On
7 October, alongside my colleague Ambassador Kodjo
Menan of Togo, I led the Security Council’s visit
to Uganda, which consisted of a detailed exchange
with President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, alongside
Defence Minister Kiyonga and Minister for Foreign
Affairs Sam Kutesa. In our meeting, I explained, on
behalf of the Security Council, that we saw a strategic
opportunity to bring stability to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the wider region, created
by the Addis Agreement, the strengthened mandate of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic People’s Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and the Kampala talks. I expressed the
Council’s appreciation for President Museveni’s work
to improve regional relations and conclude dialogue
between the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23).
The Council also wished to hear President
Museveni’s concerns on security in the region, including
on the armed groups the Ugandan Allied Democratic
Forces/National Army for the Liberation of Uganda
and the Lord’s Resistance Army. The continued threat
posed by those groups from the territory of eastern

13-522853/6

S/PV.7045

Security Council mission

Democratic Republic of the Congo to neighbouring
States is testament to the regional nature of the crisis.
President Museveni and Defence Minister
Koyongo updated us on the progress made so far in
the talks in Kampala between the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the M-23. I
expect that we will hear a fresh update on those talks in
the briefing immediately following this meeting. The
President also referred to the importance of aligning
national, regional and international efforts to support
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
he expressed appreciation for MONUSCO’s role in
helping to tackle armed groups. Council members said
that it would be important for the deal in Kampala to
avoid repeating the mistakes of 2009 peace agreement,
including allowing the worst human rights abusers to
remain on the scene. The President assured the Council
that sustained regional engagement would help deliver
full implementation of any deal.
President Museveni told the Council that the focus
needed to remain on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo as well as the region. As we have already heard
this morning, we were able to reassure him that while
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo we had
delivered important messages on internal reforms.
Council members appealed to President Museveni to
use his influence to ensure the full implementation
of commitments in the Framework Agreement by
all signatories and continue to promote peace in the
region. Overall, the exchange of views with President
Museveni served to underline the important role that
Uganda plays in furthering peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes Region,
in the short term, by security agreement in Kampala,
and in the longer term, by maintaining focus on the
implementation of the Addis Agreement.
In closing, I would like to express my thanks to the
Ugandan Government for hosting that leg of our visit
and for the open exchange of views we had. I would
also like to thank the staff of the United Nations, in
particular James Sutterlin and Davey McNab, for
ensuring the success of that part of our trip.
The President: I thank Sir Mark Lyall Grant for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Gasana.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): First of all, let me thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s briefing, for

4/6

21/10/2013

your leadership as President of the Security Council,
and for co-leading the Addis Ababa leg of the mission
to Africa together with Rwanda.
As detailed in the terms of reference for the
mission, the purpose of the visit to Addis Ababa
was mainly to strengthen partnership and enhance
cooperation between the African Union (AU) and the
United Nations in accordance with resolution 2033
(2012) and to exchange views on situations of interest
to the AU Peace and Security Council and the Security
Council. In that respect, on Wednesday, 8 October the
two Councils held their seventh join annual consultative
meeting. The meeting was co-chaired by yourself,
Mr. President, and by the Permanent Representative of
Equatorial Guinea to the AU, in his capacity as Acting
President of the Peace and Security Council.
Six topics were the agenda of that meeting: the Great
Lakes region, the Sudan and South Sudan, Somalia,
the Central African Republic, the Sahel region and the
enhancement of the partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations. Each organization had a
lead member to introduce each topic or to respond to the
introduction made by a designated member of the other
organization. Generally, as attested by the outcome of
the meeting, the two Councils agreed in principle on
the diagnosis of the crisis, on the partnerships required
and on the solution to bring sustainable peace in those
conflict-affected countries. A joint communiqué was
indeed adopted and was issued as a document of the
Security Council.
The AU Peace and Security Counci and the
Security Council assessed, inter alia, the cooperation
between the AU and the United Nations with regard to
the promotion and maintenance of peace and security
in Africa. They welcomed the progress made so far and
stressed the need for continued efforts to enhance the
existing partnership at both the strategic and operational
levels, in order to ensure greater synergy and coherence
and more effective responses to the evolving peace and
security challenges that the African continent is facing.
In that respect, we undertook to conduct necessary
consultations to ensure the effective implementation of
the steps agreed upon at their meetings and reiterated
the need for the agenda of their annual joint consultative
meetings to be agreed in advance and to include in
such agenda an item on issues that require follow-up,
along the lines of the communiqué of fifth annual joint
consultative meeting held in New York on 13 June 2010.

13-52285

21/10/2013

Security Council mission

The two Councils agreed to convene their eighth
annual joint consultative meeting in New York in
June 2014. The date of the meeting will be determined
through consultations between the Chairperson of the
AU Peace and Security Council and the President of the
Security Council.
Following the joint consultative meeting, the
Security Council also met, upon her request, with
Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, Chairperson of the
AU Commission, to exchange views on the relationship
between the International Criminal Court and the
African continent.
The Council ended its mission to Africa with
a meeting with His Excellency Mr. Hailemariam
Dessalegn, Prime Minister of Ethiopia and Chairperson
of the African Union, in which both parties reviewed
together the outcome of the mission to Africa and
discussed peace and security on the continent.
Let me conclude by thanking you, Sir, for your
leadership and for scheduling this productive mission to
Africa. I extend my appreciation also to my colleagues,
the members of the Security Council, for the highlevel representation from their delegations and for their
active participation throughout the mission.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): On
7 October, Ambassador Power had the privilege of
leading the Security Council’s first visit to Rwanda
since 2009. Council members began that leg of our trip
by visiting a demobilization centre in Mutobo, where
we had a chance to hear testimonials from former
Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR)
combatants who had voluntarily returned and, with the
help of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and the Rwandan Government, are
trying to reintegrate into society. These individuals
told us about the difficulties they faced while living on
the run in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
about the hard choices they had to make in deciding
to leave the rebel force. In many cases, the FDLR has
threatened to retaliate against them and members of
their families. We were pleased to hear of the key role
that MONUSCO continues to play, in collaboration
with Rwandan authorities, to ensure that these former
fighters can successfully resume their lives.
The Council then travelled to Kigali, where
we had a tour of the children’s wing of the Gisozi
genocide memorial. Even those of us who had already

S/PV.7045

visited Rwanda’s memorial were overwhelmed by
the devastating eloquence of the memorial. Since the
memorial opened in 2004, more than 100,000 visitors
have viewed the exhibits — an impressive number, but
a mere fraction of the 250,000 people whose bodies
are buried in mass graves beneath the four acres of
memorial gardens and grounds. The facility serves as a
permanent repository for photos and testimonies related
to the 1994 genocide and a permanent warning for the
world community. That warning has special meeting
for the Council, which failed dismally in responding to
the slaughter of 19 years ago.
As Council members are aware, the waves crated
by the genocide continue to disrupt and claim lives.
Prior to arriving in Kigali, we met with displaced
persons outside of Goma in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, where many thousands of families have
been victimized by recurring attacks and atrocities.
We were struck by the contrast between conditions in
and around Goma and the relatively calm and stable
environment in Rwanda. In our meetings with Rwandan
officials, several of us made the point that Rwanda has
an opportunity to take steps that would help spread the
peace and greater prosperity it has achieved to people
across the Great Lakes Region.
Following our visit to the Gisozi memorial, we
met in Kigali with the Ministers of Foreign Affairs,
Defence and Finance, and with senior representatives
responsible of intelligence and economic planning. In
those meetings, we discussed a comprehensive range of
issues, including the status of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. Foreign Minister
Mushikiwabo assured us of her Government’s readiness
to be a full partner in creating a sustainable peace, and
said that she was encouraged by the proactive initiatives
undertaken by the Secretary-General, the President of
the World Bank and the new leadership of MONUSCO.
The Foreign Minister also raised Rwanda’s concerned
about the ongoing security threat posed by the FDLR and
requested greater collaboration between the Security
Council and the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region. We were able to reinforce the message
that Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Kobler had delivered — that MONUSCO would not
allow the FDLR to wreak havoc in eastern Congo any
more than it would the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23).
Council members then had a frank 90-minute
dialogue with President Paul Kagame. The President

13-522855/6

S/PV.7045

Security Council mission

echoed his Foreign Minister in calling attention to the
dangerous activities of the FDLR. Council members
again noted MONUSCO’s clear mandate to neutralize
all irregular armed groups and expressed their
commitment to seeing that that aspect of the United
Nations Mission’s mandate was implemented. Council
members cited the threat posed by, in addition to the
FDLR, the M-23, and observed that, if the regional
Framework is to succeed, all armed groups must be
neutralized.
Building on this point, we emphasized the
imperative for every country, including Rwanda, to
neither tolerate nor provide support to any militia or
armed force, and appealed to President Kagame to use
his country’s influence with the M-23 to promote peace
and help bring the Kampala talks to a decisive close.
The President pledged that Rwanda would be
a genuine partner in the peace process but noted his
concern with how events in the region had been
characterized, questioning whether the causes of the
current conflict are accurately understood. Further,
he urged the Council and the international community

6/6

21/10/2013

to help establish adequate judicial and accountability
mechanisms in the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Overall, we found our exchange of views with
Rwandan Government officials to be very substantive
and constructive, and we are hopeful that the dialogue
will help to further efforts to achieve regional peace.
In closing, I would like to thank the United Nations
Resident Coordinator for Rwanda, Lamin Manneh, and
other United Nations staff, including Neneh Bah, James
Sutterlin and Davey McNab, for helping to make this leg
of our trip successful. I express my appreciation, too,
to our Rwandan Government hosts for their hospitality
and open exchange of views.
The President: I should like to express appreciation
to all of the members of the Security Council and
the Secretariat who participated in the mission for
the manner in which they discharged their important
responsibilities on behalf of the Council.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 10.25 a.m.

13-52285
