S/2002/207*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 March 2002
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
Terms of Reference for the ad hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa

I.

Composition

The Working Group should consist of one representative from each member of
the Security Council. It should be entirely informal in nature.

II. Chairmanship
The Chairman of the Working Group will be designated by members of the
Security Council for a period of one year. The Chairman of the Group will be
Ambassador Jagdish Koonjul, Permanent Representative of Mauritius to the United
Nations.

III. Mandate
(i)

To monitor the implementation of recommendations contained in the
presidential statement S/PRST/2002/2 and previous presidential
statements and resolutions regarding conflict prevention and resolution in
Africa.

(ii)

To propose recommendations on the enhancement of cooperation
between the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council as
well as with other United Nations agencies dealing with Africa.

(iii) To examine, in particular, regional and cross-conflict issues that affect
the Council’s work on African conflict prevention and resolution.
(iv) To propose recommendations to the Security Council to enhance
cooperation in conflict prevention and resolution, between the United
Nations and regional (OAU) and subregional organizations.

* Reissued for technical reasons.
02-26596* (E)

010302

*0226596*

S/2002/207

IV. Methods of work
(i)

The Working Group will hold informal meetings.

(ii)

Decisions will be taken by consensus.

(iii) The Chairman of the Working Group will report to the Council whenever
appropriate.
(iv) The Security Council will conduct a review of the progress of the work
of the Working Group against its mandate not later than six months from
its establishment.

V. Duration
In the light of the review in paragraph IV, (iv) above, the Security Council will
decide on the mandate of the Working Group.

2
