UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/201
6 March 1998
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: FRENCH

LETTER DATED 15 JANUARY 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to transmit herewith a copy of the report submitted to me
by the fact-finding mission to the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
I should be grateful if you would bring this report to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

98-05603 (E)

060398

060398

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1998/201
English
Page 2

Annex
[Original:

English]

Report of the fact-finding mission to the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to the Secretary-General

Introduction
1.
The fact-finding mission that you asked me to lead to the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya visited the country from 13 to 18 December 1997. I was accompanied
by Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, Principal Officer, Department of Political Affairs,
and Mr. Winston Tubman, Principal Legal Officer.
2.
The task given to the mission was to meet with Libyan officials and to hear
and record information they provided concerning the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 748 (1992) of 31 March 1992 and 883 (1993) of
11 November 1993 and the humanitarian and economic conditions in the country; to
meet with representatives of the United Nations system resident in the country
to be briefed about their activities and programmes; and to submit a succinct
and factual report to you on the basis of those discussions and briefings.
3.
The mission met with senior officials of the Government, including the
Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation; Health; Agriculture; Planning,
Economy and Trade; and Animal Wealth; the Vice-Minister of Transportation; the
Governor of the Central Bank of Libya; and the Director of the National
Authority for Information and Documentation. It also met with the Chairman of
the Foreign Relations Committee at the General People's Congress. The mission
visited the Tripoli International Airport, a children's hospital and a kidney
treatment and transplant centre, an agricultural air company and the Al-Haira
Valley project for livestock and poultry in Azizia, some 70 kilometres south of
Tripoli. The mission also met with the representatives of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. The list of the
officials with whom the mission met and the programme of its activities is
attached.
The sanctions regime
4.
The Security Council, acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, imposed a regime of sanctions on the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in
resolutions 748 (1992) and 883 (1993). The sanctions imposed in resolution
748 (1992) related to various aspects of air embargo, supply of arms and
military weapons, reduction and restriction of the activities of diplomatic and
consular missions and restrictions of known or suspected terrorist nationals of
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. Those measures were significantly expanded by
resolution 883 (1993) to include a freeze on some Libyan assets abroad, the
tightening of the air embargo and the banning of certain types of equipment used
at oil transportation terminals and refineries.

/...

S/1998/201
English
Page 3

5.
In their meetings with the mission, the Libyan officials elaborated in some
detail upon the adverse impact that the air embargo was having on the economy,
particularly on the health, social and agricultural sectors. The freeze on
assets was mentioned by the Governor of the Central Bank, not so much in
connection with its impact on the humanitarian situation, but on the overall
economy. However, no mention was made of the arms embargo and the reduction and
restriction of Libyan diplomatic and consular missions abroad. Similarly, the
effect of the sanctions on the oil sector was raised only once by the Libyan
officials, and in general terms, during the mission's introductory meeting with
senior officials of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation.
The economic and social situation:

a brief overview

6.
According to the Government of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, the economic
situation of the country has deteriorated during the last five years of
sanctions. The gross domestic product has declined and so has foreign direct
investment. The unemployment rate has increased from less than 1 per cent in
1992 to 12 per cent in 1996, and the inflation rate has also increased sharply.
In the local market, the price of most goods and services has risen by more than
200 per cent.
7.
The sectors that have been most affected include health and social
services, agriculture and transportation. In response to queries from the
mission regarding vulnerable groups, the Libyan officials mentioned women and
children and also said that the level of poverty in the country had increased
overall. When asked by the mission why the mechanisms established by the
Sanctions Committee to address the unintended consequences of the sanctions had
not worked, the response often given by the Libyan officials was that removal of
the "unjust" sanctions was the only way to resolve the difficulties facing the
Libyan economy, particularly the humanitarian situation.
The effect of the air embargo
8.
According to the Libyan officials, the air embargo had and continues to
have a pervasive, adverse impact on the social well-being of the people and the
economy of the country. In large measure, they attributed the problems
experienced in the health and social sectors directly to the air embargo.
9.
Although the air embargo does not apply to domestic air travel, the
restrictions on the purchase of aircraft, spare parts, navigational and landing
equipment, and on training and certification of pilots and other crew have
reduced the number of airworthy aircraft and curtailed domestic air travel. In
addition to the restrictions this has placed on the ability of Libyans to
respond to humanitarian emergencies, it has also limited the mobility of
expatriate and foreign nationals, a view shared by the United Nations and
diplomatic community in the country.
10. The mission was told that the most adverse impact of the air embargo was on
the health sector. It has restricted and complicated emergency medical
evacuation both within and outside the country, and some patients have died
while waiting for permission to be granted. The fact that the Sanctions
Committee did not meet during weekends was also mentioned as one of the reasons
/...

S/1998/201
English
Page 4

for the delay in approving requests for exemptions. The difficulty of importing
spare parts has reduced to one the air ambulance fleet of four authorized by the
Sanctions Committee. It has also led to inordinate delays in the arrival of
urgently needed vaccines, serums and drugs. Moreover, it has made it difficult
for Libyan medical professionals to travel abroad and has discouraged foreign
medical professionals from travelling to the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya for training
and consultation purposes and has become an impediment to regional and
international programmes and campaigns for basic health care, including those
initiated by WHO. These points were underscored to the mission during visits to
a children's hospital and a kidney treatment and transplant centre by the
medical staff, including expatriate professionals.
11. Again, the mission underlined that the Sanctions Committee had authorized
exemptions to respond to humanitarian emergencies and that the Committee's
reports indicated that the Government of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya had not
availed itself of them. The mission noted that it had learned that the
Government had not yet responded to a proposal submitted to it by WHO in 1996
for the importation of vaccines, medicines and serums in two consignments perishable and urgently needed medication by air and the rest by sea. The
Libyan officials remarked that they were not satisfied that the arrangement
ensured that the medicines would arrive on time and that the proposed aircraft
was too small for transporting the medicines. According to the WHO
representative, the Government also felt that the price quoted for the
consignment was not competitive.
12. Because of the air embargo, road transportation has increased in volume
significantly and has led to sharp increases in the number of road accidents and
casualties. It has also made it difficult for Libyans to perform religious
rites, particularly Umra pilgrimage to Mecca outside the Haj season. The
suspension of Libyan Arab Airline flights abroad and the drastic reduction of
its domestic flights has forced the company to lay off hundreds of people, with
serious consequences to the welfare of the employees and their families as well
as to the long-term viability of the national airline.
13. In the agricultural sector, the difficulties and delays faced in the
importation of grafted fruit-tree seedlings, beekeeping supplies and
pharmaceuticals, fire-fighting equipment and chemicals has resulted in material
damage and financial loss. The suspension of air travel has also hampered the
work of animal health inspectors and caused delays in the delivery of veterinary
supplies needed to protect farm animals and poultry from diseases. Agricultural
aviation has come almost to a standstill because of the inability to obtain
spare parts for aircraft used in spraying. Officials of the agricultural air
company pointed out that they would be unable to respond adequately if, as they
expect, a locust attack were to occur. That would have serious consequences for
agricultural production in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and neighbouring
countries.
14. According to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) in Tripoli, the air embargo has contributed to the increase in
the hardship of refugees in the country and the cost of repatriation. At
present, there are about 7,000 registered refugees in the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, most of them Palestinians, followed by Somalis and Eritreans. The
/...

S/1998/201
English
Page 5

repatriation of refugees through neighbouring countries is difficult because of
cumbersome formalities and costly charter flights. Even refugees who wish to
return to their countries without UNHCR assistance are greatly hampered because
neighbouring countries either bar them from entry or because the visa process is
often time-consuming.
Psychological effect of the sanctions
15. It was apparent that the sanctions had a psychological effect on the Libyan
leadership. It feels isolated, targeted and unjustly subjected to a form of
collective punishment even before the guilt or innocence of the two suspects had
been established through an appropriate judicial process. The Libyan officials
underscored that the stigma of a rogue State was hurting the people at large,
and the damage to national pride has been grave. They noted that the
psychological impact also constrained other countries from dealing with the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in areas outside the purview of the sanctions. They also
seemed perplexed that the initiatives and alternatives proposed by the
Organization of African Unity and the League of Arab States, among others, to
facilitate a resolution of the problem were not accepted by the Security
Council.
The Libyan démarche
16. It was apparent to the mission that the Libyans consider the sanctions
imposed in resolutions 748 (1992) and 883 (1993) as "illegal" and unjust and
want them to be lifted immediately. The mission was quick to stress that its
primary purpose was to listen and record the views of the Government on the
implementation of the resolutions and on the economic and social conditions in
the country. In the latter case, the mission pointed out the existing channels
through which the Government of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya could seek relief
from the impact of the sanctions on the humanitarian situation in the country on
a case-by-case basis and solicited its view on how to help mitigate the adverse
impact of the sanctions, especially on vulnerable groups.
17. The Libyan officials reiterated to the mission the specific exemptions that
they would like the Security Council to approve, particularly urgent requests of
a humanitarian nature relating to the health and social sectors. Those include:
permission to operate flights to carry medicines, vaccines and blood specimens;
an increase in the number of countries where patients may be taken by Libyan
medical evacuation aircraft for treatment; permission to purchase aircraft for
use in medical evacuation inside and outside the country; permission to operate
direct flights for humanitarian and religious purposes; and permission to
acquire spare parts, emergency equipment and equipment and services directly
linked with civilian air traffic control. The mission emphasized that many of
those requests could not be addressed within the existing mechanism and would
require a decision of the Security Council.
18. The Libyan officials with whom the mission met were appreciative of the
Secretary-General's decision to send the mission. They said that it was
important for the Secretary-General to be given an impartial, first-hand account
of the views of officials and professionals both within and outside the
Government on the economic and social conditions in the country, particularly
/...

S/1998/201
English
Page 6

regarding the deteriorating situation in the health, social and agricultural
sectors as a result of the sanctions.
19. In conclusion, I would like to express my appreciation to Mr. Zerihoun and
Mr. Tubman for their contributions to the work of the mission and its report, as
well as to the Resident Coordinator, Mr. Awni Al-Ani, and
Mr. Abdelhamid Abdeljaber (Office of Communications and Public Information),
interpreter and information officer, for their valuable support to the mission.

(Signed)

Vladimir PETROVSKY

/...

S/1998/201
English
Page 7

Attachment
[Original:

English]

Programme of meetings of the fact-finding mission to the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya (13 to 18 December 1997)

Saturday, 13 December 1997
14.00

Arrival in Tripoli

17.00

Meeting at the Foreign Ministry: welcoming remarks by
Mr. Solayman Eleghmary, Minister of Health and Social Affairs, and
Mr. Abel-Ati Obeidi, Under-Secretary-General for European Affairs at the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs

18.30

Meeting with:
-

Mr. Abdul Hafeth Al-Zlatni, Minister of Planning, Economy and Trade

-

Mr. Taher Al-Johami, Governor of the Central Bank

-

Mr. Amar Eltaif, Director of the National Authority for Information
and Documentation

Sunday, 14 December 1997
10.00

Meeting with Mr. Ali Ben Ramadan and Mr. Mas'oud Abu Sowa, Ministers of
Agriculture and of Animal Wealth, respectively, and their senior staff

13.00

Official lunch with Mr. Omar Mustapha Al-Montaser, Minister of Foreign
Affairs

15.00

Visit to the cemetery of Saidi Al-Saaeh, 30 km outside Tripoli

16.00

Meeting with the Under-Secretary of Transportation and his senior staff
Visit to Tripoli International Airport and meetings with pilots,
engineers and other officials of Libyan Arab Airlines

Monday, 15 December 1997
10.00

Meeting with Mr. Solayman Eleghmary, Minister of Health, and his senior
staff, including the heads of the Air Ambulance Unit, the children's
hospital and a kidney treatment and transplant centre

15.00

Walking tour of some shops, pharmacies and supermarkets in Tripoli

/...

S/1998/201
English
Page 8

Tuesday, 16 December 1997
10.00

Meeting with United Nations staff at the UNDP office

10.30

Meeting with the heads of UNDP, WHO and UNICEF

16.00

Visit to the Agriculture Air Company, 60 km outside Tripoli

17.00

Visit to the Azizia banana farm, 55 km outside Tripoli

Wednesday, 17 December 1997
10.00

Visit to the Tripoli Paediatric Hospital

11.00

Visit to the Al-Zahra Kidney Hospital, 45 km outside Tripoli

19.00

Reception by the United Nations Resident Coordinator for the mission and
the diplomatic corps accredited to the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya

Thursday, 18 December 1997
08.00

Visit to the Al-Haira poultry and livestock farm, 72 km outside Tripoli

10.00

Meeting with Mr. Saad Mujbir, Chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee
at the General People's Congress

12.00

Concluding meeting with Mr. Omar Mustapha Al-Montaser, Minister of
Foreign Affairs

Friday, 19 December 1997
07.00

Departure by land to Djerba

-----
