A/58/PV.62

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-eighth session

62nd plenary meeting
Monday, 24 November 2003, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

The Hon. Julian R. Hunte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Saint Lucia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. van den Berg
(Netherlands), (Vice-President), took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 16 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(a) Election of forty-three members of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade
Law
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will elect 43 members of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law, pursuant to
resolutions 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, 3108
(XXVIII) of 12 December 1973, 31/99 of 15 December
1976 and 57/20 of 19 November 2002.
The General Assembly will turn first to the
election of 19 members to replace those members
whose term of office expires on 13 June 2004, the last
day prior to the opening of the thirty-seventh session of
the Commission. The General Assembly will then
proceed to the election of 24 additional members of the
Commission, pursuant to resolution 57/20 of 19
November 2002.
After the election of the 24 additional members,
the President of the General Assembly shall draw lots
to select 13 from among the 24 additional members,
whose terms of office shall expire on the last day prior

to the beginning of the fortieth session of the
Commission, in 2007.
The General Assembly will now proceed to the
election of 19 members to replace those members
whose term of office expires on 13 June 2004. The 19
outgoing members are: Austria, Burkina Faso,
Colombia, Fiji, Honduras, Hungary, India, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Italy, Kenya, Lithuania, Paraguay,
Romania, Spain, the Sudan, Thailand, Uganda, the
United States of America and Uruguay. Those members
are eligible for immediate re-election.
I should like to remind members that, as of 14
June 2004, the following States will continue to be
represented on the Commission: Benin, Brazil,
Cameroon, Canada, China, France, Germany, Japan,
Mexico, Morocco, the Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Sweden, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Those 17 States are
therefore not eligible.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of
procedure, the election shall be held by secret ballot
and there shall be no nominations. I should like to
recall, however, paragraph 16 of General Assembly
decision 34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing
with the secret ballot for elections to subsidiary organs
when the number of candidates corresponds to the
number of seats to be filled should become standard,
unless a delegation specifically requests a vote on a
given election.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

03-62868 (E)

*
0
3
6
2
8
6
8
*

A/58/PV.62

In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to this election on the
basis of dispensing with the secret ballot?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I shall now read out the
names of the candidates endorsed by the regional
groups.
For the four seats from among the African States,
the endorsed candidates are Kenya, Madagascar,
Nigeria and Uganda.
For the four seats from among the Asian States,
the endorsed candidates are India, Mongolia, Pakistan
and Thailand.
For the three seats from among the Eastern
European States, the endorsed candidates are Belarus,
the Czech Republic and Serbia and Montenegro.
For the four seats from among the Latin
American and Caribbean States, the endorsed
candidates are Ecuador, Guatemala, Paraguay and
Venezuela.
For the four seats from among the Western
European and other States, the endorsed candidates are
Austria, Italy, Spain and the United States of America.
Since the number of candidates endorsed by the
African States, the Asian States, the Eastern European
States, the Latin American and Caribbean States and
the Western European and other States corresponds to
the number of seats to be filled in each group, may I
take it that the General Assembly wishes to declare
those candidates elected for a six-year term beginning
on 14 June 2004?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I congratulate the
following States, which have been elected members of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law for a six-year term beginning on 14 June 2004:
Austria, Belarus, the Czech Republic, Ecuador,
Guatemala, India, Italy, Kenya, Madagascar, Mongolia,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Paraguay, Serbia and Montenegro,
Spain, Thailand, Uganda, the United States of America
and Venezuela.
The General Assembly will now proceed to the
election of 24 additional members of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law.

2

Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 57/20,
the additional members are to be elected according to
the following pattern: five from among the African
States; seven from among the Asian States; three from
among the Eastern European States; four from among
the Latin American and Caribbean States; and five
from among the Western European and other States.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of
procedure, the election shall be held by secret ballot
and there shall be no nominations. I should like to
recall, however, paragraph 16 of General Assembly
decision 34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing
with the secret ballot for elections to subsidiary organs
when the number of candidates corresponds to the
number of seats to be filled should become standard,
unless a delegation specifically requests a vote on a
given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to this election on the
basis of dispensing with the secret ballot?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I shall now read out the
names of the candidates endorsed by the regional
groups.
For the five seats from among the African States,
the endorsed candidates are Algeria, Gabon, South
Africa, Tunisia and Zimbabwe.
For the seven seats from among the Asian States,
the endorsed candidates are Fiji, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Jordan, Lebanon, Qatar, the Republic of Korea
and Sri Lanka.
For the three seats from among the Eastern
European States, the endorsed candidates are Croatia,
Lithuania and Poland.
For the four seats from among the Latin
American and Caribbean States, the endorsed
candidates are Argentina, Chile, Colombia and
Uruguay.
For the five seats from among the Western
European and other States, the endorsed candidates are
Australia, Belgium, Israel, Switzerland and Turkey.
Since the number of candidates endorsed by the
African States, the Asian States, the Eastern European
States, the Latin American and Caribbean States and
the Western European and other States corresponds to

A/58/PV.62

the number of seats to be filled in each group, may I
take it that the General Assembly wishes to declare
those candidates elected members of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I congratulate the
following States, which have been elected members of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law: Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Chile,
Colombia, Croatia, Fiji, Gabon, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Lithuania, Poland, Qatar,
the Republic of Korea, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Switzerland, Tunisia, Turkey, Uruguay and Zimbabwe.
The General Assembly will now turn to the
drawing of lots to select 13 from among the 24
additional members just elected. The terms of office of
these 13 members shall expire on the last day prior to
the beginning of the fortieth session of the
Commission, in 2007.
Pursuant to resolution 57/20, the 13 members are
to be drawn according to the following pattern: two
from African States; four from Asian States; two from
Eastern European States; three from Latin American
and Caribbean States; and two from Western European
and other States.
First I will proceed to the drawing of lots for two
members from among the five additional members of
the Commission from African States.
As members can see, the box is empty. The names
of the five countries that will now be put into the box
are: Algeria, Gabon, South Africa, Tunisia and
Zimbabwe.
The Acting President drew the following two
names from the box: Tunisia and South Africa.
The Acting President: Next, I will proceed to
the drawing of lots for four members from among the
seven additional members of the Commission from the
Asian States.
As members can see, the box is empty. The names
of the seven countries will now be put into the box.
They are: Fiji, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan,
Lebanon, Qatar, the Republic of Korea and Sri Lanka.
The Acting President drew the following four
names from the box: Qatar, Jordan, Republic of
Korea and Sri Lanka.

The Acting President: Now, I will proceed to the
drawing of lots for two members from among the three
additional members of the Commission from the
Eastern European States.
As members can see, the box is empty. The names
of the three countries will now be put into the box.
They are: Croatia, Lithuania and Poland.
The Acting President drew the following two
names from the box: Croatia and Lithuania.
The Acting President: Next, I will proceed to
the drawing of lots for three members from among the
four additional members of the Commission from the
Latin American and Caribbean States.
As members can see, the box is empty. The names
of the four countries will now be put into the box. They
are: Argentina, Chile, Colombia and Uruguay.
The Acting President drew the following three
names from the box: Chile, Argentina and
Uruguay.
The Acting President: Now I will proceed to the
drawing of lots for two members from among the five
additional members of the Commission from the
Western European and other States.
As members can see, the box is empty. The names
of the five countries will now be put into the box. They
are: Australia, Belgium, Israel, Switzerland and
Turkey.
The Acting President drew the following two
names from the box: Belgium and Turkey.
The Acting President: Having been drawn by
lots, the following 13 members of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law will serve a
term of office beginning on 14 June 2004 and ending
on the last day prior to the beginning of the fortieth
session of the Commission, in 2007: Argentina,
Belgium, Chile, Croatia, Jordan, Lithuania, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Tunisia,
Turkey and Uruguay.
The following 30 members of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law have been
elected for a term of office of six years, beginning on
14 June 2004: Algeria, Australia, Austria, Belarus,
Colombia, the Czech Republic, Ecuador, Fiji, Gabon,
Guatemala, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel,
Italy, Kenya, Lebanon, Madagascar, Mongolia, Nigeria,

3

A/58/PV.62

Pakistan, Paraguay, Poland, Serbia and Montenegro,
Spain, Switzerland, Thailand, Uganda, the United
States of America, Venezuela and Zimbabwe.

The two Western European and other States, for
two vacancies, are France and the United States of
America.

The Acting President: This concludes our
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 16.

In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of
procedure, all elections should be held by secret ballot,
and there shall be no nominations. However, I should
like to recall paragraph 16 of General Assembly
decision 34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing
with the secret ballot for elections to subsidiary organs
when the number of candidates corresponds to the
number of seats to be filled should become standard,
unless a delegation specifically requests a vote on a
given election.

(c) Election of seven members of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination
The Acting President: Pursuant to General
Assembly decision 42/450 of 17 December 1987, the
Assembly elects the members of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination upon their nomination by
the Economic and Social Council.
The Assembly has before it document A/58/552,
which contains the nominations by the Economic and
Social Council to fill the vacancies in the Committee
that will occur as a result of the expiration, on 31
December 2003, of the terms of office of the Bahamas,
Botswana, France, Mexico, the Russian Federation, the
United Republic of Tanzania and the United States of
America.
Those States are eligible for immediate reelection.
I should like to remind members that, after 1
January 2004, the following States will still be
members of the Committee: Argentina, Armenia,
Benin, Brazil, Canada, the Central African Republic,
China, Cuba, Ethiopia, Gabon, Germany, India,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Japan,
Monaco, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, the Republic of
Korea, the Republic of Moldova, South Africa,
Switzerland, Tunisia, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and Uruguay.

In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on the
basis of dispensing with the secret ballot?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Since the number of
States nominated from among the four regional groups
corresponds to the number of seats to be filled in each
of those groups, may I therefore take it that the
Assembly wishes to declare those States nominated by
the Economic and Social Council from among the
African States, the Eastern European States, the Latin
American and Caribbean States, and the Western
European and Other States — namely the Bahamas, the
Comoros, France, Mexico, the Russian Federation, the
United States of America and Zimbabwe — elected
members of the Committee for Programme and
Coordination for three-year terms of office beginning
on 1 January 2004.
It was so decided.

Therefore, those 27 States are not eligible in this
election.

The Acting President: I congratulate the seven
States that have been elected members of the
Committee for Programme and Coordination.

I should now like to inform members that the
following Member States have been nominated by the
Economic and Social Council.

We have thus concluded our consideration of subitem (c) of agenda item 16 and of agenda item 16 as a
whole.

The two African States, for two vacancies, are the
Comoros and Zimbabwe.

Agenda item 20 (continued)

The one Eastern European State, for one vacancy,
is the Russian Federation.
The two Latin American and Caribbean States,
for two vacancies, are the Bahamas and Mexico.

4

Support by the United Nations system of the efforts
of Governments to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies
Draft resolution (A/58/L.15)

A/58/PV.62

The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held the debate on this agenda
item at its 57th and 59th meetings, on 5 and 10
November 2003.
In connection with this item, the Assembly has
before it a draft resolution issued as document
A/58/L.15.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Mongolia to introduce draft resolution A/58/L.15.
Mr. Choisuren (Mongolia): My delegation has
the honour to introduce, on behalf of its sponsors, draft
resolution A/58/L.15, entitled “Support by the United
Nations system of the efforts of Governments to
promote and consolidate new or restored democracies”.
The draft resolution has been prepared on the
basis of a previous resolution adopted by the General
Assembly at its fifty-sixth session in December 2001
and modified to take into account the activities
undertaken by the United Nations and Member States
over the past two years.
I wish also to inform the Assembly that, on 28
October, informal consultations were organized by our
delegation with the draft resolution’s sponsors to
finalize its text.
As the Secretary-General noted in his report on
this agenda item, the survey of the democratic
assistance given by the United Nations system to new
or restored democracies clearly demonstrates the
widened scope of the Organization’s involvement in
promoting democratization.
The Ulaanbaatar Conference of New or Restored
Democracies has also given new momentum to pursue
the Organization’s emerging democratization agenda.
But there is still much more to be done to make the
work of the United Nations system in support of
democracy more integrated and effective.
Therefore, in the draft resolution, the General
Assembly, while recognizing once again the important
role of the United Nations in providing timely,
appropriate and coherent sport to the efforts of
Governments
and
commending
the
activities
undertaken, encourages the Secretary-General to
continue to improve the capacity of the Organization to
respond effectively to the requests of the Member
States.

The Secretary-General further underlines, in his
concluding observations, that, although democratic
government differs from country to country, a more
coherent approach to democratization is certainly
needed, one which requires a global dialogue on
common challenges and practices of governance in the
twenty-first century.
International cooperation also needs to be
strengthened, along with the tools to carry out the work
in that field. The Assembly debate that took place on
this agenda item reaffirmed this need and underlined in
that regard the importance of ensuring effective followup to the Fifth International Conference of New or
Restored Democracies.
In operative paragraph 3, the draft resolution
therefore encourages Member States, the relevant
organizations of the United Nations system, other
international organizations, national parliaments and
non-governmental organizations to contribute actively
to the follow-up and to make additional efforts to
identify possible steps in support of the efforts of
Governments, including those set out in the
Ulaanbaatar Declaration and Plan of Action.
As
His
Excellency
Mr.
Luvsangiin
Erdenechuluun, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Mongolia and President of the Fifth Conference,
indicated in his statement to the General Assembly (see
A/58/PV.57), the Conference presidency will place
particular focus on efforts to implement the
recommendations adopted by the Conference. He also
shared some preliminary ideas on how to ensure more
effective and efficient follow-up. In this regard, I wish
to reiterate the importance my country attaches to the
support and cooperation of Member States, the United
Nations and other international organizations and nongovernmental organizations in implementing their
follow-up activities.
During the consultations on the draft resolution
before us, several delegations put forward constructive
ideas and proposals that further improve the text. Still,
at the request of some of the sponsors, I wish to make a
small revision to paragraph 3 of the draft resolution.
After the words “national parliaments”, the text
“, including” should be added. And after the words
“Inter-Parliamentary Union”. the text “and other
parliamentary organizations,” should be added.
At the time the draft resolution was published, 84
countries were sponsors. Another 42 countries have

5

A/58/PV.62

since joined as sponsors. They are: Antigua and
Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Belize, Cape Verde, Chad,
Colombia, Croatia, Djibouti, Dominica, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, Gabon,
Georgia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Iceland,
Kenya, Latvia, Lesotho, Madagascar, the Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Niger, Pakistan, the Republic of Moldova,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Serbia and
Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Suriname, Switzerland,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay, Venezuela and Zambia. This brings the total
number of sponsors to 126. I hope that today many
more countries will join in sponsoring the draft
resolution. That would be another energetic
demonstration of the international community’s support
for the efforts of Governments to achieve
democratization in their respective countries and in the
international arena as a whole.

States of America and, of course, my own country,
Chile. Italy, Peru and Romania also associate
themselves with this statement.

On behalf of all of the sponsors, I express our
hope that draft resolution A/58/L.15, as orally revised,
will receive, as similar texts have received in the past,
the unanimous support of the Assembly and will be
adopted without a vote.

The Community of Democracies was launched in
June 2000 at a ministerial conference in Warsaw,
Poland, where more than 100 countries pledged to
uphold the democratic principles outlined in the
Warsaw Declaration. At its recent ministerial meeting
held here during the General Assembly session, on 26
September, the convening group stressed the adherence
of the Community of Democracies to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and fundamental
principles of international law. They also emphasized
the interdependence among peace, development,
human rights and democracy, and reiterated the
commitment of the Community of Democracies to the
continued development of democracy at the national,
regional and global levels. Furthermore, the members
of the convening group recalled the Warsaw
Declaration commitment that the Community of
Democracies will collaborate on democracy-related
issues in existing international and regional
institutions.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/58/L.15, as orally
revised. Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that since the
introduction of the draft resolution the following
countries have become sponsors of A/58/L.15: Nauru,
Nepal and Senegal.

It is on the basis of the aforementioned that the
convening group of the caucus of democracies
supported the draft resolution in document A/58/L.15,
entitled “Support by the United Nations system of the
efforts of Governments to promote and consolidate new
or restored democracies” and introduced by Mongolia,
as an important contribution to our common purpose.

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/58/L.15, as orally revised?

We look forward to collaborating with all
interested States that share our values and our
dedication to the promotion of democracy, and with the
Secretariat, in the implementation of this resolution.

Draft resolution A/58/L.15, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 58/13).
Mr. Muñoz (Chile): I have the honour to take the
floor on behalf of the members of the convening group
of the Community of Democracies, composed of the
Czech Republic, India, the Republic of Korea, Mali,
Mexico, Poland, Portugal, South Africa, the United

6

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 20?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.
