United Nations

S/PV.6404

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6404th meeting
Monday, 18 October 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rugunda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uganda)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Nishida
Mr. Salam
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Anderson

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-58828 (E)

*1058828*

S/PV.6404

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bangladesh, the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, Egypt, Iceland, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Jordan, Mauritania, Morocco,
Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Tunisia and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Reuben
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 15 October
2010 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, which will be issued as document
S/2010/533 and which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council that will
be held on Monday, 18 October 2010, on the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

2

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
take a seat at the Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, head of the delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, to whom I
now give the floor.
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco: Six weeks after direct
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations began in Washington,
D.C., we are at an impasse. The parties have not met
since 15 September.
On 26 September, despite calls for its
continuation from the Middle East Quartet, Israel’s
partial settlement moratorium in the West Bank expired
and was not renewed. Construction that had been
frozen resumed in some settlements. President Abbas
indicated that he would not continue negotiations
unless Israel froze settlement activity.
The Secretary-General has publicly expressed his
disappointment that the moratorium was not renewed
and reaffirmed that settlement activity is illegal under
international law and contrary to the Road Map. He has
been in direct and frequent contact with regional
leaders, including President Abbas and Prime Minister
Netanyahu, and has urged all to find a way forward.

10-58828

S/PV.6404

On 21 September, the Quartet met in New York,
noted the positive impact of the settlement restraint and
urged its continuation. The Quartet reiterated that
unilateral actions by either party, including settlement
activity, would not be recognized by the international
community. It encouraged the parties to work together
to find a way to ensure that negotiations continued in a
constructive manner to resolve all final status issues
within one year.
Following consultations with Quartet partners,
this position was reiterated in a message that Special
Coordinator Serry delivered on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral to the Arab League Summit in Sirte, Libya, on
9 October. In Sirte, the League of Arab States Followup Committee of the Arab Peace Initiative supported
President Abbas’s position not to continue in
negotiations unless Israel freezes settlement activity
and agreed to reconvene in a month to assess the
situation.
The Quartet envoys have been in regular contact
and principals are discussing a proposal to meet soon
to review developments. We have a brief and crucial
window to overcome the current impasse. Intensive
diplomatic efforts, led by the United States and
supported by all members of the Quartet, are ongoing
to create conditions conducive to the continuation of
negotiations. These efforts were made even more
difficult by the Israeli Government’s approval on
14 October of construction tenders for 238 housing
units in the settlements of Ramot and Pisgat Ze’ev in
East Jerusalem, contrary to international law and
running directly counter to the Quartet’s efforts.
Time is of the essence, and we need progress in
the coming weeks. The Secretary-General continues to
believe that, if the door to peace closes, it will be very
hard to reopen it. There is no alternative to a negotiated
settlement resulting in the creation of an independent
and viable State of Palestine living side by side with
the State of Israel in peace and security.
Despite these uncertainties, the State-building
agenda of the Palestinian Authority continues to
advance. On 21 September, the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee (AHLC) met in New York. The Committee
members recognized that the Palestinian Authority’s
reform agenda had accelerated in 2010, with critical
achievements in public finance reform, infrastructure
and the provision of social services. They supported
Prime Minister Fayyad’s determination to implement

10-58828

the Homestretch to Freedom agenda by August next
year. The AHLC welcomed Israeli measures to remove
some obstacles to movement in the West Bank and to
ease restrictions on some imports to Gaza, while urging
further steps, particularly in support of greater private
sector-led growth.
As a symbol of continued support for privatesector development, which will ultimately drive the
sustainable economic growth that is critical to the
future State, on 11 October Prime Minister Fayyad
broke ground on the agro-industrial park in the Jordan
Valley funded by Japan. The park could create 10,000
Palestinian jobs and provide a major boost to the
economy. However, as with other infrastructure in Area
C, this park will require the Government of Israel to
approve the necessary permits.
While in New York, Prime Minister Fayyad
briefed AHLC members, as well as Arab League
foreign ministers, that commitments of donor funding
for 2010 remained critically below what is necessary to
ensure that the Palestinian Authority can meet
expenses. Reforms have steadily lowered the budget
deficit, reducing the Authority’s reliance on donor
funding for budget support. However, despite the
continuing generosity of some donors, commitments
for 2010 remain insufficient to ensure that the
Palestinian Authority can meet expenses in both Gaza
and the West Bank, and the Palestinian Authority faces
increasing difficulties in borrowing from domestic
banks to cover this shortfall.
There continue to be tensions and violent
incidents in the West Bank. The Palestinian Authority
is working to provide security in areas under its
authority and to meet its Road Map commitments to
combat terrorist attacks — and reportedly thwarted
attempts by militants to launch attacks during the
reporting period, underscoring the continuing security
challenges on the ground. A sixth battalion of
Palestinian national security forces is currently training
in Jordan, with international assistance, before being
deployed in the West Bank.
Despite Palestinian efforts, Israeli security forces,
citing security concerns, conducted 353 operations in
the West Bank during the reporting period, in which six
Palestinians were killed, including two leaders of the
Hamas Izz el-Deen al-Qassam Brigades allegedly
involved in the killing of four Israelis near Hebron on
31 August. Also, 157 Palestinians were injured and 330

3

S/PV.6404

arrested. Incursions on this scale weaken efforts to
build genuine security cooperation. One Palestinian
labourer was killed while trying to reach East
Jerusalem through the barrier, and another suffered a
fatal heart attack.
A total of 44 violent incidents were recorded
between local Palestinians and settlers, in which six
Palestinians and four Israelis were injured. One
Palestinian was shot by a settler on 8 October, and
there were two incidents of Palestinians being run over.
In a deplorable act of desecration, there was an arson
attack by settlers on a mosque near Bethlehem on
4 October. To defuse tension and promote inter-faith
tolerance, six rabbis subsequently visited the mosque
and donated new Korans to replace those damaged in
the blaze. There were also attacks by Palestinians on
settlers, including on 26 September, when Palestinians
opened fire at an Israeli vehicle near Hebron, injuring a
man and his pregnant wife.
Hundreds of olive trees are reported to have been
set on fire, poisoned or uprooted by settlers throughout
the West Bank in the run-up to the harvest season.
Prime Minister Fayyad marked the beginning of the
olive harvest on 10 October by participating in olivepicking in the northern West Bank village of Iraq
Burin, which has been the scene of repeated attacks by
settlers in past months. Much more needs to be done by
Israel to prevent violence by extremists against
Palestinian civilians under occupation, and to impose
the rule of law.
On 13 October, Israel demolished 10 outposts in
the West Bank. This is a positive development, which
we hope will be followed by further steps towards
Israel’s Road Map commitment to dismantling outposts
erected since March 2001.
The wall partly constructed in deviation from the
Green Line and in contravention of the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice continues to pose
significant challenges to the movement of Palestinians
in the West Bank. Despite efforts to ease restrictions on
movement and access, the number of obstacles in the
West Bank remained at 508. On 11 October, an
organizer of the anti-wall campaign who advocates
peaceful resistance was convicted of incitement and
organization and participation in demonstrations, and
was sentenced to one year in jail by an Israeli military
tribunal.

4

There were renewed confrontations in sensitive
areas of East Jerusalem during the reporting period,
underscoring the tensions caused by the presence and
expansion of settler communities in the heart of
Palestinian neighbourhoods. On 22 September, a
Palestinian was shot and killed by an Israeli private
security guard in the East Jerusalem neighbourhood of
Silwan after he was allegedly attacked by Palestinians
throwing stones at his car. Violent clashes ensued and
spread to other Palestinian neighbourhoods. On
26 September, an Israeli court rejected an appeal
claiming ownership of a building by two Palestinian
families in the East Jerusalem neighbourhood of
Sheikh Jarrah, leaving a further 20 families living in
the area at risk of eviction.
The status of the four Palestinian lawmakers from
the Hamas-affiliated Change and Reform bloc remains
unresolved. This unsustainable situation needs a
sensible resolution that ensures that they are not
expelled from Jerusalem.
The situation in Gaza remains a source of serious
concern. The modest gains of recent months must not
obscure the need for more far-reaching measures to
ease the blockade, including enabling freer movement
of people and exports and a wider range of goods on
the commercial market as part of a broader effort to
implement all aspects of resolution 1860 (2009).
If we are to make progress, all parties must work
to ensure calm. During the reporting period, Palestinian
militant groups fired seven rockets and six mortars
from Gaza into Israel, while Israeli security forces
conducted five air strikes and six incursions into Gaza.
Three Palestinian militants and one civilian were
killed, while 18 civilians and one militant were injured.
We urge all parties to respect international
humanitarian law and to halt violence.
During the reporting period, a total of 2,570
truckloads entered Gaza, with a weekly average of 857.
Fifty-eight per cent of the imports were food products.
In June, prior to the announcement of the new Israeli
policy for Gaza, the weekly average was 566 trucks.
However, the current imports still represent a third of
the June 2007 pre-blockade weekly average. We
reiterate that the appropriate way to meet needs in
Gaza is through the further opening of legitimate
crossings.
I am pleased to report the completion of 151
housing units in Khan Younis, which on Friday,

10-58828

S/PV.6404

15 October, began to receive their new inhabitants.
Further approvals of United Nations projects have been
received from the Government of Israel. While these
are only a portion of the total package presented to
Israel, they are nevertheless part of an expanding flow
of United Nations recovery and construction work,
which will begin to address Gaza’s immense recovery
and reconstruction needs. In that regard, the United
Nations will present additional programmes of work
before the end of the year and will continue to work
with the Government of Israel to streamline
implementation arrangements. One immediate step
would be for Israel to expand the working hours and
days for which the Karni crossing is open.
The de facto Hamas authorities closed down
several civilian associations during the reporting
period, including a journalists’ syndicate and a farmers’
union. Some civic groups, including partners in United
Nations-implemented projects, have suspended their
operations in Gaza, claiming to have experienced
increasing pressure from the authorities. In addition, on
19 September, unknown assailants set ablaze a
recreation water park in Gaza. We are also concerned
that, on 22 September, a Palestinian man was sentenced
to death by firing squad after a military tribunal
convicted him of collaboration with enemy parties.
We reiterate our concern over the continued
captivity of Staff Sergeant Shalit and call for his
immediate release. Humanitarian access to him should
be granted without further delay. We note reports of a
resumption of efforts to conclude an agreement that
would secure his release in exchange for the release of
a number of the more than 9,000 Palestinian prisoners
in Israeli jails.
We continue to support efforts to advance
Palestinian reconciliation based on commitments of the
Palestinian Liberation Organization. These efforts have
been stalled following Hamas’s refusal to sign the
Egyptian-brokered draft reconciliation proposal. Senior
Fatah representatives met with Hamas leader Khaled
Mashal in Damascus on 23 September. A further
session of talks is expected on 20 October.
As mentioned at the last monthly briefing to the
Council (see PV.6388), the Secretary-General’s Panel
of Inquiry on the 31 May 2010 flotilla incident will
discuss and review the interim reports once it had also
received a report from Israel. The Israeli commission
to examine the maritime incident of 31 May 2010

10-58828

continues its proceedings, which are now at an
advanced stage. We look forward to the continued
cooperation of the parties with the Panel and to the
Panel’s further progress and substantive work.
It remains essential — and indeed urgent — that
serious steps are taken to restore the regional tracks of
the peace process, in particular between Israel and
Syria. Only a comprehensive approach to peace will be
sustainable and has the potential to ease tensions in the
region. On the ground, the situation in the occupied
Golan remained stable but settlement activities
continued.
Turning to Lebanon, tensions generated by
speculation and allegations related to potential
indictments by the Special Tribunal for Lebanon grew
steadily in recent weeks. Those tensions were
accompanied by a sharp increase in the use of
belligerent rhetoric and challenges to State institutions,
raising fears of sectarian violence. Against that
background, the Special Coordinator for Lebanon,
Michael C. Williams, held meetings with Lebanese
officials and political leaders and called on all sides to
tackle difficult issues in an atmosphere of calm. The
Secretary-General expressed his support for the work
of the Special Tribunal, stressing that it is independent,
with a clear mandate from the Security Council,
through resolutions 1664 (2006) and 1757 (2007), to
uncover the truth and end impunity, and that no one
should prejudge the outcome.
On 13 and 14 October, the President of the
Islamic Republic of Iran conducted an official visit to
Lebanon, including to the south of the country. The
visit sparked serious concerns in many quarters.
The living conditions of Palestinian refugees in
Lebanon remained of serious concern. The United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) continues to face
funding shortfalls, both for its regular programmes,
aimed at delivering basic services to Palestinian
refugees, and for the reconstruction of the Nahr
al-Bared camp. We reiterate our call to donors,
including countries in the region, to provide vital
financial support for the reconstruction efforts, as well
as for the work of UNRWA.
The overall situation in the area of operation of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon remained
generally quiet. During the past month Israeli air
violations took place on an almost daily basis. The

5

S/PV.6404

twelfth report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) will be
released today.
We must remain collectively committed to the
goal of a peace agreement within a year from the start
of talks in September. We must overcome the current
impasse and — more important — ensure that when
talks resume they move intensively and definitively to
seek resolutions of the key core issues, including
borders. The Secretary-General will continue to work
closely with the Quartet and regional and international
partners — and the parties themselves — to support
this agenda.
The United Nations remains committed to an end
to the occupation that began in 1967 and to the goal of
establishing an independent, democratic, contiguous
and viable Palestinian State living side by side in peace
and security with Israel and its other neighbours.
The President: I thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco
for his statement.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I congratulate you, Sir,
and your friendly country Uganda on your presidency
of the Security Council. We are confident in your able
guidance of the agenda this month. We express
appreciation as well to the friendly country of Turkey
for its skilled leadership of the Council in September. I
also wish to thank Assistant Secretary-General Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing.
Today, we find ourselves at yet another critical
juncture in our long, tormented search for a just and
peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine — the
core of the Arab-Israeli conflict — and the realization
of peace and security in the Middle East. There are two
paths before us that we must all choose from. That
choice must be made with full awareness that the path
chosen will determine the future prospects for peace
and stability in the Middle East region and beyond.
The first choice is clear: to together seize, with
full determination, the significant opportunity that is
before us to resume and accelerate the peace process,
on the basis of its agreed terms of reference for the
realization of the two-State solution on the basis of the
pre-1967 borders. With good faith and a genuine
commitment to international law, relevant United
Nations resolutions, the principle of land for peace, the

6

Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet Road Map, it is
this path that will speedily advance us towards the
achievement of a final, just resolution of all core issues
in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, including the issues
of refugees, Jerusalem, settlements, borders, water and
security, bringing a definitive end to the Israeli military
occupation that began in 1967, the independence of the
State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital and
a just and agreed solution to the plight of Palestine
refugees.
This is the path preferred and supported by the
overwhelming majority of the international community.
It has been given new impetus by the serious efforts of
the Quartet, including with the active engagement and
leadership of the United States Administration of
President Barack Obama, as well as by the League of
Arab States and all other concerned, peace-loving
countries. The urgency of pursuing this path is widely
recognized as absolutely vital for achieving a just,
lasting and comprehensive solution of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, and of the Arab-Israeli conflict as
a whole, and for making peace and security a reality in
our region.
The second choice is also clear: to allow the
intransigence, violations and impunity of one State —
Israel, the occupying Power — to not only undermine
but to completely sabotage the prospects that remain
for realizing the two-State solution for peace. At this
critical point in time, it is widely recognized that the
status quo in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, is untenable, unsustainable
and volatile as a result of Israel’s ongoing illegal
actions and provocations against the Palestinian people
and their land. It must also then be recognized that if
recklessly forced down this path by the occupying
Power, we will be taken on a trajectory that will bring
only more violence, suffering, loss and instability for
both the Palestinian and Israeli peoples, as well as the
region as a whole, propelling us into yet another era of
darkness and taking us further away than ever from our
noble goal of realizing a future of peace, security and
coexistence in the Middle East.
We come before the Security Council today to
appeal once again to the members of this body to
uphold their Charter responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. This critical matter
must be given due attention, and action should be taken
to ensure that it is the first path — the path of peace —
that is seized at this moment and resolutely pursued.

10-58828

S/PV.6404

Breaches of the law via acts of colonization,
aggression and collective punishment against the
Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and contempt for the will of
the international community must be confronted and
firmly rejected. Israel, the occupying Power, must
choose either to pursue the path of peace or to bear
responsibility for its obstruction.
The Palestinian leadership has for decades been
decisively committed to a peaceful settlement in
accordance with the two-State solution on the basis of
the pre-1967 borders, beginning with the 1988
Declaration of Independence of the State of Palestine
and onwards. Our commitment and good faith were
displayed once again in our willingness to take part in
the recent proximity talks conducted by the United
States and in the direct negotiations launched in
Washington in September by President Obama,
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Senator George
Mitchell,
despite
the
less
than
favourable
circumstances in both the political environment and the
situation on the ground.
It is well known that the proximity talks were
supported by the Palestinian leadership, the Arab
countries and the international community as a means
to bridge the gap between the two sides on the issues of
settlements, borders and security and to reaffirm the
agreed terms of reference of the peace process in order
to pave the way for direct negotiations.
Those talks, however, did not make tangible
progress due to Israel’s intransigence and refusal to
comply with its legal obligations and the Road Map
requirement to cease all settlement activities, including
so-called natural growth. Those activities are
illegitimate, are unquestionably a major obstacle to
peace and are totally contradictory to the two-State
solution and the core principle of land for peace.
We reiterate here that the cessation of all Israeli
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, is essential for the
resumption of a credible process aimed at achieving
the two-State solution on the basis of the pre-1967
borders. This is not a Palestinian condition for the
peace process; it is a legal obligation incumbent upon
Israel, the occupying Power, under the Fourth Geneva
Convention, numerous Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions, and the Quartet Road Map. It is
also the unanimous position of the entire international

10-58828

community and has been an unwavering demand
throughout the years if the peace process, before the
process, and even during periods when it has been
suspended.
In that regard, it is important to recall the special
Security Council meeting on 26 September 2008,
which specifically addressed the ever-present problem
of illegal Israeli settlement activities and which was
addressed by President Mahmoud Abbas, among other
high-level officials (see S/PV.5983).
On the other hand, the Israeli conditions now
being imposed on the Palestinian side are indeed
arbitrary preconditions intended to exact further
political gains for Israel based solely on the imbalance
of power and impunity that it enjoys and that allow it
to arrogantly make such demands while totally
ignoring its own long-standing legal obligations and
commitments. Such preconditions distort the reality on
the ground, distract the focus of the debate from the
core issues and have been used by Israel as a pretext to
evade responsibilities in the peace process and to
sabotage the process, revealing not only bad faith but
total disrespect for the most fundamental principles of
the process.
Nevertheless, the Palestinian leadership, with the
support of the Arab Ministerial Committee, has heeded
the international calls for resumption of direct
negotiations, on the understanding that our
participation would be on the basis of the Quartet
statement of 20 August 2010. That statement
reaffirmed the commitment to previous statements,
including the 19 March 2010 statement, which, inter
alia, called on Israel to abide by its obligation to freeze
all settlement activities, including natural growth, and
to dismantle outposts erected since March 2001. The
August statement expressed the “determination to
support the parties throughout the negotiations, which
can be completed within one year, and the
implementation of an agreement”.
Moreover, it was clear to everyone at the time
that once direct negotiations commenced, the so-called
Israeli moratorium on settlement activities would
continue for the duration of negotiations or until the
conclusion of a peace treaty.
On that point, I must be clear that, despite our
very deep reservations about the moratorium —
especially with regard to its partiality and non-extension
to East Jerusalem, and which we continue to insist must

7

S/PV.6404

be a complete settlement freeze without exception —
that gesture gave some credence to Israel’s stated
commitment to the two-State solution and could
potentially help to create an environment more
conducive to launching indirect and then direct
negotiations.
Despite the adverse circumstances that prevailed,
the resumption of direct negotiations in September was
widely welcomed and once again raised hopes that the
political impasse was about to be overcome and that,
with serious efforts, a peaceful settlement could be
achieved.
President Obama’s statement before the General
Assembly on 23 September 2010 (see A/65/PV.11)
further clarified the commitment to the goal of
realizing within one year an end to the 1967 Israeli
occupation and the realization of an independent,
sovereign State of Palestine, living side by side with
Israel in peace and security, as well as of a
comprehensive Arab-Israeli peace on all tracks. The
strong support of the international community for that
goal was continually voiced by the majority of the
world leaders who took the Assembly’s rostrum. It
seemed possible at that time that the momentum and
hope generated would not be lost, despite the looming
expiration of Israel’s settlement moratorium.
Yet, regrettably, none of that was enough to
compel Israel to extend its moratorium and comply
with its obligation to freeze settlement activities to
allow for an atmosphere truly conducive to the
successful resolution of all final status issues,
beginning with borders and security. Rather than acting
in good faith and in a manner respectful of the
circumstances and that would allow for the
negotiations to be convened, the Israeli Government
has chosen to blatantly disregard the global calls to
cease its unlawful colonization of the occupied
Palestinian territory, persisting with its illegitimate
policies and revealing its intention to continue
pursuing its narrow, reckless expansionist agenda, at
the expense of the prospects for peace and security.
Even a cursory review of the situation on the
ground reflects the deplorable reality of the ongoing
Israeli violations and crimes in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
Settlement construction and expansion continues, with
new and provocative projects being undertaken daily
by settlers and officials, who continue to gloat in the

8

perpetration of the crime of confiscating and
colonizing another people’s land, further fuelling
already high tensions and doubts regarding Israel’s
credibility as a peace partner.
Since January of this year alone, the Israeli settler
population in the occupied Palestinian territory
increased by 8,000. In addition, fanatic and extremist
settlers continue to terrorize, harass and intimidate
Palestinian civilians, including children, and to destroy
and vandalize Palestinian properties. There has been
yet another arson attack on a mosque, as well as
ongoing attacks on Palestinian agricultural fields and
orchards, with particular malice during this the oliveharvesting season.
These settlers are undoubtedly driven to persist in
such acts of lawlessness and violence by Israeli
religious and political leaders who continue to
shamelessly provoke and incite them with
inflammatory rhetoric, racist initiatives and hate-filled
and offensive remarks, including from the rostrum of
the General Assembly of this Organization.
The situation in occupied East Jerusalem remains
most volatile, as Israeli settlers continue to act with
aggression against the Palestinian residents of the city
and continue to seize Palestinian properties. We have
alerted the international community on numerous
occasions to the extremely fragile situation in the
Jerusalem neighbourhoods of Silwan, Al-Bustan,
Sheikh Jarrah and others as a result of the constant
encroachment by Israeli settlers in these areas, with
official governmental support, as well as of the
ongoing demolition of homes and eviction of
Palestinian families. None of these illegal actions have
ceased, even after the launch of direct peace
negotiations.
At the same time, the situation in the Gaza Strip
remains critical. In spite of Israel’s declared intentions
to ease its illegal, inhumane blockade, the occupying
Power continues to obstruct the entry of essential
goods into Gaza. Barely 25 per cent of needed goods
and supplies are allowed to enter, and the obstruction
of the entry of construction materials and supplies for
industrial production continues, as does the prohibition
on the export of Palestinian goods.
The reconstruction process thus continues to be
severely hampered, including efforts by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and other United Nations

10-58828

S/PV.6404

agencies on the ground to reconstruct destroyed and
damaged facilities and to build the schools necessary to
accommodate Palestinian children in Gaza — 40,000
of whom were turned away at the start of the school
year for lack of classroom space.
It is deplorable that in spite of the incessant calls
for a full lifting of the blockade, Israel continues its
defiance, and the humanitarian crisis, trauma and
instability inflicted on the civilian Palestinian
population by the Israeli blockade and military
aggression persist unabated.
As stated at the outset, the situation is untenable,
unsustainable and volatile and requires immediate
redress. The most effective remedy is adherence to the
law and pursuit of a peace settlement through an
active, accelerated, good faith political process on the
basis of the agreed terms of reference. Regrettably, at
the moment, this option remains elusive.
Israel stands alone in rejecting the global call to
honour its legal and moral obligations, as it continues
to carry out illegal acts that are totally contradictory to
those required for a peaceful settlement in accordance
with the two-State solution, on the basis of the pre1967 borders. Such actions — which have focused on
altering the demographic composition, character and
status of the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, further fragmenting its contiguity,
unity and integrity and imposing a fait accompli — are
seriously, and perhaps permanently, threatening the
viability of the two-State solution.
It is thus Israel that is responsible for the critical
situation on the ground and for undermining peace
negotiations, and it must be held accountable. The
international community must act in unison to bring
Israel into compliance with the global consensus to
salvage the peace process. It is unacceptable for us to
waver and change our legitimate position to
accommodate Israel’s intransigence and unlawful
actions, permitting it to continue to shirk its legal
obligations to the grave detriment of our collective
future prospects for peace and security. Israel should
be held accountable and held to the same legal standard
as all countries in the world. The preferential treatment
given it, which has fuelled its contempt and impunity
over the decades, must stop.
The Palestinian leadership has consistently
participated in the negotiations in good faith and, in
spite of the many challenges, has repeatedly affirmed

10-58828

its willingness to engage in direct negotiations for
peace. In addition to our constructive efforts in the
political process, the Palestinian leadership, with
strong international support, has simultaneously
continued its efforts to ensure law, order and security
and has been forging ahead with the implementation of
the second year of the programme initiated by Prime
Minister Salam Fayyad to build the strong foundations
and institutions of the Palestinian State in preparation
for independence.
At the same time, the Palestinian leadership
stands firm in its rejection of Israeli settlement
activities. This position received unanimous Arab
support at the recent summit in Sirte, Libya. The
summit also decided that, in deference to the role being
played by President Obama, an extended period of time
should be given to allow the United States
Administration to succeed in its efforts to compel
Israel to cease its settlement campaign and to respect
the very basis of the peace process. We remain
supportive of President Obama’s efforts, and our
commitment to peace is clear, but we also remain
insistent that settlement activities and the peace
process cannot coexist and that one negates the other.
Now, it is time for Israel to decide. It must choose
whether it wants peace and security for its people and
with all of its neighbours, or whether it wants to
remain an occupier, oppressor, human rights violator
and aggressor State. The consensus position is
obviously in favour of the first choice, and the
readiness of the international community to support the
parties in seizing the historic opportunity for peace is
clear.
However, if Israel once again decides to defy the
law and the will of the international community,
choosing instead to listen to its extremists and settlers,
then it should be made to bear the consequences that
all other violators of the law are made to bear. The
international community, including this Council, must
act accordingly, following through with the longoverdue implementation of resolutions of international
legitimacy and taking the necessary practical measures.
It must put an end to the exceptional treatment that has
been granted to Israel for decades now, which has
permitted it to act as a State above the law and to make
a mockery of the international community and of all
efforts being exerted for a peaceful settlement.

9

S/PV.6404

The solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict —
the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict — is before us and
has been for decades. Courageous, decisive decisions
must be made, while recognizing that time is of the
essence and that the decisions made at this critical
juncture will determine not just the short term but the
years ahead for our region.
I reaffirm today that, despite the grave difficulties
before us on all fronts, the Palestinian leadership
remains committed to peace and to engaging in a
credible peace process on the basis of the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid terms of
reference, including the principle of land for peace, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet Road Map.
We continue to strive with full commitment
towards the goal of a peaceful settlement of the
conflict that will bring a complete end to the Israeli
occupation of our land; that will allow the Palestinian
people to realize their right to self-determination and to
live in freedom and dignity in their independent State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, side by side with
Israel and all other neighbours in peace and security on
the basis of the pre-1967 borders; and that will achieve
a just and agreed solution to the plight of the Palestine
refugees on the basis of international law and United
Nations resolutions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Reuben (Israel): Allow me to commend you,
Sir, for your able stewardship of the Security Council
this month. In my first speech as Israel’s Ambassador
to the United Nations, I appear before you today and
state the profound and enduring wish of my nation to
establish peace with the Palestinians: a peace based on
security and mutual recognition; a peace that will
ensure prosperity for our two peoples.
Peace can only be achieved through direct
negotiations and compromise from both sides. Israel
has continued to show that it is willing to take bold
measures and make difficult decisions in pursuit of
peace. To this end, Israel helped to encourage
impressive growth in the Palestinian economy,
removing hundreds of roadblocks and checkpoints in
the West Bank. We took this action despite legitimate
security concerns and continued terrorism. With a
heavy heart, Israel put in place a self-imposed and
unprecedented 10-month moratorium on settlement
construction.

10

We are hopeful that the Palestinians will take the
measures necessary for peace. After refusing to engage
in direct negotiations for nine months during the
moratorium, the Palestinians — who at first belittled
the gesture — now demand its extension as a
precondition for continuing talks. Settlements are one
of many issues that need to be resolved in final status
negotiations. History has shown that they do not stand
in the way of making peace — as seen by peace
agreements that were achieved with Egypt and Jordan.
Furthermore, when Israel dismantled all of its
settlements in the Gaza Strip, it received terrorism and
rocket fire on towns and communities in return.
Israel welcomes the extremely important efforts
of the United States Administration to promote peace
and security in the region. In this regard, the United
States is closely engaged with Israel and other parties
to get direct talks back on track.
In looking for a way forward, we must build any
future agreement on the principles of mutual
recognition and security. A request that Israel recognize
a Palestinian State as the nation-State of the Palestinian
people must be met with an acknowledgement that
Israel is the nation-State of the Jewish people. After
generations of conflict, mutual recognition will be
essential in overcoming a long history of incitement,
combating terrorism and establishing peaceful
coexistence between our two peoples. Any peace
agreement must also clearly address Israel’s security
concerns with strong arrangements in that field.
The diverse and dangerous threats facing Israel
remain significant. With support from the Iranian and
Syrian regimes, extremist terrorist organizations in the
region continue to rearm and stage attacks on Israeli
civilians. The Hamas-controlled Gaza Strip remains an
epicentre for terror and a launching ground for
continuous rocket attacks against Israel. In Lebanon,
the Hizbullah terrorist organization serves as a constant
obstacle to peace and security for all in the region.
Establishing peace will require more than
declarations or signatures on a piece of paper; it will
necessitate concrete actions on the ground. With this in
mind, the wider Arab world must also show Israelis
and people around the globe that its declarations of
peace will extend beyond words and will translate into
deeds.
This body will discuss in detail the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) in a few

10-58828

S/PV.6404

weeks, but in advance of that discussion I would like to
share a few thoughts about the continued challenges
emanating from Lebanon, where radical forces
continue to pose a threat to stability in the region. As
we approach the upcoming report on resolution 1701
(2006), it remains clear that the Hizbullah terrorist
organization continues to build up its military
capabilities and armaments, acquiring sophisticated
weaponry and missiles from its Iranian and Syrian
patrons.
Hizbullah’s deadly rearmament endangers
Lebanon itself, as well as the wider Middle East. This
terrorist organization continues to deploy weapons and
build its military infrastructure throughout the civilian
villages of southern Lebanon, adjacent to schools,
hospitals, houses of worship and residential buildings.
Evidence of this phenomenon can be found in a
series of explosions of Hizbullah weapons caches south
of the Litani River over the past 15 months. The last
such explosion took place in the Lebanese village of
Shehabiyya on 3 September. Unfortunately, despite
having real-time information about all of these
incidents, the Lebanese Armed Forces did not intervene
in a timely or robust manner. Furthermore, there is
clear proof that Hizbullah removed evidence from all
of those sites.
Hizbullah’s
provocations
and
continued
rearmament must not go unanswered by this Council —
which has repeatedly and clearly stipulated that this
terrorist organization must disarm and disband — as
they comprise a key issue addressed in resolution 1701
(2006).
We also call on the Syrian Government to refrain
from engaging in actions that destabilize the region.
While Syria claims to seek peace, it continues to
support terror. There are numerous indications that the
Syrian regime is hosting Hizbullah training camps
within its territory, including locations where
operatives receive training on missiles and other
weapons. This reflects just the tip of the iceberg in
terms of Syria’s extensive support for terrorism in the
region. If Syria genuinely wants to embrace the full
spirit of peace, it must completely abandon its support
for terror.
Let me turn to the greatest danger facing the
Middle East and the world: Iran. The visit last week of
Iran’s President to Lebanon underscores the
destabilizing impact of that extremist regime on our

10-58828

region. Iran’s President is a leader who denies the
Holocaust, promotes conspiracy theories about the
11 September terrorist attacks and calls for Israel to be
wiped off the map; he only advances the causes of
destruction and instability.
His regime’s support provides a lifeline to the
terrorist organizations of Hamas, Islamic Jihad, and
Hizbullah, which could not exist without Iran. Relying
on those proxies, Iran seeks to foil any movement
toward rapprochement between Israel and the
Palestinians, as well as other parties in the region.
Thus, in searching for a durable agreement with the
Palestinians we must also confront this threat with firm
resolve.
I would like to note that, while Iran’s President
and his extremist allies seek to impose fear, bloodshed
and jihad on the population of Lebanon, there are many
other voices in the region. An open letter to President
Ahmadinejad that was recently published in the
Lebanese media offers an example of one such voice.
Let me read to the Council a quote from this letter:
“. . . you are attempting to interfere, just like
others that came before you, in our affairs, where
foreign interference was just to use Lebanon
internally; the big slogans and the good intentions
could not decorate or block the actual truth of this
use.”
Even more alarming than its continued support of
terror is Iran’s continued pursuit of nuclear weapons
capabilities. Such behaviour endangers not only our
region or merely a specific group of countries. It
endangers us all and must continue to be met by strong
and effective action.
My comments today would not be complete
without expressing our ongoing deep concern that for
more than four years our kidnapped soldier, Gilad
Shalit, has remained deprived of his most basic human
rights, including any visit from the Red Cross. Israel
expects the international community to do all in its
power and more than has been done thus far, to bring
about his swift release.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached among Council members, I wish
to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than five minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate the

11

S/PV.6404

texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.

Palestinians, the United States and all those who seek
to maintain international peace and security.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.

Those in the region who want a Palestinian State
should do all they can to support the parties’ efforts to
bring about a just and lasting peace. And those around
the world who seek an end to this bitter conflict should
support these efforts and do nothing to undermine
them.

Ms. Anderson (United States of America): I
thank you, Mr. President, and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Fernandez-Taranco for your briefings today.
Last month, Israeli and Palestinian leaders took
the momentous step of returning to direct talks. The
core issues of this long-standing and tragic conflict
will not be easily resolved. Direct talks are the path for
the parties to reach a solution that resolves all issues,
ends all claims and establishes a viable State of
Palestine alongside a secure State of Israel as a key
part of a comprehensive peace among Israel and all of
its neighbours. The United States will continue to be a
vigorous and steadfast partner in this vital effort. We
are working closely with both sides to allow these
negotiations to continue.
We were disappointed by the announcement of
new tenders in East Jerusalem on 14 October, which
was contrary to our efforts to resume negotiations. We
have long urged both parties to avoid actions that could
undermine trust, including in Jerusalem, and we will
continue to do so as we work to make progress towards
Middle East peace. Ultimately, however, forging a
lasting and just peace will depend on leadership, vision
and courage from the Israelis and the Palestinians.
As President Obama has noted, we have urged
Israel to extend the settlement moratorium, which we
believe makes sense as long as constructive talks are
under way. As we continue to urge Prime Minister
Netanyahu to institute another moratorium, we also
urge President Abbas to resume negotiations, which
remain the only way to resolve the conflict’s most
difficult issues and give the Palestinians the dignity of
an independent State of their own.
We know that many obstacles lie ahead. We know
that attempts to move towards lasting peace may be
met by rejectionists and terrorism, but we must not let
the forces of violence and despair determine whether
Israeli and Palestinian children will live in peace or
languish in conflict. We must press forward together
towards our common goal of a comprehensive ArabIsraeli peace, including a two-State solution, with
Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace and
security. That goal is in the interests of Israelis,

12

Let me turn to the situation in Gaza. We continue
to view the situation there with concern. Israel’s
announcement of 5 July was an important step towards
improving the flow of goods and material into Gaza.
That progress is continuing several months later, and
we encourage the Government of Israel to take further
steps to expand trade in both directions, consistent with
its security needs. All those wishing to deliver goods
should do so through the expanded, established
channels to ensure that Israel’s legitimate security
needs are addressed even as the Palestinians’
humanitarian needs are met.
Let me also draw attention to the Israeli soldier,
Gilad Shalit, whom Hamas abducted in 2006 and who
remains in captivity. We call again for his immediate
release.
In its 1 June presidential statement on the flotilla
incident (S/PRST/2010/9), the Council called for a
prompt,
impartial,
credible
and
transparent
investigation conforming to international standards. We
commend
the
Secretary-General’s
constructive
initiative in convening a Panel of Inquiry that will
receive and review the results of Israel’s and Turkey’s
investigations. We welcome the spirit of cooperation
that the Panel represents and continue to regard it as
the primary and most appropriate method for the
international community to review the incident.
Let me conclude by touching on the situation in
Lebanon. The United States remains firmly committed
to Lebanon’s sovereignty and independence, and
therefore to the full implementation of resolutions 1559
(2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006). We continue to
be gravely concerned by attempts by foreign players to
undermine Lebanon’s independence, endanger its
stability and interfere with its sovereign affairs.
The continuing flow of weapons and war-fighting
materiel across the Syrian border to Hizbullah is a
reckless practice that risks plunging the region into
open conflict. We urge the Council to remain vigilant

10-58828

S/PV.6404

to these destabilizing trends, which threaten
international peace and security and the lives of
innocent civilians on both sides of the Blue Line.
Finally, let me turn to the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon. On 6 October, the Secretary-General rightly
and unequivocally noted that the Tribunal is an
independent body with a clear mandate from the
Security Council to uncover the truth and end the era
of impunity for political assassinations in Lebanon.
The Tribunal is an independent judicial entity. Its work
is a matter not of politics but of law. The Tribunal is
fulfilling its independent judicial mandate under this
Council’s resolution 1757 (2007) at the request of the
sovereign Government of Lebanon. We completely
endorse the Secretary-General’s statement that the
Tribunal’s efforts must go forward without
interference. Efforts to discredit, hinder or delay the
Tribunal’s work should not be tolerated, and those who
engage in them do not have the interest of Lebanon or
justice at heart.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank the
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, for his substantial
briefing on the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question.
Unfortunately, our discussion is taking place at a
time when the direct talks relaunched on 1 September
in Washington, D.C., between Palestinians and Israelis
is once again at an impasse. Indeed, during the Council
debate of 17 September (see S/PV.6388), we all
unanimously welcomed the resumption of dialogue
between the main parties concerned in order to find a
negotiated solution ultimately leading to the creation of
a Palestinian State. We believed then in the parties’
commitment to overcoming their difficulties, which
were numerous, and to pursuing uninterrupted talks
until a peace agreement was signed. Unfortunately, we
must recognize the fact that the peace process is once
again deadlocked.
Regardless of the reasons, the impasse is no
alternative to peace, and my delegation therefore urges
both parties to resume their dialogue, which is a sine
qua non for arriving at a final settlement of the longstanding conflict between them. We therefore invite
them to arrive at a compromise on the remaining
obstacles as soon as possible.

10-58828

The Israeli-Palestinian crisis will find a lasting
solution only in the context of comprehensive peace
throughout the region. In that regard, we fully support
the recommendation of the Secretary-General aimed at
a comprehensive and negotiated settlement of the
various crises prevailing in this region. We are
convinced that the effective involvement of Syria and
Lebanon in peace talks is absolutely essential for
achieving the objective of comprehensive and lasting
peace in the region.
My delegation recalls the obligation to respect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States of
the region, including Lebanon. We therefore call for an
end to the persistent violations of Lebanon’s airspace.
We cannot speak of Lebanon without renewing
our full support for the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon. We insist on the freedom of movement that it
must enjoy throughout its area of operations so that it
can effectively carry out the mandate entrusted to it by
the Security Council.
Recurrent violence in the region will not,
unfortunately, promote the establishment of a climate
of trust between the parties, without which neither
dialogue, peace nor reconciliation is possible. The
language of violence and hatred is the enemy of peace
and brotherhood. We therefore invite the parties to
refrain from engaging in actions likely to compromise
the possibility of a lasting peace not only between the
Palestinians and Israelis, but also, in particular,
throughout that strategic region.
The pursuit of peace in the region necessarily
involves relieving the suffering of the people of Gaza.
In that regard, we must underscore once again the need
for broad access to the crossing points to Gaza in order
to supply the Palestinians with essential commodities
and building materials. However, we should not lose
sight of the fact that the State of Israel’s security is also
an essential guarantee of peace in the region. Israeli
security concerns must therefore be taken into account
in the peace talks. It cannot be otherwise.
Destined to live together and to contribute to the
flourishing of the Middle East, Israelis and Palestinians
have no choice but to pursue the path of peace together.
My delegation would therefore like to reiterate its
support for the establishment of a viable Palestinian
State living side by side with the State of Israel within
secure and internationally recognized borders.

13

S/PV.6404

Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing. I
also thank the Permanent Observer of Palestine and the
Permanent Representative of Israel for their statements.
France associates itself with the statement to be made
by the head of the European Union delegation.
I would like to make four points.
First, it is important not to squander the
opportunity created on 2 September in Washington,
D.C., by the resumption of direct negotiations on the
establishment of a viable and contiguous Palestinian
State living side by side in peace with Israel within
secure and recognized borders. Relaunching the
negotiations was a brave decision by the Palestinian
and Israeli leaders, backed by the efforts of the United
States and the Quartet under the sponsorship of Jordan
and Egypt. The status quo will only lead to further
instability and violence in the Middle East.
The direct negotiations are stymied by the issue
of settlements. We have unceasingly reiterated that
settlements are illegal and an obstacle to peace. Every
day, they compromise a little more the desired twoState solution. In that regard, they jeopardize Israel’s
security. Settlement, including in East Jerusalem, must
stop.
In that regard, the settlement policy pursued in
Palestinian neighbourhoods with the support of the
Israeli authorities justifies this Council’s concerns. Not
only is it illegal, but it increases the specific threat of
violent incidents in the holy city, with all conceivable
political risks. That is why France, the European
Union, the Quartet, the United States and the entire
international community continue to advocate
extending the moratorium.
However, we must transcend that impasse and not
lose sight of the primary objective of an in-depth
discussion of all final status issues. We welcome the
fact that the Arab Peace Initiative follow-up committee
has left the way open for a continuation of the process,
but progress must urgently be made.
The international community must commit itself
to assisting the negotiations. Naturally, France
welcomes the United States efforts that have enabled
that process to be relaunched, as well as the personal
commitment of President Obama and the Secretary of
State. However, in order to tackle the task of peace, so
often relaunched in the region, and to finally achieve it,

14

broader assistance to that process is vital because it
would increase the essential trust between the parties
and make it possible to better share the political risks
that the choice of peace requires.
When he met President Abbas, President Sarkozy
recalled that France was ready to work in that
direction, together with the Quartet, whose role is
essential, and the European Union, which, owing to its
links to and involvement in the region, must also
participate. The States of the region have a key role to
play by showing their willingness, when the time
comes, to turn the Arab Peace Initiative into concrete
steps towards Israel. To that end, we are working to
create conditions conducive to a resumption of SyrianIsraeli talks, in close cooperation with the United
States and Turkey.
Secondly, changes must arise on the ground to
create conditions conducive to the success of the
negotiations. The Palestinian and Israeli populations
must be able to see that improvements on the ground
go hand in hand with the negotiations process, in
particular with regard to freedom of movement and
access and security.
All provocation must be avoided. We deplore the
decision of the Israeli Government to launch calls for
tender for the construction of 238 housing units in East
Jerusalem. There can be no peace that excludes
Jerusalem as the capital of both States, as the President
of the French Republic said to the Knesset on 23 June
2008. In addition, the Palestinian Authority must
continue its efforts to strengthen the security sector and
establish the rule of law. The ongoing fight against
terrorism must remain a priority.
With regard to Gaza, France continues to call for
the immediate opening of crossing points to allow
humanitarian access to the civilian population and the
development of the economy. France welcomed Israel’s
adoption of measures to facilitate the entry of goods.
Additional steps — such as an increase in the
throughput of crossing points, the resumption of
exports from Gaza, and relaxing conditions for
individual freedom of movement to and from Gaza —
are needed for economic activity to resume.
In addition to humanitarian and reconstruction
issues, the blockade imposed on the population does
not promote positive development of the political
situation. Alongside those efforts, we continue to call
for the unconditional and immediate release of Gilad

10-58828

S/PV.6404

Shalit and for a halt to all violence, in particular the
firing of rockets into southern Israel.
Thirdly, the international community’s support
for efforts of the Palestinian Authority and President
Abbas to bolster the institutions of the future
Palestinian State must continue. Israel must also
resolutely assist that process, including in the West
Bank. Token steps have been taken on the ground, but
they remain insufficient, in particular concerning
freedom of movement and access.
We reiterate our full support for the reforms
implemented by Palestinian Prime Minister Salam
Fayyad. We share the World Bank’s assessment that “If
the Palestinian Authority maintains its current
performance… it is well positioned for the
establishment of a State… in the near future”.
In addition to the pledges made, which must be
honoured, we have voiced our readiness to organize in
Paris, in pursuit of the ongoing political process, a
second donor conference for the Palestinian State,
which would facilitate the support needed for the new
plan to be submitted by the Palestinian Authority
shortly.
Fourthly, we are also continuing our efforts in
Lebanon. We call on all parties to implement resolution
1701 (2006) and to fully respect the Blue Line. We
continue to provide our support to the Government of
National Unity, headed by Prime Minister Saad Hariri,
but we are concerned about the current tensions. In that
regard, we regret the statements made by the President
of Iran, calling into question the existence of a Member
of the United Nations.
We also condemn efforts to undermine the work
of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. We wish to recall
that the Special Tribunal for Lebanon was established
pursuant to resolution 1757 (2007) at the express
request of the Lebanese Government. That resolution is
binding on all. The creation of the Tribunal was a
significant step forward in the fight against impunity.
In the interests of Lebanon and the entire region, the
Tribunal must be allowed to continue to work
completely independently, as it currently does, and in
peace. No one can or should prejudge the outcome of
its work or attempt to exert any undue influence on it.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing
this morning.

10-58828

Peace in the Middle East is a key priority for the
United Kingdom. The launch of direct negotiations
between Prime Minister Netanyahu and President
Abbas more than a month ago was welcome progress
towards achieving the outcome that we all want to see:
a secure and universally recognized Israel living
alongside a sovereign and viable Palestinian State, with
Jerusalem as the capital of both States and a just
settlement for refugees. We commend United States
efforts to bring the parties to the negotiating table and
the leadership shown by both sides in agreeing to direct
talks after a long pause.
But the process has hit a serious obstacle.
Negotiations are now on hold. If there is to be
sustainable peace, both parties must do what is
necessary to enable talks to resume. We are therefore
disappointed that Israel failed to renew the settlement
moratorium that expired on 26 September and that
settlement activity has resumed throughout the
occupied West Bank. The reported approval last week
of a further 238 housing units in East Jerusalem is
deeply concerning and will only further erode trust
between the parties. Settlement activity, including in
East Jerusalem, is illegal. It undermines the viability of
a Palestinian State and is damaging to the peace
process.
We must be clear that meaningful reinstatement
of the moratorium, which itself falls far short of
Israel’s legal obligations, is not an unreasonable
expectation. It is essential to keep open the path to
peace. Creating facts on the ground makes the
necessary compromises harder to achieve. It destroys
trust. In the end, it can close off the possibility of a
deal entirely. We urge Prime Minister Netanyahu and
his Government to demonstrate the leadership required
to resolve this problem so that the parties can focus on
the considerable challenges ahead. Doing so would
inject some much-needed trust back into the process
and create a fairer basis for negotiations. We have
made this point to the Israeli Government at all levels.
The Palestinians must play their part, too. My
Foreign Secretary spoke with President Abbas last
week and was impressed by his resolve to return to
direct negotiations under the right circumstances. We
welcome the significant progress achieved by the
Palestinians in recent years on security and institutionbuilding — the foundations of a viable Palestinian
State. This work must continue.

15

S/PV.6404

But there is also tough work to be done on intraPalestinian reconciliation. A unified leadership is a
crucial component of creating the conditions for a
sustainable Palestinian State. Negotiations between the
two leaders remain the best way of achieving the desired
outcome. Alternative options, some of which were
floated by the Arab League in its statement of 9 October,
are less than ideal. But it is a fact that those options will
receive increasing attention if compromises are not
made to get the negotiations back on track, so again we
urge both leaders to make those necessary compromises.
If peace is to succeed, it is imperative that there
be progress on Gaza. We have been clear that the
situation is unsustainable and counterproductive.
Israel’s decision in the summer to move from a list of
permitted goods to a list of specific prohibited items
has led to some improvement, but more needs to be
done. The United Nations has said that at current rates
of approval it would take 75 years to bring in what is
required to implement the Gaza reconstruction plan of
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East. This is not good
enough. All parties must now work together to deliver
real change on the ground, including by allowing
essential reconstruction to take place and supporting
the development of the legal Gazan economy through
exports.
Israel has legitimate security concerns, and we
continue to call on Hamas to renounce all violence and
take immediate and concrete steps towards the Quartet
principles. The United Kingdom has long called for
Gilad Shalit’s immediate and unconditional release. It
is also vital that Hamas allow the International
Committee of the Red Cross to visit Shalit
immediately. Shalit’s continued captivity, without any
Red Cross access, and with only very minimal contact
with his family, is unacceptable.
Any solution must involve the entire region
within a comprehensive peace, so we are concerned
about increasing rhetoric aimed at undermining the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon. The Tribunal should be
allowed to continue its work unimpeded. We strongly
support the Secretary-General’s unequivocal statement
of 6 October reaffirming the Tribunal’s independence
and urging Lebanese and regional actors to avoid
interfering with its work.
We continue to believe that a negotiated peace in
the Middle East is achievable. The international

16

community expects it. The people of Israel and
Palestine deserve it. It is up to the Israeli and
Palestinian leaders to make the compromises needed to
deliver it.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for
his briefing on the situation in the Middle East. We
also listened carefully to the statements of the
representatives of Israel and Palestine spelling out their
views regarding the Middle East settlement.
We view the launch of the Israeli-Palestinian
dialogue as an important outcome of the joint efforts
undertaken under the aegis of the Quartet of
international mediators, with very active Russian
participation. We wish to express our deep concern
regarding the decision of the Israeli authorities not to
extend the moratorium on construction activity and to
resume construction in East Jerusalem. We believe that
the resolution adopted on 9 October at the League of
Arab States summit in Sirte will allow for continued
contact with the aim of preserving direct talks between
Israel and Palestine.
We again affirm our position, formulated in
particular in the statements of the Middle East Quartet
in Moscow on 19 March and in New York on
21 September, regarding the fact that Palestinians and
Israelis should strive to find compromise solutions and
refrain from unilateral steps that would prejudice the
outcome of negotiations and are not recognized by the
international community.
It is essential that the Palestinians and Israelis
adopt a serious attitude and achieve compromise
solutions on all aspects of final status, which will
enable the settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
on the well-known international legal bases: the
relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles and the Arab Peace Initiative.
We understand that achieving this will not be
easy. Differences of principle exist between Israelis
and Palestinians regarding approaches to many issues
on the agenda. Even though close United States
involvement in the discussions is important, it is also
necessary to provide collective assistance for an
Israeli-Palestinian settlement. Particularly important in
that respect is the mechanism for assisting the ArabIsraeli settlement embodied by the Quartet of
international mediators, which is recognized by all
interested parties, as well as the development of

10-58828

S/PV.6404

cooperation between the Quartet and the League of
Arab States Contact Group.
The situation in the region remains complex, with
surges of tension around Gaza and activity by various
extremist forces working to undermine the negotiations
process. If a detailed, unbiased investigation is to be
undertaken of the tragic events occurring around the
freedom flotilla, it is important that an international
commission under the aegis of the United Nations be
set up and that Israel and Turkey agree to participate in
it. We hope that the work of such a commission would
promote a general improvement of the situation in the
region and that its recommendations would prevent the
recurrence of such dramatic events in the future.
One pressing issue still pending is that of
Palestinian unity. Solutions should continue to be
sought in order to achieve reconciliation. We support
Egypt’s efforts to that end and send a clear message to
Hamas in that regard.
Our proposal to convene a conference on the
Middle East in Moscow remains timely. It enjoys the
well-known support of all interested parties. If direct
and substantive political dialogue between the
Palestinians and Israel becomes sustainable, it will
create the conditions necessary for the preparation and
holding of the conference — of course, following
consultations with all interested parties.
In our view, the situation in Lebanon is radically
different from that which prevailed in 2008. President
Sleiman, the Government led by Mr. Hariri and the
Lebanese Parliament have been able to create some
stability and to ensure the effective operation of force
structures and other State institutions. At the same
time, the success that has been achieved needs to be
bolstered. Against the backdrop of the complex
regional situation, it is important for the Lebanese to
pursue the processes of strengthening State institutions
and domestic stability, which must continue without
outside interference. Lebanon cannot be allowed to
become the theatre of score-settling between external
forces.
In that regard, we are concerned over attempts to
entangle the issue of the future verdict of the Special
Tribunal through leaks regarding accusations against
individual Hizbullah officials. Our position concerning
the Special Tribunal remains unchanged. We believe
that the proceedings should be fair, unbiased and free
of all politicization.

10-58828

We welcome the positive momentum in relations
between Lebanon and Syria. We view normal goodneighbourly relations between those countries, with
which Russia has traditionally enjoyed relations of
friendship, to be a substantial contribution to regional
stability.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at
the outset to commend Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco
for his comprehensive briefing. We support the
important role of the United Nations in the settlement
of the Arab-Israeli conflict in the Middle East.
We have no doubt, Sir, that you share our view
that the major feature of the situation in the Middle
East is Israel’s ongoing attempts to block the peace
efforts led by the United States of America by
continuing its illegal practices, notably settlement
activity, the demolition of homes and the expulsion of
their inhabitants, not to mention the collective
punishment of the people of the Gaza Strip through the
ongoing blockade. The efforts for peace I refer to are
the same mentioned by President Obama before the
General Assembly (see A/65/PV.11) when he promised
the establishment of a Palestinian State within one year
and expressed his hope that, when he returns to the
Assembly Hall next year, the independent State of
Palestine would be a new Member of the United
Nations. He also called on Israel to extend its
moratorium on settlement activities.
However, the Government of Israel continues to
ignore not only the appeals of President Obama and the
Quartet and the international consensus on the twoState solution and the Road Map, but also the dozens
of resolutions of this Council and the General
Assembly, not to mention the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice. The State of Israel has
not only refused to extend the moratorium on
settlement activity in the West Bank — which did not
include East Jerusalem — and pursued such activity
uninterrupted over the past 10 years, but it has
amended its citizenship law, making it a condition for
anyone seeking Israeli nationality to take an oath of
allegiance to the State of Israel as a Jewish State.
Furthermore, Prime Minister Netanyahu of Israel
has sought to pre-empt the results of the negotiations
by setting as his principal objective the establishment
of arrangements to guarantee Israel’s security by
ensuring the presence of the Israeli army on the borders
between the West Bank and Jordan and by recognizing

17

S/PV.6404

Israel as the Jewish State. Indeed, the amendments to
the Israeli law of citizenship and the call on
Palestinians to recognize Israel as a Jewish State are
but two faces of the same coin and are not only aimed
at eroding the right of return of Palestinian refugees
and displaced persons, but also threaten the very
presence of Palestinians in Israel itself by denying their
legitimate historical presence in the land of their
forefathers. It dresses up the idea of transfer or
deportation as Fascism in new robes, as has been noted
in the Israeli media by the most prominent Israel
writers.
This is exactly what Foreign Minister Avigdor
Lieberman meant when he said that we must place the
problem of the Arabs of Israel on the negotiating table,
for there can be no lasting, genuine and solid solution
based on a homogeneous Palestinian State without a
Jewish presence at a time when Israel is being asked to
be a bi-national State. From the rostrum of the General
Assembly, Mr. Lieberman said that the negotiations
should be based on the exchange of land and
population and not on land for peace. He believes that
there is no possibility of achieving peace next year or
in the next generation and that the only solution is a
phased, long-term solution. He thus calls for emphasis
on the problems of security and the economy.

using or entering 17 per cent of the land in the Strip,
including 35 per cent of its arable land. It also prohibits
fishing in 85 per cent of Palestinian territorial waters,
contrary to the Oslo Accords.
With regard to Gaza, we emphasize the
importance of promptly dispatching the fact-finding
mission established by the Secretary-General to
investigate — in an impartial, credible and transparent
manner and in accordance with international criteria —
the attack by the Israeli occupying forces and navy on
the freedom flotilla. Such an investigation would allow
us to assign responsibility, punish the perpetrators, and
compensate all the victims. In this context, we hope
that the Council will consider all consequent reports of
the fact-finding mission.
Faced with that intransigence and Israel’s logic of
might, we emphasize that we are committed to the
force of the law and that we seek a just, comprehensive
and lasting settlement of the conflict in the Middle East
based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973), the Madrid terms of reference for peace,
the principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace
Initiative. In that context, negotiations in whatever
form must deal with the final status issues mentioned
in the terms of reference cited. The Road Map calls for
a total moratorium on settlement activities within
specified, short time frames. That was emphasized by
the Quartet on 20 August.

In fact, what Lieberman calls economic security
and phased peace are pure illusions. Economic security
cannot be achieved or sustained in isolation from the
political situation. He seeks to delude the international
community into believing that the Palestinian economy
in the West Bank is growing and that the Palestinians
are achieving prosperity under Israeli occupation. None
of this is true, for that economy is based largely on
assistance from donors, as many representatives around
this table well know. The call for phased peace, at a
time when settlement activities in the West Bank and
the blockade of Gaza continue, will achieve the
contrary of peace because it erodes the basis of peace
and the two-State solution.

Permanent peace is a peace that includes Syria and
Lebanon and is predicated on a withdrawal from the
occupied Syrian Golan Heights to the borders of 4 June
1967 and what is remaining of Lebanese territories, in
accordance with the resolutions of the Council, in
particular resolution 1701 (2006). In that respect we
avail ourselves of this opportunity to re-emphasize
Lebanon’s commitment to resolution 1701 (2006) in all
its aspects. Israel must do that also.

In any case, we cannot imagine peace in any
form, shape or context so long as Israel continues to
blockade the Gaza Strip and occasionally to bombard it
and kill its people under the pretext of fighting
terrorism. As a matter of fact, Israel is imposing not
only an external blockade of Gaza, but an internal one
as well. The most recent report of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, issued in
August, notes that Israel bans the Palestinians from

Last month, the international community
overwhelmingly welcomed the resumption of direct
negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority. Cautious optimism was in the air. There was
even talk of reaching a settlement within one year.
However, it unfortunately did not take long for the
skeptics to be proven right once again. Despite appeals
from all quarters of the international community, Israel
let the moratorium on settlement activity expire.

18

Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me at the outset thank
Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his useful briefing.

10-58828

S/PV.6404

For our part, we still believe that this last round
of direct talks can be salvaged. Turkey welcomes the
decision by the Palestinian side to not withdraw
completely from the process and to give ongoing
efforts to find common ground some more time. That
being said, this pause in direct engagement cannot last
forever.
Once again, Turkey, like scores of other States,
calls on Israel to desist from taking unilateral steps and
employing politically expedient rhetoric that
undermine and prejudice the notion of a negotiated
two-State settlement. That means first and foremost
immediately freezing all settlement activity, including
in East Jerusalem, with a view to giving direct
negotiations a chance to proceed.
For there to be popular support for direct
negotiations and ultimately the realization of a twoState solution, the conditions of occupation have to be
eased and a positive environment created on the ground
that allows for the State-building exercise in Palestine
to make progress. If the Palestinian Authority is indeed
Israel’s partner in peace, then it must be empowered to
assume its responsibilities fully.
We welcome the World Bank’s recent
pronouncement that at its current pace and
performance, the Palestinian Authority is well
positioned for the establishment of a State at any point
in the near future. For the Palestinian Authority to
become economically viable, obstacles to private
sector development and sustainable growth have to be
lifted. Palestinians need to be able to use more of their
land. They also have to enjoy their fundamental rights
and freedoms. In short, as the base for a State is rolled
out, the measure of occupation must be rolled back. In
the meantime, the international community must
continue to support the considerable progress already
made by the Palestinian Authority in State-building.
On the other hand, according to all accounts, the
humanitarian situation in Gaza continues to be grave.
By virtue of its illegal and inhuman blockade, Israel is
directly responsible for an ongoing human tragedy that
is unfolding day in and day out, in plain sight. It is a
harsh existence where, for example, teenagers
collecting rubble to make cement are shot at on a daily
basis. Such is the sad reality designed and imposed by
Israel.
The international community must react
proactively to the suffering that endures in Gaza.

10-58828

Turkey once again calls for the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) and for the
full and immediate lifting of the blockade.
On a positive note, Turkey welcomes the recent
progress made in talks between Palestinian factions.
The existing differences need to be overcome, and
disunity must be made a thing of the past. We will
continue to support efforts at reconciliation. The
Palestinian people need and deserve a single leadership
that incorporates all factions and is able to lend its full
support to the peace process.
The stability of Lebanon continues to be of
paramount importance for peace and security in the
region. Tensions have visibly mounted over the past
few weeks. It is crucial that all of the actors in the
political spectrum in Lebanon remain calm, maintain
dialogue and be sensitive to all legitimate concerns.
The Special Tribunal for Lebanon is an independent
body established by the Council at the request of
Lebanon. Its work should not become politicized.
Turkey believes that the hard-won peace in
Lebanon must be preserved at all costs, and we will
continue to play our part in a bilateral and regional
context to defuse existing tensions. In this context, let
me also reiterate our full support for the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. Turkey will
continue to call for and strive towards the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).
As concerns the attack by Israeli military forces
on an international humanitarian aid convoy on the
high seas, Turkey welcomes the fact that, based on the
Council’s presidential statement on 1 June
(S/PRST/2010/9), the work of the panel of inquiry
established by the Secretary-General is under way. In
mid-September the panel produced its first progress
report, after receiving an interim report on the Turkish
national investigation. The panel awaits a similar
national contribution from Israel to proceed with the
inquiry.
On the other hand, the fact-finding mission
dispatched by the United Nations Human Rights
Council submitted its report, which that Council
adopted by on 29 September (See A/HRC/RES/15/1). I
will not go into the details of that important report
here. In short, the mission concluded, based on a very
detailed analysis of the facts, that a series of violations
of
international
law,
including
international
humanitarian and human rights law, were committed by

19

S/PV.6404

the Israeli forces during the interception of the flotilla
and the detention of passengers in Israel prior to their
deportation. Turkey continues to support the work of
the panel of inquiry and looks forward to the
establishment by the panel, as soon as possible, of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding that tragic use
of force against civilians in international waters.
There are once again serious question marks
about the future of the Israeli-Palestinian peace
process. At this time of uncertainty, all parties must
exercise restraint and refrain from taking steps that are
counterproductive to the efforts to establish common
ground and a basis for compromise. In that context, the
major new settlement activity in East Jerusalem,
announced just last Friday, is yet another step in the
wrong direction. Israel must put an end to the actions
designed to change the demographics and the social
and religious fabric of Jerusalem. It must refrain from
any provocative action in the city and preserve the
status of Jerusalem, as required by the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
More broadly, peace in the Middle East cannot be
attained without putting in place a comprehensive
framework that takes into account all the different
tracks. We call on all actors in the region to act
responsibly, assume their fair share of the burden in the
search for stability, and give peace a chance.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Assistant Secretary-General FernandezTaranco for his briefing. I have also listened attentively
to the statements made by the representatives of
Palestine and Israel.
Currently, the situation in the Middle East
continues to be complicated and volatile. The
international community should continue to work to
create conditions conducive to resolving tensions
between the parties concerned and achieving lasting
peace. On the Middle East question and the issue of
achieving lasting peace in the region, China has always
maintained that differences should be settled through
negotiation and dialogue between the parties
concerned.
China supports the early establishment of an
independent State of Palestine living in peace with
Israel, arrived at through political negotiations between
Palestine and Israel. The direct negotiations that began
in early September represent an important opportunity
for the peace process in the Middle East. China hopes

20

that the negotiations will continue and will yield
substantive progress at an early date.
Currently, those negotiations have been brought
to a standstill by the issue of settlements. China is
profoundly concerned about this. The direct
negotiations between Israel and Palestine did not come
about easily. China hopes that Israel will be able to see
the big picture and extend the freeze on the
construction of settlements, so as to create the
necessary conditions for the continuation of
negotiations. We call upon Israel to immediately and
completely freeze the construction of settlements and
of the separation wall on occupied Palestinian territory,
including the Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem.
The humanitarian situation in occupied
Palestinian territory, and in particular in the Gaza Strip,
continues to be grave. That situation should not be
allowed to continue. We welcome the recent Israeli
easing of restrictions on the access of some assistance
in the form of humanitarian goods and commodities to
the Gaza Strip. However, it is not enough to alleviate
the dire humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. China
calls upon Israel to immediately and completely lift the
blockade on the Gaza Strip and to once again allow the
people there the space necessary for a normal and
dignified existence, life and development. We call upon
the international community to pay continuing
attention to the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip
and to provide greater support to its people.
China firmly supports the just cause of the
Palestinian people to achieve their legitimate national
rights. We hope that all factions in Palestine will settle
their differences and achieve reconciliation through
dialogue and consultation at an early date, so that they
can work together for the long-term interests of the
nation by achieving independent Statehood, whereby
the Palestinian people can enjoy peace and stability.
On 13 and 14 October, Mr. Wu Sike, China’s
Special Envoy on the Middle East issue, visited Israel
and Palestine. China is ready to work actively and
constructively on the peace process in the Middle East.
China has taken note of the efforts made by the Quartet
on the question of the Middle East. However, the
Quartet cannot replace the role of the Security Council
in promoting the Middle East peace process. The
Security Council should assume its responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
with regard to the Middle East issue.

10-58828

S/PV.6404

China supports the two-State solution, with
Palestine and Israel living in peace with one another, as
well as the achievement of a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East on the basis of the
relevant United Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace
Initiative, the principle of land for peace and the Road
Map.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me first join
others in thanking Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco for his update on recent
developments in the Middle East. I would also like to
thank Ambassador Meron Reuben and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their important contributions
to our discussion here today.
Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the delegation of the European Union on
behalf of the Union.
One of the strongest messages from world leaders
at last month’s General Assembly debate was the
appeal to the leaders of Israel and the Palestinian
people to be courageous and move ahead with direct
talks. As Austrian Foreign Minister Michael
Spindelegger underlined in his address in the
framework of the general debate and in his meetings
with Middle East leaders on that occasion, those talks
offer the first concrete prospects for sustainable peace
in the Middle East in many years. An agreement
between Israel and the Palestinians would radically
improve the lives of the peoples concerned and provide
the key to a more stable region.
With the expiration of the partial moratorium on
settlement construction, we again face the risk of
sliding back into a stalemate that would only profit
demagogues and violent spoilers. We therefore call on
the Government of Israel to urgently reconsider its
position. At the same time, we reiterate our call on
Israel to bring all settlement activities to an effective
halt, including in East Jerusalem. In that context, we
specifically call for a halt to the implementation of
recent decisions with regard to the construction of
additional housing units in Ramot and Pisgat Ze’ev.
We call on both sides to realize their enormous
responsibilities towards their peoples and the wider
international community, and to continue to work
towards a negotiated settlement. The absence of peace
for yet another generation is neither a viable nor an
acceptable alternative for either side. We urge Israeli
and Palestinian leaders to look beyond the political

10-58828

expediency of the day and carve out an environment in
which all core issues can be tackled and resolved
successfully.
We call on both sides to observe calm and
restraint in words and deeds and to demonstrate their
adherence to the obligations they agreed to under the
Road Map. Both sides should take visible and tangible
steps to nurture confidence in the renewed peace
efforts. We strongly encourage both sides to capitalize
on the positive developments that their cooperation has
yielded in recent months, including in the area of
security and economic growth. In particular, decisive
progress in the expansion of freedom of movement and
access in the West Bank and the acceleration of the
recovery of Gaza would contribute to building trust in
the belief that there is an alternative future of peace
and security for the State of Israel and the future State
of Palestine, living side by side in peace as neighbours.
It is important that the efforts of the Palestinian
Authority to build functioning institutions for a future
Palestinian State move forward dynamically. We call
on Palestinian political representatives to seriously
pursue reconciliation efforts and to agree on a political
platform based on non-violence and the quest for
peace, democracy and the rule of law. The current split
between the West Bank and the Gaza Strip jeopardizes
prospects for the successful implementation of the twoState solution.
With regard to the investigation of the tragic
flotilla incident, we support the ongoing efforts of the
Panel of Inquiry established by the Secretary-General.
We look forward to the continued cooperation of the
parties with the Panel.
With regard to Lebanon, we reiterate our call on
all parties to abide by their obligations under resolution
1701 (2006). While awaiting the results of the
investigation into the incident of 3 September in
Shehabiya, we wish to underscore the importance of
decisive efforts by all parties to ensure that the area
south of the Litani River is kept free of unauthorized
armed personnel, assets and weapons.
Austria is deeply committed to promoting the rule
of law, as this is also a prerequisite for sustainable
peace and development. Preventing impunity for past
crimes is an essential contribution to strengthening
democracy and the rule of law. The Special Tribunal
for Lebanon, like other international criminal courts
and tribunals, is an important instrument to fight

21

S/PV.6404

impunity. We firmly believe that respect for its
independence is essential for fulfilling its mandates,
and we thus fully support the statement by the
Secretary-General on 6 October.
In closing, let me reiterate the deep commitment
of Austria, in cooperation with her European Union
partners, to supporting and ensuring the success of
direct negotiations and to opening all tracks for a
comprehensive regional peace. Let me add that we also
hope for the continued support of our Arab partners in
this important endeavour.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to begin by thanking Mr. Fernandez-Taranco,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for
his update on recent developments in the Middle East.
We also thank the Permanent Representative of Israel,
Mr. Meron Reuben, and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine, Mr. Riyad Mansour, for their presence and
their contribution to our debate.
In the past month, we have all witnessed the
intensified efforts to find a way to continue direct
peace talks in an environment conducive to progress.
During the Security Council discussions last month,
Bosnia and Herzegovina whole-heartedly welcomed
the resumption of direct talks between Israelis and
Palestinians. We would also like to use this opportunity
to reiterate our full support for serious and responsible
direct negotiations, which represent the only way to
resolve all final status issues and reach a two-State
solution.
The resumption of direct talks represents a major
breakthrough in the Middle East crisis and a significant
achievement by the parties involved. It has also been
strongly supported by many international actors, and
we must again pay tribute to United States Secretary of
State Hillary Clinton and Senator George Mitchell,
who have played an important role, which reflects
President Obama’s commitment to peace in the Middle
East. The Middle East Quartet and the Arab League
have also contributed substantially to this process.
My delegation was aware of the tremendous
efforts required from both sides in order to get the
negotiation process moving. Unfortunately, we are
once again confronted with discouraging news from the
Middle East. Bosnia and Herzegovina shares the grave
concerns of others regarding actions that threaten the
continuation of direct talks, in particular the expiration
of Israel’s 10-month partial settlement moratorium. We

22

must underline once again that all settlement activities
on occupied land are illegal under international law
and are contrary to Israel’s obligations under the Road
Map. Those activities, therefore, represent an obstacle
on the road to comprehensive peace. Bosnia and
Herzegovina calls upon Israel to respond positively to
appeals by the international community and end all
settlement activities, including in East Jerusalem.
Still, despite this major obstacle on the road to
negotiations, it is our strong belief that their
resumption is a crucially important opportunity that
must not be missed. The Middle East can not afford a
failed peace process. Bosnia and Herzegovina,
therefore, urges the parties directly involved to take the
difficult and necessary decisions to achieve a just
political settlement that should lead to a two-State
solution. We would like to underline that we firmly
believe that this momentum deserves the continuous
and unconditional support of the entire international
community, and we are looking forward to a
comprehensive political dialogue with a clear agenda
and terms of reference aimed at resolving all
permanent status issues — including the status of
Jerusalem — within one year.
With that in mind, it is important to reiterate that
the current situation calls for brave political decisions
and practical steps from both sides. It is also of utmost
importance that both sides avoid provocative actions
that could undermine the success of the negotiations.
Furthermore, respect for international humanitarian
law by all is vital for any lasting solution and
cooperation between the two sides.
We strongly condemn all armed attacks on
civilians and wish to reiterate that Israeli and
Palestinian civilian populations must be protected.
Bosnia and Herzegovina calls for a complete stop to all
violence, in particular rocket fire and terrorist attacks.
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina
advocates
a
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East,
which can be achieved only on the basis of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, the
Road Map and agreements previously reached by the
parties, as well as the Arab Peace Initiative. Bosnia and
Herzegovina is and will remain committed to the twoState solution, with the State of Israel and an
independent, democratic, contiguous and viable State
of Palestine, living side by side in peace and security.

10-58828

S/PV.6404

The continuation and worsening of the situation
in Gaza is of continuing concern to Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We recognize positive Israeli activities
towards easing the entry of goods into Gaza, but
reiterate our calls for a full implementation of
resolution 1860 (2009) and for the immediate,
sustained and unconditional opening of crossings for
the flow of humanitarian aid, commercial goods and
persons to and from Gaza, including goods from the
West Bank.
Allow me to reiterate our firm belief that only
direct, open and frank negotiations can advance the
peace process and bring it to a successful conclusion.
Bosnia and Herzegovina urges the Israelis and the
Palestinians to invest all their efforts to achieve a just,
lasting, and comprehensive peace.
In conclusion, Bosnia and Herzegovina recalls
that peace in the Middle East should be comprehensive
and reiterates the importance of negotiations on the
Israeli-Syrian and Israeli-Lebanese tracks. As regards
Lebanon, we reaffirm our full support to the Lebanese
authorities and commend the crucial role in southern
Lebanon of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL). We call upon all parties concerned
to implement all provisions of resolution 1701 (2006),
to respect the Blue Line in its entirety and to cooperate
fully with the United Nations and UNIFIL. Bosnia and
Herzegovina fully supports the work and the
independence of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I would also like to extend
appreciation to Assistant Secretary-General FernandezTaranco for his very lucid briefing on the situation in
the Middle East. I would like to limit my comments to
three issues, namely, political developments, security
and humanitarian assistance.
On the subject of political developments, we
believe that last month the Security Council lauded the
resumption of direct talks between Israel and the
Palestinians, facilitated by the United States and the
Quartet. Although the resumption of talks was greeted
with a great sense of relief and hope, no one was under
the illusion that moving the peace process forward
would be easy. Mindful of the enormity of the task
ahead, we emphasized the need for compromise and
flexibility by the parties to pave the way for the
achievement of desired results.
It is disheartening to note that in the weeks
following the resumption of the talks difficulties have

10-58828

arisen, resulting in a stalemate. Indeed, many had
hoped that Israel would heed the appeals for the
extension of the 10-month freeze on housing
construction in the West Bank Jewish settlements as a
positive confidence-building measure. Instead, the
Israeli Government’s approval of 238 new homes in
East Jerusalem announced last Friday will not only
enflame passions on the Palestinian side. The decision
could also be interpreted as a move to kill the direct
talks and thereby complicate the peace process.
Coming at a time when the Palestinian Authority has
accepted the compromise of a two-month extension on
the moratorium, the announcement would have
profound impact on the United States-backed
negotiations with the Palestinian Authority.
Against that background, the Council, the
Quartet, the Arab League and bilateral partners should
sustain the pressure on the parties to remain engaged
through dialogue. They should also be encouraged to
remove all impediments to a negotiated settlement that
would result in a two-State solution and agreement on
all final status issues within two years.
The parties themselves must increase their efforts
in both words and deeds to create the conditions
conducive to a lasting peace. Provocative action on
either side at this delicate juncture does not serve the
interest of peace. We therefore urge Israel to rescind
the decision to construct new homes in Ramot and
Pisgat Ze’ev.
With regard to security, we believe that the
volatile situation in the region remains a matter of deep
concern. The series of attacks in August and September
that led to the death and injury of several Israelis,
including two pregnant women, are deplorable. It is
indeed regrettable that a group of Hamas militants
initiated some of the attacks in order to disrupt the
peace talks.
Reports that Hamas and Hizbullah continue to
threaten the peace talks are indeed troubling. There is
no justification for actions by either of the parties that
contradict the rules of engagement and international
war conventions. Soldiers and combatants alike must
be held to the highest professional standards. We thus
welcome the recent ruling by an Israeli court that found
two Israeli soldiers guilty of reckless endangerment
and of improper conduct. The use of children or
civilians as human shields should not be condoned in
any situation.

23

S/PV.6404

We hope that Israel’s announcement of indirect
talks with Hamas leaders on prisoner swap will help to
ease the tensions.
While we welcome the marginal increase in the
amount of goods and materials allowed to enter the
Gaza Strip, we wish to reiterate the need for the
complete removal of the blockade by the Israeli
Government. The unimpeded flow of humanitarian aid,
commercial goods and persons to and from Gaza would
facilitate the Palestinian state-building process. It
would also reduce tensions and the threat to Israel’s
security. Indeed, the determination by aid vessels to
break the blockade — most recently by the aid vessel
Irene — would be unnecessary were the blockade on
Gaza to be completely lifted. Until that goal is
achieved, we call on all aid vessels to avail themselves
of the legitimate crossings provided for persons, goods
and materials into the Gaza Strip to avoid unpleasant
consequences.
Nigeria believes that for the negotiations to have
a successful outcome, there must be mutual trust and
confidence between the parties. The parties must also
abide by and recommit to their Road Map obligations.
We call for the increased commitment and involvement
in the peace efforts from regional partners to help
secure the process. We welcome the support of the
Arab League for the peace process and its decision to
engage in discussions on the way forward.
The time is indeed ripe for a comprehensive and
holistic discussion of the decades of crisis in the
region, including the Israel-Syria and Israel-Lebanon
conflicts.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to thank Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his
comprehensive briefing. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Mansour and Ambassador Reuben for
their respective statements.
As we have repeatedly stated, the only way to
achieve durable peace in the Middle East is through
sincere negotiations in good faith between the parties
concerned. We strongly encourage both parties to
resume the direct negotiations that started at the
beginning of September. We support the United States
effort to resume the negotiations and achieve a
negotiated settlement.
Japan is disappointed that the Israeli moratorium
on settlement activities was not extended and that

24

Israel approved bidding for construction of housing
units in East Jerusalem. Japan urges Israel not to
implement this new construction plan and to extend the
moratorium on settlement activities.
Both parties must carry out their obligations and
commitments under the Road Map. We reiterate our
call on the Israeli Government to freeze all settlement
activities in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
No actions should be taken that could prejudge the
final status negotiations. At the same time, we call
upon the Palestinian Authority to continue its efforts to
improve security and fulfil its commitment to cease
violence and work against incitement.
The negotiations should achieve a two-State
solution by ending the occupation of those territories,
including East Jerusalem, occupied since 1967. Japan
supports the plan of the Palestinian Authority to build a
Palestinian State within 24 months. Japan will continue
to extend assistance and help build capacity for the
Palestinian people and institutions for the Palestinian
State. I thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for mentioning
our “corridor for peace and prosperity” project, which
we are actively pursuing.
With regard to Gaza, we continue to call for the
full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009). We also
call for Palestinian reconciliation and support the
efforts of Egypt in that regard.
With regard to Lebanon, we reaffirm our support
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and
political independence of Lebanon and the full
implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions. We are alarmed by some of the statements
made in Lebanon about the present situation, and we
call on all parties to act responsibly. We strongly
support the work of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon to fully implement resolution 1701 (2006)
and maintaining calm in its area of operation.
We also firmly support the work of the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon, which is an independent and
international judicial entity. The Tribunal should
continue to carry out its mandate without any
interference; that will contribute to ending impunity.
Japan will continue to make every effort to help
the parties achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I too would like to thank
Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco his comprehensive

10-58828

S/PV.6404

briefing, as well as the Permanent Representative of
Israel and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for
their remarks.
Once again, the Middle East peace process is at a
very delicate juncture. The end of the construction
freeze on Israeli settlements in the West Bank,
continued construction of Israeli homes in East
Jerusalem, the attacks on and by Israeli settlers and the
increased exchange of fire between Gaza and Israel are
all ominous developments that pose a real challenge to
the direct negotiations.
Those disturbing developments must be reversed
so that the negotiation process launched on 2 September
can continue. That will require political courage and
statesmanship. It means halting all settlement activity,
as it becomes untenable for the Palestinian leadership to
gather support for the talks while the very prospects of a
viable Palestinian State continue to be undermined by
construction. Freezing construction is not only a legal
obligation, but is actually the single most critical
contribution to peace in the region at this juncture.
We all understand that domestic political
constraints are a factor in any significant diplomatic
endeavour and, in cases of war and peace, even a
determining one.
At the same time, leaders and parties must look
beyond their immediate political objectives and take
the measures that are necessary to preserve the peace
process and to reach their long-term goals. The
commitment of all parties to peace will be judged not
by words, but by deeds. One is not asking Israel to
make concessions. Israel is being asked to fulfil its
legal obligation not to build in the occupied territories
and, in so doing, to allow for the negotiations to have a
reasonable chance to succeed.
Saving the incipient direct negotiations will also
require the active engagement of the international
community. We commend the efforts of the United
States Administration in that regard. We also applaud
the decision taken by the Follow-up Committee of the
League of Arab States in Sirte to support the
Palestinian Authority in giving some time for
conditions to be created for the resumption of
negotiations.
Despite the many challenges they face today and
will certainly face in the future, negotiations are the
only way to achieve sustainable peace, provided they

10-58828

are fair, meaningful and achieve concrete results in the
timeframe announced in September. Negotiations for
the sake of negotiations do not serve the purpose of
peace; rather, they endanger it.
Stopping and preventing violence is also key to
sustaining the fragile peace process. Recent incidents
of provocation and intolerance are a matter for serious
concern. We condemn the attacks against Israeli
settlers and the rocket-firing into southern Israel from
Gaza. We equally condemn provocation and violence
from Israeli settlers and the unacceptable attacks on
mosques and on Palestinian civilians and property.
Perpetrators of such acts must be swiftly brought to
justice. Moving the peace process forward is the most
unambiguous response to those who resort to
incitement and violence to impose their will,
discourage dialogue and undermine the two-State
solution.
The ultimate success of the peace process will
also depend on intra-Palestinian reconciliation. We
welcome the recent developments in the Palestinian
talks in Damascus and the constructive role played by
Egypt. Positive signs in the right direction are most
needed as the effort of institutional capacity-building
in Palestine, following Prime Minister Fayyad’s plan,
reaches a new phase. We reiterate the need for Israel to
contribute to that effort by further eliminating
restrictive measures.
The rightful focus on direct negotiations must not
divert attention from the gravity of the humanitarian
situation in Gaza. On the contrary, apart from inflicting
unlawful hardship upon 1.5 million people, the
blockade of Gaza is also detrimental to the peace talks
and inconsistent with a true desire to create an
environment conducive to substantive dialogue. We
welcome the easing of the Israeli blockade, but what is
required is a complete lifting of the blockade, without
prejudice to Israel’s legitimate security concerns.
At this critical point in time, there are
fundamental choices to be made by the parties, in
particular by the strongest one. As the SecretaryGeneral recently and eloquently stated, if the door to
peace closes, it will be very hard to reopen. We hope
and expect that his important message will be
understood and heeded.
Before I conclude, let me add a few words on
Lebanon. We encourage all Lebanese to work together
towards political stability and prosperity. We urge all

25

S/PV.6404

parties to address their differences peacefully. The
international community should also continue to extend
its full support to the country, especially through
efforts to assist Lebanon in promoting justice while
consolidating peace and reconciliation.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for the briefing he has given
us, as well as the representatives of Israel and the
Permanent Observer Mission of Palestine for their
statements.
For decades, the international community has
witnessed wars, tension and violence in the Middle
East, quite often without having the capacity to
respond, hoping that some day the conflict would
finally end and give way to peaceful coexistence
between those nations. At present, no efforts are being
spared to achieve that goal. The United Nations and
various States, both from within and outside the region,
have been resolutely involved in this complex task.
The situation is quite different from that which
prevailed 60 years ago. Peace agreements have been
signed, the existence of the State of Israel has been
recognized by the vast majority of the international
community and dialogue has been established between
the main parties involved, namely, Israelis and
Palestinians. On occasion, that dialogue has
substantive; at times, it has been a dialogue of the deaf.
However, the conflict persists, and we have not
achieved the objective that would make it possible to
resolve the conflict once and for all, that is, the
creation of a sovereign and independent Palestinian
State that is politically and economically viable and
living in peace side by side with Israel within secure
and internationally recognized borders.
At the beginning of September, thanks to the
efforts of President Obama’s Administration, hopes for
peace were once again rekindled owing to the
restoration of direct dialogue between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority, supported by the Quartet, the
Arab League and the international community. The
goal is ambitious: to resolve all the central issues
within a year. All the relevant stakeholders have
become involved in that task, with the firm goal of
giving shape to the so-called two-State solution. They
all knew that there would obstacles, threats and risks,
but were determined to become involved in the process
sincerely and seriously.

26

Today, ongoing dialogue hangs from a thread, and
the process of rapprochement seems to be slipping
backwards. This situation is not acceptable. Dialogue
and negotiation must continue and must produce
tangible results for the Palestinians and the Israelis.
The status quo is not a viable alternative. It will only
exacerbate tensions and lead to greater violence and
confrontation, directly affecting the civilian population
and destabilizing the region.
The international community also has a role to
play in restoring substantive and direct dialogue
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority, not only
because the alternative to dialogue is more violence,
but because we truly believe in the need for the
Palestinian people to have a sovereign and independent
State. This was established by the Quartet in its
statement of 19 March and in subsequent statements,
and it has been recognized by the vast majority of
Member States of the Organization.
But perhaps the most decisive factor will be when
both parties abstain from carrying out provocative acts
or acts that run counter to their obligations under the
Road Map. Israel and the Palestinian Authority must
create a context that is conducive to negotiations. In
that regard, the resumption of construction in illegal
settlements in the West Bank and the announcement of
new construction in East Jerusalem are a serious step
backwards. The international community has been
unanimous on this point: settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories are illegal, run counter to
international law and are a serious obstacle to the
peace process, as they prejudge and alter the results of
the negotiations.
Contrary to what some think, settlements do not
provide for greater security. On the contrary, they
generate tension, resentment and violence between the
two peoples, as we have seen in the past few weeks and
over the years. We urge Israel to cease this practice
once and for all, including the so-called natural growth.
This would confirm its commitment to the peace
process.
The Palestinian Authority must also continue to
meet its commitments under the Road Map. Despite the
tragic attacks against Israeli civilians, which we have
firmly condemned, we have noted with satisfaction the
improved capacities of Palestinian security forces, as
well as a gradual improvement in the economic
situation of the West Bank.

10-58828

S/PV.6404

We cannot think about improving the living
conditions of the Palestinians without considering the
civilian population in Gaza. The blockade imposed on
Gaza is unsustainable and counter-productive and has
severe humanitarian consequences for the civilian
population of the Gaza Strip. The partial lifting of
restrictions is welcome, but it is insufficient. The
blockade must be completely lifted, and, as we have
continued to state since January 2009 and taking
account of the legitimate security concerns of Israel,
we believe that this will only be possible if an
international monitoring mechanism is set up which
will guarantee a lasting ceasefire, the complete
openness of border crossings and control of illicit
weapons trafficking to Gaza, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009). This will also
lead to a significant reduction in tension and deaths
resulting from this situation, such as the attack on the
Freedom flotilla on 31 May.
We trust that the Panel of Inquiry established by
the Secretary-General will clarify the events that took
place during that incident, and we reiterate the primacy
of international norms. An investigation must be
carried out, as stated in the Council’s presidential
statement (S/PRST/2010/9), and it must be prompt,
impartial, credible and transparent. We await the early
outcome of the investigations under way. It is also
essential that inter-Palestinian dialogue continue, as
facilitated by Egypt and other States involved.
Assessing the situation in the Middle East
requires that we take into account the regional
situation. We have noted with concern an increase in
inter-community tensions in Lebanon, which endangers
the political balance and coexistence among the
various factions within Lebanese political society and
has led to ongoing violations of Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006), in particular through the
caching of weapons and explosives in the areas of
operation of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, as well as daily incursions by Israeli armed
forces into Lebanon’s territory. We appeal both to
Israel and to Lebanon, as well as to other relevant
political stakeholders, to comply with the provisions of
Security Council resolutions and to avoid any
belligerent rhetoric that could lead to an escalation in
violence.
Moreover, the work of the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon has generated increased tension and
controversy in the region. As pointed out by the

10-58828

Secretary-General on 6 October, the Tribunal is an
independent body with a clear Security Council
mandate to end impunity in an extremely serious case.
Its conclusions must not be prejudged, and there must
be no interference with its work.
The time has come for the leaders of Israel and
the Palestinian Authority to take important but difficult
political decisions to benefit their own people as well
as to ensure international peace and stability. The
situation requires political will, which has been lacking
so far.
We appeal to Israel and to the Palestinian
Authority to demonstrate through tangible actions,
their determination to resolve this conflict in a way that
goes beyond provocation and short-term political
interests.
The President: In view of the lateness of the
hour, Uganda will be the last speaker of the morning. I
propose to resume the meeting at 3 p.m. this afternoon
in order to listen to the other speakers on the list.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Uganda.
I thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing. I
also thank the representatives of Israel and Palestine
for their statements.
It is a matter of concern to my delegation that the
situation in the Middle East remains tense and fragile.
We were encouraged by the commencement of direct
negotiations between Israel and Palestine last month. It
is essential that the two parties uphold their
commitment to work towards a framework for
permanent peace.
There is no doubt that this negotiation process
will require courageous decisions and concessions by
both parties. Uganda is convinced that a
comprehensive and durable peace lies in a two-State
solution: Israel and Palestine living side by side in
peace and security. In this regard, we commend the
efforts undertaken by the international and regional
partners in facilitating the negotiations.
We salute the efforts of the Palestinian Authority
to fulfil their obligations under the Road Map,
particularly in the security sector, in institutionbuilding and in economic development. We, however,
remain concerned about divisions among the

27

S/PV.6404

Palestinians and call upon them to resolve their
differences through dialogue.
The continued settlement activity by Israel in
East Jerusalem is a recipe for conflict, which is a
matter of serious concern. We call upon Israel to freeze
all settlement activity, including natural growth. We are
also concerned over the continued rocket attacks from
Gaza into Israel, as well as Israeli air strikes into Gaza.
We call on both sides to exercise maximum restraint
and adhere to the ceasefire as envisaged in resolution
1860 (2009).

28

While the easing of the blockade on Gaza by
Israel is a positive step, we call for the total lifting of
the blockade.
On Lebanon, we are concerned about the
continued violations of resolution 1701 (2006). We call
on all parties to fully implement that resolution.
I resume my function as President of the Council.
As indicated earlier, I intend, with the concurrence of
Council members, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.

10-58828
