United Nations

A/RES/59/224

General Assembly

Distr.: General
14 February 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 83 (d)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2004
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/59/481/Add.4)]

59/224. Commodities
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 57/236 of 20 December 2002 and 58/204 of
23 December 2003, and stressing the urgent need to ensure their full
implementation,
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration adopted by Heads
of State and Government on 8 September 2000, 1
Taking note of the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on
Financing for Development, 2
Taking note also of the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development, 3
Taking note further of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries for the Decade 2001–2010 4 and the Least Developed Countries Report,
2004, 5
Recalling the Doha work programme adopted at the Fourth Ministerial
Conference of the World Trade Organization, on 14 November 2001, 6 and
welcoming the decision adopted in this context by the General Council of the World
Trade Organization on 1 August 2004, 7

_______________
1

See resolution 55/2.
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico,
18–22 March 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
3
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum),
chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
4
See A/CONF.191/13, chap. II.
5
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.04.II.D.27.
6
See A/C.2/56/7, annex.
7
World Trade Organization, document WT/L/579. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.
2

04-48970

A/RES/59/224

Taking note of the São Paulo Consensus adopted at the eleventh session of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 8 particularly the paragraphs
relating to commodities
Taking note also of the report of the Trade and Development Board on its fiftyfirst session, 9
Recognizing that commodity prices are an important element for heavily
indebted poor countries that are dependent on commodities for maintaining longterm debt sustainability,
Taking note of the targets set out in the Rome Declaration on World Food
Security and the Plan of Action of the World Food Summit 10 and the outcome
document of the World Food Summit: five years later, 11 which reaffirms the pledge
to end hunger and poverty,
Recognizing that structural changes in international commodity markets,
particularly the increasing concentration in trade and distribution, constitute new
challenges for small farmers, commodity producers and exporters in developing
countries,
Expressing its concern about the difficulties experienced by the developing
countries in financing and implementing viable diversification programmes, which
are essential for sustainable development and for attaining access to markets for
their commodities,
Takes note of the report of Secretary-General on world commodity trends
1.
and prospects, 12 including the fact that while prices have improved for some
commodities, the real prices of others remain on a declining trend;
2.
Recognizes that many developing countries are highly dependent on
primary commodities as their principal source of export revenues, employment,
income generation and domestic savings and as the driving force of investment,
economic growth and social development;
Reiterates the importance of maximizing the contribution of the
3.
commodity sector to sustained economic growth and sustainable development, while
continuing diversification efforts in commodity-dependent developing countries;
Emphasizes the need for efforts by the developing countries that are
4.
heavily dependent on primary commodities to continue to promote a domestic
policy and an institutional environment that encourage diversification and
liberalization of the trade and export sectors and enhance competitiveness;
Reaffirms that each country has primary responsibility for its own
5.
economic and social development, and recognizes that an effective enabling
environment at the national and international levels entails, inter alia, a sound
macroeconomic framework, competitive markets, clearly defined property rights, an
attractive investment climate, good governance, an absence of corruption and well_______________
8

TD/412, part II.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/59/15), part five.
10
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the World Food Summit,
13–17 November 1996 (WFS 96/REP), part one, appendix.
11
Ibid., Report of the World Food Summit: five years later, 10–13 June 2002, part one, appendix; see also
A/57/499, annex.
12
A/59/304.
9

2

A/RES/59/224

designed regulatory policies that protect the public interest and generate public
confidence in market operations;
6.
Encourages developing countries, with the necessary support of donor
countries and the international community, to formulate specific commodity policies
so as to contribute to the facilitation of trade expansion, the reduction of
vulnerability and the improvement of livelihood and food security, by:
(a) Creating an enabling environment that encourages the participation of
rural producers and small farmers;
(b) Continuing the diversification of the commodity sector and enhancing its
competitiveness in developing countries that are heavily dependent on commodities;
(c) Increasing technology development and improving information systems,
institutions and human resources;
7.
Notes that the supply capacity and adaptability of many countries is
constrained by weak institutional and technical capacity, and invites the
international community to support commodity-dependent developing countries in
addressing the loss of competitiveness and negative commodity production and
trade trends and in taking the measures necessary to improve livelihoods and food
security in commodity-dependent developing countries by supporting the design and
implementation of commodity chain strategies, and welcomes initiatives taken in
this regard;
Emphasizes the importance of official development assistance for
8.
agriculture and rural development, and invites developing countries to prioritize
agriculture and rural development in their national development strategies and
programmes, inter alia, in the New Partnership for Africa’s Development, 13 and in
this regard invites developed countries and the donor community to further reinforce
their assistance to those sectors in developing countries by providing financial and
technical support for activities aimed at addressing commodity issues, particularly
the needs and problems of commodity-dependent developing countries;
Welcomes the decision taken by members of the World Trade
9.
Organization on 1 August 2004,7 and stresses the importance of a successful
conclusion of the Doha work programme;6
10. Reiterates the importance of expanded South-South trade and investment
in commodities;
11. Recalls the potential of regional integration and cooperation to improve
the effectiveness of traditional commodity sectors and support diversification
efforts;
12. Calls upon developed countries that have not already done so to work
towards the objective of providing duty-free and quota-free market access for all
least developed country products, and encourages developing countries in a position
to do so to contribute to improved market access for the least developed countries;
13. Recognizes that developed countries account for two thirds of world
non-fuel commodity imports, and expresses the urgent need for supportive
international policies and measures to improve the functioning of the commodity
markets through efficient and transparent price-formation mechanisms, including
_______________
13

A/57/304, annex.

3

A/RES/59/224

commodity exchanges, and through the use of viable and effective commodity price
risk-management instruments;
14. Also recognizes that market exigencies can constitute formidable
challenges to developing country commodity producers and exporters, in particular
small farmers, and urges both developing and developed countries to take
appropriate steps to enable those producers to enter global supply chains and to
facilitate their effective participation in supply chains, and invites the private sector
to promote partnerships that contribute to the effective participation of small
producers in supply chains;
15. Encourages the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Bank and
other relevant international organizations, within their respective mandates, to
enhance their efforts to facilitate access to market-based instruments, with
prudential oversight for managing commodity risks due to price fluctuation and
natural disasters, so as to address the commodity problems in developing countries;
16. Regrets that schemes to mitigate earnings shortfalls have not reached the
originally envisaged goals, and urges Governments and invites international
financial organizations to continue to assess the effectiveness, including the
operationalization and user-friendliness, of the systems for compensatory financing
of shortfalls in export earnings, and in this regard stresses the importance of
empowering developing country commodity producers to insure themselves against
risk, including natural disasters;
17. Reiterates the role of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development in addressing commodities issues in a comprehensive way in
accordance with relevant General Assembly resolutions and the provisions of the
São Paulo Consensus,8 and in this regard invites development partners to provide
the resources required to enable the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development to undertake those activities;
18. Notes with concern that the real prices of some commodities are still on a
declining trend, and requests the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
within their respective mandates, to explore appropriate ways of addressing this
problem and identifying best practices for dealing with persistent oversupply
situations;
19. Calls upon the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to
continue to work, in cooperation with all interested stakeholders, including donor
countries and organizations, for the effective operation of the International Task
Force on Commodities launched at the eleventh session of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, and invites interested parties to provide
voluntary financial support for its effective operation;
20. Underlines the need to strengthen the Common Fund for Commodities,
and encourages it, in cooperation with the International Trade Centre
UNCTAD/WTO, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and
other relevant bodies, to continue to strengthen the activities covered by its Second
Account in developing countries with its supply chain concept of improving access
to markets and reliability of supply, enhancing diversification and addition of value,
improving the competitiveness of commodities, strengthening the market chain,
improving market structures, broadening the export base and ensuring the effective
participation of all stakeholders;
4

A/RES/59/224

21. Invites all relevant stakeholders, including the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, the Common Fund for Commodities and the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, within their respective
mandates, and other donors to intensify their support for the financing of
commodity diversification, focusing on developing private sector capacity,
strengthening market institutions, developing strong producer associations for
commodities with a proper role for producers, including women and small farmers,
developing key infrastructure and stimulating investments;
22. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in collaboration
with the Secretariat of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to
report on the implementation of the present resolution and on world commodity
trends and prospects to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session,
under the item entitled “Macroeconomic policy questions”, the sub-item entitled
“Commodities”.
75th plenary meeting
22 December 2004

5
