S/2020/1176

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 December 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 8 December 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, Departments of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations; Mr. Alexandre Zouev, Assistant
Secretary-General for Rule of Law and Security Institutions, Department of Peace
Operations; and Mr. Smaїl Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security; as well as the statements delivered by Their Excellencies Ms. Naledi Pandor,
Minister of International Relations and Cooperation of South Africa; Ms. Sophie
Wilmès, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs, European Affairs
and Foreign Trade of Belgium; Mr. Rein Tammsaar, Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Estonia; Mr. Mohamed Ali Nafti, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Tunisia; Ms. Keisal M. Peters, Minister of State with responsibility for Foreign Affairs
and Foreign Trade of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines; Mr. Niels Annen, Minister
of State in the Federal Foreign Office of Germany; Mr. Mahendra Siregar, ViceMinister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia; and by the representatives of China, the
Dominican Republic, France, the Niger, the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam
in connection with the video-teleconference on “Maintenance of international peace
and security: security-sector reform”, convened on Thursday, 3 December 2020.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefings and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Jerry Matthews Matjila
President of the Security Council

20-16699 (E) 151220 150121

*2016699*

S/2020/1176

Annex I
Statement by the Assistant Secretary-General for Africa,
Departments of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace
Operations, Bintou Keita
I would like to thank the South African presidency for having convened this
high-level debate. I am very pleased to address the Council today with Mr. Zouev
and African Union Commissioner Chergui on the topic of security-sector governance
and reform. I will outline the strides that we have made and the challenges that we
face in supporting Member States that embark on security-sector reform in contexts
of fragility and post-conflict recovery.
For societies recovering from conflict and instability, security-sector reform
(SSR) holds great promise: democratically governed, effective and accountable
security and justice sectors — which reflect the social fabric of the nation — create
a safe and secure environment in which the rule of law and economic and social
development can take root for the benefit of States and their peoples.
There is indeed broad recognition that security-sector governance is a key
element of United Nations support for national efforts to sustain peace and prevent
the outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence of conflict across the entire
peace continuum. This applies from prevention to peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
development settings. As one example, the Peacebuilding Fund invested $21 million
during 2017 through 2019 in support of those efforts in countries such as Burkina
Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, the Gambia, Guinea and Liberia.
The joint United Nations-World Bank study, Pathways for Peace, illustrated
the importance of security-sector governance, including the fact that security-sector
reforms play a critical role in prevention. We can see this in Indonesia, Kenya, TimorLeste and Tunisia, to name but a few countries. Security-sector reforms should be part
of larger political strategies and priorities, as, for example, in Afghanistan, Liberia
and Sierra Leone; also, security-sector-reform processes are more sustainable when
based on inclusive citizen involvement, including of women and youth.
Expectations, however, need to be realistic. Security-sector governance and
reform is a complex and long-term endeavour, sometimes spanning a generation. It
requires a deep understanding of the root causes of a conflict, sustained political
will to overcome resistance and the space to implement difficult political decisions.
It also requires the balancing of all stakeholders’ security needs.
With that in mind, let me reflect on three strategic points, based on lessons
learned from our experience in implementing security-sector reform mandates.
First, SSR can succeed only when it is part of a wider political process; also,
political considerations must result in the design of reasonable plans and realistic
expectations. In that regard, we welcome the Security Council’s linking of SSRmandated tasks to the strategic priorities of peace operations such as support for
peace processes, stabilization, the extension of State authority and the protection
of civilians.
Let me list some of the SSR tasks that peace operations perform.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) uses good offices and mediation efforts to advance the implementation
of SSR provisions in the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, signed at
Algiers; the Peacebuilding Fund was also the first partner to support the compliance
framework for the Group of Five for the Sahel Force, which the United Nations

2/35

20-16699

S/2020/1176

is mandated to support, with approximately $600,000 in seed funding, quickly
followed by European Union funding of €10 million.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the
Central African Republic (MINUSCA) provides technical and logistical support to
the recruitment, integration and deployment of security services.
The United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) is facilitating dialogue with national authorities
and partners to create space for sustainable SSR while also supporting the efforts of
the military justice system to hold security elements accountable.
The United Nations Mission in South Sudan is employing good offices and
providing technical expertise to support the articulation of a national reform model.
In all of those contexts, peace operations are working to enhance the
coordination of international partners in support of national SSR priorities and are
injecting critical capacity into security-sector institutions and personnel.
Yet despite the significant progress made, too often SSR support is narrowly
focused on enhancing the capacity and capability of security providers and often at
junctures when such an investment is unlikely to be sustainable. In many settings, the
social contract remains fragile, there is deep mistrust towards security services, and
there is no dialogue on security and defence matters between authorities, political
actors and the population at large. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
example, lack of a national consensus and the multiplicity of partners and competing
visions have led to a narrow focus on the reinforcement of military capacities at the
expense of a wider approach to the protection of civilians. The current MONUSCO
transition provides a fresh opportunity for a structured dialogue and forging a
consensus that should not be missed.
Secondly, coordination and close cooperation among partners on the ground
is essential. The United Nations is rarely alone in assisting security-sector reform.
Given the complexity of the task, partnerships are a welcome necessity.
The African Union — supported by its regional economic communities and
regional mechanisms — has been at the forefront of advancing security-sector
reform at the policy and operational levels in Africa. We built a strategic partnership
with the African Union Commission, focused on advancing the African Union’s
(AU) leading role in SSR on the continent and in Silencing the Guns. That included
support for the elaboration of the AU Policy Framework on SSR, the development
of a tailored capacity-building programme and, more recently, bolstering strategic
coordination between the African Union and partners in the framework of an SSR
steering committee.
The European Union is also a key and longstanding SSR partner in
many settings.
Bilateral SSR support and assistance programmes are almost always in place
and are often most influential.
In all settings, we strive to ensure coordination among partners and the
compatibility of their approaches, for the benefit of the host country and local
communities. I must be frank: sometimes this can be a rather challenging task.
We need to redouble our efforts to work together on the ground through joint
analysis, assessment and joint implementation whenever possible. An inclusive and
consensual national SRR vision, backed by coordinated international partners, is the
most efficient way forward.

20-166993/35

S/2020/1176

Thirdly, lasting security will remain elusive as long as the underpinning
analysis, assessment and implementation of security governance reform excludes
women’s and minorities’ perspectives and security needs. Security sectors in many
countries continue to be largely dominated by men and systematically discriminate
against women. SSR is a key opportunity to raise awareness and generate a national
commitment to addressing inequalities by building security institutions that are
more gender-neutral and representative of minorities.
Inclusive and gender-responsive SSR requires strong political leadership to
transform long-held stereotypes and patriarchal norms about women in uniform,
such as establishing gender-parity quotas, assessing barriers to women’s inclusion,
delivering advanced career opportunities and ensuring women’s promotion to
leadership roles.
It takes time for security institutions to evolve. But whenever security services
discriminate against or fail to protect individuals or communities based on gender,
race or ethnic affiliation, accountability must be swift and impartial. Finding that
balance is a challenge that societies around the world grapple with daily.
In the Central African Republic, MINUSCA supported the Armed Forces
of the Central African Republic in building facilities for women soldiers in Camp
Kassaï, east of Bangui. In Mali, MINUSMA successfully supported the establishment
of a vetting mechanism that will prevent perpetrators of sexual violence from
joining the Malian army. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO has
supported efforts by Congolese military justice to prosecute, among others, cases of
sexual violence.
However, despite the progress made, there is an enormous gap between
the expectations for gender-responsive SSR processes and the availability of the
resources — political, technical and financial — necessary to foster inclusivity and
representativity within security institutions at all levels.
To conclude, I would like to put forth three recommendations to the
Security Council and Member States to optimally position the United Nations in
advancing nationally owned and led security-sector governance and reform efforts
by, first, recognizing security-sector governance and reform primarily as political
processes and ensuring that peace operation mandates on SSR are linked to broader
political objectives; secondly, systematically recognizing the coordination role of the
United Nations and the necessity of partnerships as means to align international
assistance with national SSR priorities; and, thirdly, supporting inclusive SSR
processes and prioritizing efforts aiming at increasing women’s participation in
national security services by identifying and addressing systemic barriers to their
recruitment, retention and promotion.

4/35

20-16699

S/2020/1176

Annex II
Statement by the Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of Law
and Security Institutions, Department of Peace Operations,
Alexandre Zouev
I would like to thank Her Excellency Minister Naledi Pandor and the
Government of South Africa for this timely initiative and for the continued support
for advancing the United Nations security-sector reform (SSR) agenda.
I would also like to thank the members of the Security Council for their
continued interest in SSR issues, which led today to the submission of the second
stand-alone Security Council draft resolution on SSR. I am grateful for the continual
support provided by the Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform, co-chaired
by South Africa and Slovakia, and all other partners that have engaged with and
supported the United Nations on this important topic.
Assisting national authorities in building an effective and accountable security
sector is an important priority for the United Nations.
In 2014, the Security Council adopted resolution 2151 (2014), which affirms
that an effective, professional and accountable security sector is the cornerstone of
peace and sustainable development. Over the years, and in support of the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping, prevention and sustaining peace agenda, the
United Nations has facilitated political commitment from its Member States to
support the normative and operational aspects of SSR.
The United Nations is currently assisting more than 15 countries in undertaking
various SSR initiatives through the implementation of peacekeeping and special
political missions’ mandates as well as in response to requests from Member States
and regional organizations for targeted SSR support.
In addition to the various country examples mentioned by Assistant SecretaryGeneral Keita earlier, the United Nations, at the request of the national authorities,
stepped up its cross-pillar support for national SSR processes in Burkina Faso and
the Gambia. In those countries, the Peacebuilding Fund financed catalytic SSR
advisory programmes to support the design and implementation of comprehensive
SSR processes, with a focus on the greater inclusion and participation of women in
the security sector.
A number of special political missions also support critical security-sector
reform tasks. In Libya, the United Nations Support Mission in Libya supports
mediation efforts among security actors, including following the signing of the
ceasefire agreement in October by the 5+5 Joint Military Commission.
In Yemen, the Office of the Special Envoy has supported efforts to broker
a nationwide ceasefire agreement through SSR analysis and technical advice,
fostering dialogue and implementing confidence-building initiatives between local
communities and security forces.
In Somalia, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia is providing
strategic policy advice to national stakeholders on the security architecture and
security-sector governance structure. It also supports the Government in coordinating
international assistance to the security sector.
Strategic partnerships are key to promoting effective, predictable and
sustainable international SSR assistance. The United Nations continues to strengthen
its collaboration with regional organizations such as the African Union; the Economic
Community of West African States; the European Union and its overseas operations
20-166995/35

S/2020/1176

in the Central African Republic, Mali and Somalia; the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe; and the World Bank.
The coordination of international SSR assistance is enhanced through
the United Nations Inter-Agency Security Sector Reform Task Force and the
United Nations Global Focal Point for the Rule of Law. Those platforms have been
essential in ensuring the coherence of system-wide SSR assistance, delivering joint
and/or coordinated responses, and developing system-wide policy and guidance —
most recently in partnership with the World Bank and through the generous
support of the United Nations Humanitarian, Development, Peacebuilding and
Partnership Facility.
However, some challenges persist.
First, United Nations regional offices and special envoys lack reliable SSR
capacity, particularly in the context of implementing the Secretary-General’s
conflict-prevention agenda. As the demand for related expertise and assistance
grows in non-United Nations mission settings, supporting those entities with the
relevant knowledge and capacity would be vital to assessing and analysing the risks
and conflict factors associated with the security sector in the geographical areas
under their purview.
Secondly, the mismatch between financial needs and the resources availed and
committed to by donors is a major concern in many countries. That is particularly
challenging in transition settings, where the Government and United Nations
country teams often lack the resources needed to preserve the SSR gains made
through peacekeeping.
Finally, ensuring an effective division of labour and fostering the strategic
coherence of international assistance, including in the context of implementing
political agreements such as in the Central African Republic, Mali and South Sudan,
continue to be a challenge.
I would like to conclude by sharing three recommendations.
First, for a greater effectiveness of prevention efforts, United Nations regional
offices and special envoys should be equipped with enhanced capacity to analyse
the risks, vulnerabilities and conflict drivers in the security sector to inform good
offices and feed into national peacebuilding and development strategies.
Secondly, to consolidate SSR gains in transition and sustaining-peace settings,
the allocation of the necessary financial resources by Member States is critical;
greater resources need to be made available to support SSR initiatives through the
Peacebuilding Fund and other pooled-funding mechanisms.
Thirdly, the Council’s support for United Nations joint planning of SSR
assistance with its strategic partners, in particular the AU and the EU, will be vital
for strategic coherence. This can help reinforce the capacity of United Nations
peace operations to comprehensively deliver on their mandates through greater SSR
coordination. Regular reporting on these support activities could be provided to the
Security Council.

6/35

20-16699

S/2020/1176

Annex III
Statement by the African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security, Smaïl Chergui
I feel greatly honoured for this opportunity to address the Security Council at
today’s Ministerial debate on peacebuilding and sustaining peace and security sector
governance and reform. The theme of today’s debate is topical for the African Union,
given the increasing recognition among our member States and other States around
the world of the centrality of security sector governance and reform in building
sustainable peace agreements. Effective security sector reform (SSR) contributes to
the realization of the aspiration of a peaceful and secure Africa in which all guns will
be silent and in which human rights, democracy and gender equality are guaranteed,
in accordance with the continent’s Agenda 2063.
The African Union Master Roadmap of Practical Steps to Silence the Guns
in Africa by the Year 2020 also acknowledges that the failure to transform African
defence and security forces into professional and disciplined national security
institutions that are subject to civilian oversight and control has often led to the
eruption of or relapse into conflicts, thereby perpetuating cycles of violence and
disrupting stabilization and peacebuilding efforts.
Since the adoption of its security sector reform policy framework in 2013,
the African Union (AU) has continued to deploy efforts to assist member States
upon request in addressing the challenges of security sector governance and reform.
Indeed, the AU Peace and Security Council has been seized of the matter.
We note that SSR is essential both in peacetime and in conflict and postconflict situations, within the context of the continental structural conflictprevention framework. This is because of its contribution to consolidating peace and
preventing relapse into conflict.
As part of our efforts to highlight the contribution of SSR in conflict prevention
and crisis management, in 2019, the AU Commission held a high-level retreat that
brought together our High Representatives and Special Envoys and Representatives
to exchange views on mediation and security sector reform as conflict-prevention
and conflict-resolution tools.
The reform of national security institutions constitutes a major pillar of
the African Union Policy on Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development. It
is observed that a deficit in security governance constitutes a major root cause of
most political and armed conflicts in Africa. This explains the inclusion of SSR
provisions in the texts of most peace agreements and political settlements across the
African continent.
The AU Policy on Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development gives
priority to the establishment or re-establishment and strengthening of the capacity
of security institutions, including defence, police and correctional services
through designing and implementing relevant policies. The recent establishment
of the African Union Centre for Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development
is aimed at providing technical support in SSR and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) to member States and Regional Economic Communities
(RECs), in close collaboration with the AU Commission. We expect that the
United Nations and its partners will work closely with the Centre to strengthen its
capacities in this regard.
The AU is supporting member States to develop and strengthen inclusive
national policies, strategies and plans and to undertake dialogue aimed at building
professional and accountable security institutions. Madagascar is one of the
20-166997/35

S/2020/1176

countries we are supporting. Indeed, Madagascar has demonstrated a high degree of
political will by providing the requisite political leadership and committing funding,
meagre though it may be, in support of national priorities. This gesture calls for
the full support of the international community, namely, our two organizations and
international partners.
The AU is also supporting Somalia, the Gambia, Mali, the Central African
Republic, Guinea Bissau and Ethiopia in implementing SSR, in accordance with
their needs. In all these endeavours, national ownership is fundamental.
I need to stress here the important role of women and youth in security
governance and sustaining peace. We are supporting member States, through our
policy framework, to address cultural barriers and related stereotypes that perpetrate
the underrepresentation of women in national defence and security forces. We have
developed an operational guidance note on gender and security sector reform, whose
dissemination we launched to member States and regional economic communities
in 2019.
On the other hand, and as the United Nations and international partners
continue to deploy efforts aimed at supporting measures to stabilize member States
on the continent that are faced with political instability, it is critical that such support
aim at deploying the available funds to address concrete national priorities rather
than on administrative overheads. This is a concern that member States have raised
to the AU in various forums.
The AU is grateful for the efforts of international partners to provide concrete
support for security agencies in member States, for instance the Group of Five for
the Sahel Joint Force. Such support has had positive impact in quest for peace and
stability on the continent. However, the need for predictable and sustainable funding
for such security support remains a concern. The same applies to AU peace support
operations. The AU will continue to engage with United Nations on this issue.
We also note that the absence of mechanisms for ensuring that DDR is
conducted as part of peace agreements and stabilization efforts in the member States
where SSR is being carried out. This may result in relapses into violence since
some individuals slip through the cracks in peace processes. This is an area that the
African Union is focusing its attention on, and it is one in which we will welcome
enhanced cooperation from the United Nations and the international community.
As part of the efforts to enhance coordination in SSR on the African
continent, the AU Commission established an SSR forum and a steering committee
where the AU, RECs, the United Nations and international partners can jointly
identify priorities, align their approaches and provide guidance to member States
on the means to enhance and streamline security sector governance in all aspects
of conflict prevention and resolution. We continue to encourage active participation
in these means, especially because member States implementing SSR are invited to
submit briefs and share experiences.
Since SSR is linked to a change of mentality, which is often a gradual process,
it is necessary for all stakeholders to provide long-term support for programmes with
flexible logical frameworks that that can be adapted to emerging security threats,
depending on the specific context of the situation. This will limit the possibility of
international partners withdrawing support, which we have witnessed in some cases
on the continent and which can contribute to worsening the situation.
As Council members are all aware, the coronavirus pandemic has taken its
toll in virtually all spheres of society. SSR activities have not been spared. We will

8/35

20-16699

S/2020/1176

continue to adapt interventions to this unprecedented reality in order to meet the
expectations of member States.
As I conclude, I wish to underline once again that the AU is mindful that the
governance of the security sector is a sine qua non for peacebuilding and sustaining
peace. However, SSR is politically complex, long term and often costly. It therefore
requires full engagement by State and non-State stakeholders, with strong national
ownership guided by high-level political leadership.
The AU is committed to providing enhanced support to the efforts of member
States and regional economic communities in the coming years and has developed
the AU Three-Year Strategy for SSR 2021-2023. The United Nations and its partners
were instrumental in developing this strategy, and we look forward to enhanced
partnership cooperation and coordination in its implementation.
I cannot conclude without reiterating my gratitude to Foreign Minister Naledi
Pandor for having invited the AU Commission to speak on this important theme.
We remain thankful for the constructive cooperation we have enjoyed with the
Security Council.
As Council members are aware, on 6 December 2020, the AU will be
holding an extraordinary summit on silencing the guns. The outcome of the summit
will contribute to the efforts aimed at addressing root causes to conflicts and to
accelerating the Silencing the Guns initiative on the continent.
We count on the outcomes of this debate to support the efforts of our member
States in security sector governance and reform.

20-166999/35

S/2020/1176

Annex IV
Statement by the Minister for International Relations and
Cooperation of South Africa, Naledi Pandor
South Africa is honoured to preside over today’s meeting of the
Security Council on security sector governance and reform, which we believe
deserves the sustained attention of the Council, as it remains an integral aspect of
conflict-prevention and peacebuilding efforts. We thank all the briefers for their
insightful briefings, which will most certainly enrich the debate today, and all of
Council members present for their participation.
Key to South Africa’s approach to sustaining peace is a holistic perspective on
conflict prevention, post-conflict reconstruction and development, and sustaining
peace. We took a conscious decision to advance the imperative of peacebuilding
in post-conflict societies by convening today’s debate focused on security sector
governance and reform. This is an area that requires periodic reflection by the
Security Council in the light of evolving security threats, including those that are
asymmetric in nature, as well as measures that post-conflict countries ought to take
to make progress and safeguard their hard-won gains.
At the heart of security sector reform (SSR) is the expectation that a State
should be able to provide security and protection efficiently and effectively to its
population by developing policies, structures and security-sector institutional
capacity. This is a necessity for conflict prevention and sustaining peace in postconflict societies in the long term.
South Africa recognizes that security sector governance and reform are
different for every State. Our national experience with SSR proved an essential
component in entrenching democracy and sustaining peace in our diverse country.
Political will and buy-in from all segments of society and a strong and transformative
legislative policy framework contributed to the success of South Africa’s experience
with SSR. It is within this context that South Africa continues to share its experiences
with other States Members of the United Nations, in particular, African countries
affected by and those emerging from conflict.
Through our bilateral engagements, South Africa has provided policy,
institutional and structural advice on reforming the sector and training securitysector personnel in Burundi, the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Lesotho and South Sudan, inter alia. As a troop- and police-contributing
country to United Nations peacekeeping operations, South Africa has participated
in the implementation of SSR mandates in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
South Sudan and the Darfur region of the Sudan. South Africa, in its capacity as a
Chair of the Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform, together with Slovakia,
convenes regular engagements in coordination with various stakeholders to share
experiences, lessons learned and insights in the area of sustaining peace and SSR
with a view to strengthening the work of the United Nations in this area.
We note, however, that it has been a while since the Security Council has
considered SSR within the realm of its competence. Since the adoption of the only
Security Council resolution on the issue (resolution 2151 (2014)), which was initiated
by Nigeria over six years ago, South Africa recognizes that meaningful progress
has been made in advancing security sector governance and reform. However,
gaps and challenges in implementation remain, presenting an opportunity for the
Council and States Members of the United Nations to improve in this important area
for peacebuilding.

10/35

20-16699

S/2020/1176

Notable progress has been made in the prioritization of security sector
governance and reform in various peace processes. As a result, United Nations
peacekeeping missions and special political missions are increasingly being
mandated to provide assistance in SSR in close cooperation with the host State.
This is vital to enabling missions to discharge their mandates and hand security
responsibilities over to the host State in a timely manner.
We also observe that peace agreements facilitated by the United Nations
and other regional organizations — such as those for the Central African Republic,
Colombia, Haiti, Mali, South Sudan and the Sudan — are increasingly including
provisions on security sector governance and reform. However, more remains to be
done to ensure their effective and timely implementation. Consistent engagement
and oversight by relevant stakeholders, including the Security Council, is required
to address this lacuna.
We must continue to address such challenges that persist in security sector
governance and reform as the misalignment between national priorities and the
support provided by bilateral and international partners and poor coordination among
partners and national authorities, with the result that SSR initiatives are ineffective. It
is the prerogative of each State to determine its SSR approach, strategies and policies
from inception through implementation to evaluation. In this regard, international
community support must be well coordinated and conform to national priorities of
the host State. This will be consistent with the principles of full national ownership
and leadership that must guide effective security sector governance and reform. A
one-size-fits-all approach must be avoided, given the nuanced differences, needs and
complexities of societies.
In order to ensure that SSR is able to support long-term sustainable peace, it
must be informed by and address the needs of the entire population with the active
involvement of women and youth as well as civil society actors. Indeed, the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women through the development of genderresponsive SSR strategies remains a vital component of any peacebuilding effort.
It will contribute not only to ensuring inclusive processes but the consolidation of
mutual trust between the population and security institutions.
The success of any peacebuilding effort requires adequate resources. There is
therefore a need to ensure predictable and sustainable funding for activities related
to SSR efforts.
There are opportunities that we should explore to further advance security
sector governance and reform. The United Nations should strengthen its collaboration
with such regional organizations as the African Union, which has an established SSR
architecture reinforced primarily by its security sector reform policy, its Centre for
Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development and its steering committee on SSR.
We also see merit in the Security Council placing security sector reform on
its agenda as one of its key priorities and paying sustained attention to such reform
in order to prevent countries from relapsing into conflict. That will also allow the
Security Council to take stock and keep track of developments in this area of work
and, in a holistic manner, draw from lessons learned in order to improve on the
action that it takes in addressing security sector governance and reform in specific
country situations.
Against that background, South Africa has undertaken to update resolution
2151 (2014) to make it more relevant, taking into account the evolving situation
regarding the realization of the objectives of security sector governance and reform.

20-1669911/35

S/2020/1176

Let me conclude by reaffirming South Africa’s commitment to supporting
security sector governance and reform initiatives. South Africa, as a co-Chair of
the Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform with Slovakia, remains committed
to achieving progress in this vital area of work, which is essential in fulfilling the
Security Council’s mandate of maintaining international peace and security and in
realizing a prosperous and peaceful world for all.

12/35

20-16699

S/2020/1176

Annex V
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, European Affairs
and Foreign Trade of Belgium, Sophie Wilmès
[Original: French]
I, too, would like to thank South Africa for organizing this debate on the issue
of security sector reform.
These reforms are a fundamental part of the mandates of peace operations —
well managed, they lay the foundations for sustainable peace. Three key elements
should underpin our actions in this core area of reconstruction following a period of
conflict or deep crisis.
The first is a holistic approach. Our efforts in security sector reform will
unfortunately be in vain if they are not based on such an approach. Respect for
human rights and the rule of law is indeed a sine qua non for sustainable economic
and political development. Successful security sector reform is reform that leads
to an army, police and judiciary that respect democratic principles and are aware
of their responsibilities towards the population. It is also important to integrate the
Sustainable Development Goals into such an approach.
My second point concerns inclusiveness. Too often security sector reform
mandates do not sufficiently take into account all sectors of society. Too often
security sector reform processes fall within the sole competence of the executive
branch. We need to fill that gap. All actors in society should be consulted on security
governance — civil society, women and young people. As such, we must maintain
a high level of ambition with regard to the draft resolution contained in document
S/2020/1158, which we will adopt shortly, in line with resolution 2151 (2014).
Thirdly, I would like to commend the African Union’s role as a mediator
and facilitator of security sector reform provisions in several peace processes. The
European Union and Belgium are also shouldering their responsibilities, and our
efforts are closely linked to those of the African Union and the United Nations.
Belgium supports the efforts of the international community in this area in
various ways. In the Sahel, in the Great Lakes region, the Belgian army, the Federal
Police, the Belgian Development Agency, our Department of Justice and, of course,
my department are working in synergy to support such reforms. Belgium is also
actively participating in the European Union’s efforts in support of those processes.
That experience in the field informs our thinking. In that regard, I would like
to put forward two approaches by way of conclusion.
Today more than ever, we must ensure that we strengthen coordination among
organizations involved in security sector reform. The African Union already has
a partnership with both the European Union and the United Nations. We should
also ensure that we involve other organizations in our work as soon as possible,
in particular those at the subregional level and, on the European continent, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Secondly, United Nations peace missions on the ground have a unique role
in identifying strategic priorities and in coordinating efforts. Belgium calls for the
strengthening of that coordination role and for the genuine commitment of missions
as a whole to mandates in support of reform.

20-1669913/35

S/2020/1176

Annex VI
Statement by the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia,
Rein Tammsaar
I thank the briefers for their comprehensive overviews, and the South African
presidency for organizing today’s debate.
Over the years, the United Nations and Member States’ approach to security
sector reform (SSR) has been increasingly linked to a wider peacebuilding,
sustaining peace and prevention agenda. There is a growing understanding that the
SSR dialogue does not reach its full potential and effectiveness if it is limited only to
the post-conflict realm; rather, there needs to be a holistic view to SSR throughout
the entire cycle of conflict. Estonia is of the view that early capacity-building can
prevent countries and communities from relapsing into violence after an active phase
of conflict has ended.
Having a whole-of-society and whole-of-system view of SSR is indispensable.
The reform of security institutions, as well as security providers, needs to take into
account the local sensitivities, the context and the relevant actors on the ground.
That can be achieved only through local, national and regional ownership of the
reform process. In that context, we commend the role that the African Union has
played as a mediator and facilitator in negotiations on the specific SSR provisions in
political and peace processes.
Moreover, we are encouraged to see progress in the SSR field at the country
level. Somalia, for example, has made considerable inroads with regard to security
sector reform with help from both the United Nations as well as the African Union.
The Joint Security Sector Governance Programme is aimed at increasing civilian
oversight of security sector reforms. Importantly, the Programme also supports the
engagement of civil society, with a focus on women and youth-based organizations,
in the SSR process. One of the key gaps identified by the United Nations in SSR
processes has been the lack of inclusion of women in security-sector and institutionbuilding processes, as well as in the dialogues leading to peacebuilding and sustaining
peace. It is important not only to include women in the formal processes and official
bodies related to the security sector, but also to ensure that SSR is designed to
be gender-responsive. That includes ensuring a gender-sensitive humanitarian
response. It is essential to have clear guidelines on how to include more women
from all aspects of society into the SSR process, the judicial reforms and political
dialogue on peacebuilding and on sustaining peace. Unfortunately, it is often women
and girls that are disproportionately affected by an armed conflict, and it is therefore
extremely important to make their voices heard.
A crucial aspect of reforming and governing the security sector is the question
of accountability and respect for human rights. There needs to be a greater focus on
the human rights-based approaches to SSR. It is an important aspect in the overall
aim to resolve the root causes of conflict. Effectively addressing human rights
violations and abuses by building accountability into the security sector is key to
restoring trust between the people and the State, which is so often lacking in conflictridden societies. Making sure that all perpetrators of crimes against civilians are
held accountable and rooting out a culture of impunity need to be part of a holistic
approach to healing societies and creating conditions for sustainable peace.
Finally, Estonia fully supports the efforts of the United Nations in improving
the effectiveness of peace operations. In that context, it is essential to continue to find
better and more efficient ways to design and implement international coordination
mechanisms that would support SSR processes.
14/35

20-16699

S/2020/1176

Annex VII
Statement by the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia,
Mohamed Ali Nafti
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, allow me to thank Mrs. Naledi Pandor, Minister for International
Relations and Cooperation of South Africa, for convening this meeting and choosing
this important topic as its theme. I also extend my warmest congratulations
to the Republic of South Africa on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of December and wish it every success. I also
express my deep appreciation to Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for its successful
presidency of the Council during the month of November.
I also thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Mr. Alexandre Zouev and Mr. FernandezTaranco for their valuable briefings.
The world, in particular the African continent and the Arab region, is
witnessing numerous tensions and conflicts that have caused heavy human and
material losses and severe humanitarian crises for millions of refugees and displaced
persons and are having their impact on the course of development, social cohesion
and regional and international security, peace and stability.
Notwithstanding significant efforts towards conflict resolution by the
international community through the Security Council and United Nations
peacebuilding missions, and the contributions of regional and subregional
organizations to conflict resolution, the most important element continues to be
the establishment of security, because it underlies the success of political efforts
to resolve crises, build peace and sustain security, and prevents conditions from
deteriorating and crises and conflicts from breaking out anew. It also provides
reassurance to the peoples involved and helps them restore the normal rhythms of
their lives and go about the work of reconstruction and development.
In that regard, helping post-conflict countries to strengthen their capacities
to achieve security, protect civilians and address the root causes of security
vulnerability is an absolute priority. It is among the most important components of
peacebuilding processes and key to the prevention of renewed violence and political
tensions, as is noted in resolution 2282 (2016).
For the process to be of benefit to the maintenance and consolidation of
peace, it must include strengthening security sector governance and reforming
existing institutions to make them more effective, thereby increasing the State’s
ability to extend its authority and exercise its law-enforcement powers. That must
be done through national ownership and in accordance with the specificities of each
context, with a focus on the needs and priorities of each stage, particularly with
regard to achieving national unity and establishing a culture of peaceful dialogue
and participation.
We stress the importance of the role of the United Nations in helping the States
concerned impose governance in the security sector and build security strategies
that ensure that peoples are protected from violence. That opens the way for all the
various elements of society to take part in the process and helps to ensure the success
of the post-conflict recovery process, notably by strengthening the role of women and
youth in achieving security, sustainable peace and stability, reintegration, national
unity and development.
While we commend the role of the United Nations and stabilization missions
in the maintenance of peace and the peacebuilding process, we stress the importance
20-1669915/35

S/2020/1176

of maintaining a focus on support for the security governance and reform track,
while paying due attention to the considerations I mentioned. It is also important
to continue cooperation and coordination between the United Nations and other
international parties, provide adequate support and funding for national efforts and
initiatives, and to include them in official development assistance programmes.
Because of the intimate relationship between security, peace and development,
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, adopted in 2015, recognized the
central role of effective institutions, transparency and justice in achieving security,
building peace and preventing violence and conflict.
By the same token, the road to the goals of the 2063 agenda for development,
integration and economic growth in Africa must inevitably pass through the
consolidation of security, peace and stability throughout our continent, as enshrined
in the Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative, which aims to free the
continent from all ongoing wars and violent conflicts so that its people can go about
the work of development and reconstruction.
The experiences of our immediate surroundings and the world at large have
demonstrated that security reform and governance is a basic precondition for the
success of peacebuilding. It is also one of main prerequisites for the restoration of
order by legitimate Governments and institutions in the post-conflict stages. It lays
the groundwork for subsequent stages, from arrangements to build confidence and
promote political settlement, through national reconciliation and on to sustainable
development. This is a delicate and sensitive process that requires the participation
of all, mutual understanding and complementarity between national efforts and
assistance from the international community and the United Nations.
In conclusion, I reiterate the commitment of Tunisia to continue to take an
active part in promoting international peace and security, supporting preventive
diplomacy and ensuring the success of all efforts and initiatives to rid the world of
conflict and violence and provide sustainable security to all peoples.

16/35

20-16699

S/2020/1176

Annex VIII
Statement by the Minister of State with Responsibility for Foreign
Affairs and Foreign Trade of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Keisal M. Peters
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes today’s discussion on security
sector governance and reform. We commend South Africa through you, Mr. President,
for this initiative, and we thank the briefers for their insightful remarks.
The complex security challenges facing our world today can be successfully
resolved only through integrated and coherent strategies that address the root causes
of insecurity, strengthen social cohesion and bolster national ownership of political
and peace processes.
Security sector governance and reform play a central role in peacebuilding
and sustaining peace by streamlining critical governance functions and reordering
institutional arrangements to promote stability, enhance community engagement,
build public trust and create an environment conducive to national development
plans and priorities.
In conflict-affected countries, especially those that suffer the deleterious
effects of armed group activity, security sector reform has an important normative
impact. As those with the responsibility for protecting civilians, upholding the rule
of law and providing security become more organized and professionalized, a culture
of security permeates throughout society as people become predisposed to building
lasting, peaceful and stable relationships.
Such mending of the social fabric can be facilitated only through effective,
transparent and accountable institutions that are responsive to the needs of citizens.
It is therefore essential that all security sector governance and reform efforts be
based on inclusive public consultations that allow for the engagement of all segments
of society, including civil society organizations, women and youth advocacy groups,
faith-based organizations, academia and the private sector, as well as regional and
subregional organizations and other partners that assist Member States with their
reform agendas. We welcome the capacity-building assistance provided to conflictaffected countries in the areas of police, justice and corrections through the Global
Focal Point for the Rule of Law, as well as the programmatic activities of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
To maximize the impact of security sector governance and reform, these
initiatives must be linked to wider development efforts to enhance the judicial and
legislative system, improve training and education and address structural barriers
to social, economic and political participation. In that regard, it is crucial that a
holistic view of the drivers of conflict across the peace and security, development
and humanitarian nexus be incorporated into the reform process. The effects
of contemporary drivers of insecurity, such as climate change, environmental
degradation, health crises and cyberactivity, should not be overlooked.
It must also be highlighted that the positive social changes envisaged through
these initiatives can never be externally imposed — they ought to emerge organically
from within the State with the support of those actors who have the expertise and
contextual understanding of local and regional security dynamics. There can be no
one-size-fits-all approach to security sector governance and reform. These processes
must be context-specific and structured around the unique histories, cultures,
politics and the material circumstances of development that exist within each
particular country.

20-1669917/35

S/2020/1176

In the light of the foregoing, we underscore the importance of the African
Union Policy Framework on Security Sector Reform and the range of measures
spearheaded by the African Union (AU) to enhance continental peace and security,
including the Silencing the Guns initiative and the AU’s Agenda 2063. We encourage
closer collaboration between the United Nations and the African Union in providing
operational guidance to those peacekeeping operations mandated to provide security
sector reform assistance to host-countries in Africa. We also encourage the donor
community to increase its efforts to provide predictable, reliable and sustainable
financing to security sector reform initiatives through their overseas development
assistance programmes.
In conclusion, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines emphasizes that all
security sector governance and reform efforts must place people at the centre.
Security architecture must provide protection and access to justice for all, without
discrimination, in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. As we
commence this important Decade of Action for the Sustainable Development Goals,
let us recommit ourselves to building a more peaceful and prosperous world.

18/35

20-16699

S/2020/1176

Annex IX
Statement by the Minister of State of Germany, Niels Annen
“Peacebuilding and sustaining peace” has recently become a regular agenda
item on the Security Council’s agenda. This is a crucial and hopeful sign of a more
forward-leaning and preventative Council, which Germany has advocated throughout
its membership over the past two years.
Therefore, I would like to thank South Africa for the opportunity to have
today’s discussion. We are grateful for the excellent cooperation during the past
two years. This has been the second time South Africa and Germany have jointly
served on the Council. I believe we have profited a lot from this, not least with a
view to our bilateral relations in difficult times. Let us aim for a third joint period on
the Council.
Coming back to today’s meeting: security sector reform (SSR) is an essential
aspect of a comprehensive approach to peace and security. It has become a key
component of the international agenda in countries affected by conflict. It requires
continued and early attention, as well as the engagement and support of a wide range
of actors, to develop an effective, legitimate and accountable security sector.
We have proposed very concrete steps on how the Council should better
address root causes, thereby anticipating challenges and strengthening prevention,
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Allow me to point out some recommendations
and how the approach relates to security sector reform:
First, we, as members of the Security Council, need to ensure that the
United Nations and its presences on the ground, its peacekeeping operations and
special political missions, are sufficiently mandated and resourced to implement a
comprehensive understanding of peace and security. Every peace operation needs to
be able to provide advice and support to national security actors, including on the
crucial aspect of combating the proliferation of small arms and lights weapons. We
have partnered with the African Union in support of its Silencing the Guns initiative
to cut the flow of weapons into areas of conflict, improve the control of arms and
ammunition in fragile States, including through SSR, and train a new generation of
experts to take the lead in arms control. That is particularly important in the context
of transitions.
Support to SSR processes is also very much needed in non-mission settings
with a potential role for Resident Coordinators. The standing capacity in Brindisi
is an important platform providing specific SSR expertise. Germany is happy to
support those capacities financially on a bilateral basis, while we hope for the general
budget to take over. I would like to appeal to those who have second thoughts about
including this into the general budget: a penny spent on prevention saves dollars on
intervention. Let us work on this together.
Secondly, while we need better coordination and coherence within the
United Nations system, its agencies, funds and programmes, coordination alone
will not do the trick. Peacebuilding and sustaining peace also need sustainable and
predictable funding. We need to explore innovative funding mechanisms and further
strengthen partnerships with international financial institutions and regional banks,
as well as the private sector.
Thirdly, all efforts will be in vain if they are not based on national ownership.
We need to make sure that what we build actually holds. Respect for human rights
and political processes that are inclusive and allow all parts of society, especially
women, youth and marginalized groups, to participate in a meaningful way are
crucial for building lasting structures and security sectors that enjoy — maybe most
20-1669919/35

S/2020/1176

important — the trust of the people. It is the Council’s task and duty to embed those
requirements in its mandates.
I thank you, Madam President, again for initiating today’s discussion. It is
important to highlight the crucial issue of SSR itself, and even more so to fully
understand that successful security sector reforms are central to stabilizing and
creating resilient and inclusive societies.
SSR is a natural link between any peacekeeping mission and the transition
to an eventual peacebuilding setting. SSR is a long-term investment in peace and
security. In this spirit, the Council needs to systematically consider this crosscutting issue in its discussions and mandates.

20/35

20-16699

S/2020/1176

Annex X
Statement by the Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia,
Mahendra Siregar
The coronavirus disease pandemic serves to underscore the importance of
adequate governance of the security sector. Security institutions around the world
have to perform beyond their mandates to support pandemic response. However, for
countries emerging from conflicts the situation is more complex, as their security
institutions are often weak and lack the capacities to address those challenges.
Therefore, security sector reform (SSR) is crucial for peacebuilding and sustaining
peace. Effective, professional and accountable security institutions are key to
addressing immediate security challenges, preventing the recurrence of conflict and
providing enabling environments for development. With that in mind, allow me to
make the following points.
First, security sector reform must be nationally led and owned and must
address specific national needs and contexts. There is no one-size-fits-all formula.
It is therefore essential that host countries take a leading role in the planning and
implementation of the reform. Equally important is the participation of all relevant
stakeholders, including civil society and women. A nationally led, owned and
inclusive process is key to the long-term success of security sector reform.
Secondly, the United Nations role in supporting SSR in conflict-affected
countries must be scaled up. Most United Nations peacekeeping operations and
special political missions are now mandated to support security sector reform. The
Security Council should ensure that its mandates are clear, realistic and achievable.
To implement the mandate effectively, peacekeeping missions and special political
missions must be provided with adequate resources and capacities.
We also support strengthening the role of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) as the main platform to harness comprehensive support for SSR. The synergy
between the Security Council and the PBC needs to be strengthened, particularly
during transition phases. The United Nations must also enhance coordination among
different actors on the ground to ensure a coherent strategy to support SSR.
Thirdly, partnership with all relevant stakeholders is key. The United Nations
cannot work alone. Regional organizations can play an important role, particularly
by bringing regional perspectives and best practices. Partnership with international
financial institutions should also be strengthened to ensure adequate and sustainable
financing for security sector reform.
Member States can also make a contribution by providing technical assistance,
as well as the sharing of experience and best practices. Indonesia has its own
experience in successfully reforming its security sector, as part of a broader political
reform and democratization in the early 2000s. We are keen to share our experience
and best practices, including through our membership in the Group of Friends of
Security Sector Reform. Our peacekeepers, for instance, are actively involved in
implementing missions’ mandates to support SSR in host countries.
Beyond peacekeeping, we have also supported capacity-building in the area
of security and the rule of law, through bilateral mechanisms as well as South-South
and triangular cooperation. Therefore, we have provided training and capacitybuilding programmes for the police of Palestine, Afghanistan and countries in the
South Pacific.
In conclusion, building and reforming the security sector is a long-term
undertaking. Its success will require national ownership and strong support by the
20-1669921/35

S/2020/1176

international community. Rest assured that Indonesia remains committed to being
a true partner to support peacebuilding and sustaining peace through security
sector reform.

22/35

20-16699

S/2020/1176

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: Chinese]
The Chinese delegation supports South Africa in calling for this important
meeting. I welcome Foreign Minister Pandor to preside over the meeting and thank
Assistant Secretary-General Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General Alexandre
Zouev and African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security Smaïl Chergui for
their briefings.
Professional, efficient and fully functional security sectors are the centrepieces
of countries’ governance systems. In many post-conflict countries, security sector
reform is an integral part of consolidating and building peace and an important
foundation for achieving lasting peace and sustainable development. In recent years,
United Nations peace operations and peacebuilding programmes in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and Liberia, among other places, have served to
support security sector reform in the countries concerned, mobilize more assistance
by the international community and maintain close coordination with regional
organizations. Good results have been achieved.
Meanwhile, the international and regional security environment is undergoing
profound changes, with incessant regional conflicts and the coronavirus disease
pandemic making post-conflict reconstruction even more difficult. There are still
many things to be done to strengthen and improve security sector reform in postconflict countries. I would like to emphasize the following.
First, maintaining national security is countries’ sovereign right, and
security sector reform should be owned and led by the countries concerned. The
United Nations and the international community should fully respect the intentions
of the countries concerned and provide assistance according to countries’ priorities.
Country-specific strategies should be formulated based on differing national
conditions and circumstances, and priorities and focus should be identified.
Secondly, it is the responsibility of the security sector to maintain national
security and protect civilians. Therefore, improving their capacity is a most pressing
priority for security sector reform. Post-conflict countries face security threats
such as terrorism, violent extremism and intercommunal conflicts, as well as new
risks such as cybersecurity and transnational organized crime and severe challenges
imposed by the criminal activities of foreign troops. The security sectors of postconflict countries should conduct reform to raise capacities in early warning,
emergency response, counter-terrorism and surveillance of risks and challenges.
This includes actively using high and new technologies to holistically improve the
security and defence systems and strengthen the rule of law to bring criminals to
justice and eliminate extrajudicial behaviour.
Thirdly, security sector reform is an aspect of post-conflict reconstruction and
should be considered in the context of the post-conflict country’ overall development
strategy. An overall development strategy should be drawn up to promote coordinated
progress in security sector reform and economic and legal system reforms. Postconflict reconstruction and development resources should be used in a balanced
and wise manner to both ensure the necessary spending for the security sector and
scale up input to development, as well as vigorously alleviate poverty and promote
sustainable development, so as to eradicate the breeding ground for conflicts. A good
job should be done with regard to the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
20-1669923/35

S/2020/1176

of former combatants, and conditions should be created for economic growth and
social recovery through security sector reform.
Fourthly, security sector reform is a systematic project that requires
coordination and synergy by multiple players. The Peacebuilding Commission and
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of the General Assembly are
important platforms for discussions on issues related to security sector reform.
United Nations peacekeeping operations, missions and country teams should play
active roles in accordance with their mandates to assist the countries concerned
in advancing reforms. The African Union and other regional and subregional
organizations have made tremendous efforts in helping post-conflict countries
conduct security sector reform and have accumulated much experience. The
United Nations should strengthen coordination and cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations through, among other things, information exchange,
experience sharing and training.
There exist big gaps in funding for security sector reform in post-conflict
countries. It is necessary for bilateral and multilateral partners to provide active
assistance and increase transparency and coordination to ensure sufficient and
sustained financial resources for security sector reform.

24/35

20-16699

S/2020/1176

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
I would like to thank you, Madam President, and South Africa for your
continued efforts in implementing resolution 2151 (2014) and in prioritizing security
sector reform. This debate is a clear example of that commitment. I also thank the
various speakers for their valuable insights and recommendations.
United Nations support for security sector reform has quickly advanced,
and the conversation is now based on broader peacebuilding and development
perspectives and is moving towards a more comprehensive and sustainable approach
to peace. In recent years, the Security Council has made progress in strengthening
institutions and governance, not only to end violence and conflict but also to support
citizen security and justice, including through the adoption of more resolutions with
security sector reform and management provisions.
However, major challenges remain for the full implementation of resolution
2151 (2014). This debate is critical to focusing on the context of peacebuilding, so
we must identify opportunities to better include initiatives related to security sector
reform in transition contexts.
When security sectors do not function well, society loses confidence in
institutions. Therefore, the management and professionalization of the security sector
must be at the heart of the mandates and activities of peace operations. Beyond the
Council, the Peacebuilding Commission, the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council are critical to implementing security sector reform.
In order to be workable for countries and their peoples, national security
structures must be effective, accountable and adhere to the rule of law. It must be
borne in mind that, to ensure national ownership of security-sector reform processes,
the national authorities must be the ones to lead and promote such efforts. Likewise,
States must ensure that institutions are accessible and receptive to all and that efforts
in the areas of security and protection have the broadest possible scope. To that end,
inclusive consultations must be carried out with all sectors of society, particularly
civil society, women and youth.
Integrating a gender perspective in security-sector reform must
be a daily undertaking on the part of the armed forces, the police and
law-enforcement institutions.
Security-sector reform is without a doubt an instrument for peacebuilding.
Lasting stability, conflict prevention and development require that we move from a
strict security perspective to one that is centred on people and governance. We see
opportunities for the Council to focus on human security and governance and to
more comprehensively address the root causes of conflict.
In societies emerging from conflict, security-sector reform is a determining
factor in moving from a peacekeeping context to one of peacebuilding. The central
objective of security-sector reform continues to be the creation of national institutions
that contribute to international peace and security, sustainable development and the
full exercise of human rights.
We would therefore like to see more updates on such initiatives in mission
reports based on the links between security-sector reform and governance,

20-1669925/35

S/2020/1176

peacebuilding and peacekeeping and their integration into the three pillars of the
United Nations system.
The long-term perspective necessary for peacebuilding and the maintenance
of peace is where the potential for security-sector reform efforts lies. That will
lead us to a transformative commitment that will allow for a sustainable reform of
security institutions.

26/35

20-16699

S/2020/1176

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I, too, wish you, Madam, every success in connection with your presidency
of the Security Council and congratulate you and your country on your commitment
to an issue that is dear to us. Indeed, in all parts of the world, the confidence of our
citizens in their Governments depends on their ability to guarantee security. That is
even more true in the aftermath of a conflict, where peoples traumatized by cycles
of violence need strong security institutions, staffed by competent personnel, acting
within the framework of the law and respecting human rights, to imagine the future
and rebuild it.
With resolution 2151 (2014), the Security Council recognized the importance
of helping States to improve their performance in the area of security-sector reform
in order to consolidate peace. We welcome South Africa’s initiative to present a new
draft resolution (S/2020/1158) that would enable us to further clarify the issues at
stake in this process and achieve further concrete progress. I would like to emphasize
three points.
First, peacekeeping and special political missions often contribute to the longterm stabilization of host States, which enables them to strengthen their autonomy
and thus make a direct contribution to the exit strategy of peace operations.
However, such peace operations need to be given a mandate for that purpose. France
has strong aspirations in that area with regard to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic.
In that regard, the difficult task of security-sector-reform services within
missions, under the authority of the Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral, deserves to be actively supported. I commend the work of the organizations
that assist those missions in connection with the United Nations, such as the Geneva
Centre for Security Sector Governance, which operates in 80 countries and which
France supports.
Secondly, France advocates a vision of security-sector reform that takes the
greatest possible account of the specific characteristics of each country, based on
the political will of the host State and coordination among international actors. It
is those combined efforts that make it possible to provide a solid foundation for
security-sector reform. I am thinking, for example, of the model of the Mali national
coordination body, which provides a link between the national armed forces and
international partner forces.
Thirdly, France considers that one of the keys to success is the carrying out of
a set of initiatives at the country and mission levels, so that reforms can dovetail with
the needs identified on the ground. It is essential to be able to rely on indicators that
are tailored to each mission, which would make it possible to produce, on the basis of
regular reports, a reliable summary of the progress made, both in capacity-building
and in the implementation of structural reforms. The benchmarks in MINUSMA’s
mandate relating to the establishment of a reconstituted Malian army illustrate how
this mechanism can be used to coordinate political guidance by the Security Council
with the efforts of peace operations on the ground, as well as the international
community’s work in following up with the host State.
20-1669927/35

S/2020/1176

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Madam President, on your country’s
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for the month of December and
to thank you for having made the issue of security-sector reform a priority. I would
like to assure you of the Niger’s full support and of our appreciation for the efforts
made in connection with your country’s proposal for a draft resolution (S/2020/1158)
on the subject.
I wish also to thank the various speakers for their valuable and diverse
contributions to our debate today.
The transformation of the security sector remains more necessary than ever
given global developments and the fresh challenges facing our States. My country,
the Niger, believes that such reforms are of crucial importance given the difficulties
caused by the insecurity that has prevailed in the Sahel for almost a decade now, with
the aim of maintaining the security and stability of the country and in order to establish
and strengthen the foundations for sustainable socioeconomic development. That is
why part 3 of the Renaissance programme, entitled “Ensuring the safety of people
and property”, has the following objectives: the redefinition and implementation of a
national security policy that takes into account the political, economic and military
dimensions; the consolidation of State authority at all levels; and the pursuit and
strengthening of security cooperation with neighbouring countries.
It is important to stress that all those initiatives take account of the importance
of youth employment. Offering young people an opportunity to be active reduces
their vulnerability in a regional environment that exposes some of them, especially
those in rural areas, to the temptation of recruitment by the forces of evil. That
is how, by virtue of its geographical location, the Niger, which is surrounded by
three hotbeds of tension — Boko Haram in the south, the Libyan crisis in the north
and that in Mali in the west — has prioritized building the capacity of the security
sector, specifically in the areas of defence, the police, justice, the penal system, the
judicial system, border management and customs, so as to better adapt those security
instruments to current threats, of which the greatest is the expansion of terrorism
into the Sahel. In that context, it is important to underline all the ongoing efforts
made by my country in terms of training the various actors in the security sector and
in the modernization of their equipment.
Through subregional mechanisms, the Niger has focused on strengthening
and increasing cross-border cooperation with neighbouring countries and Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) member States so as to better
promote security-sector reform in an increasingly globalized context. It is in the
context of pooling our efforts that we are committed, within the political framework
of ECOWAS, to the reform and governance of the security sector, as adopted in 2016,
consistent with the policies of the African Union and the United Nations in that area.
In that regard, my delegation welcomes the involvement of the Security Council
and various other United Nations bodies, in particular the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel, and of regional and subregional organizations, which, by
means of strategic partnerships, work together to strengthen good governance in the
security sector.

28/35

20-16699

S/2020/1176

It is also important to underline that no transformation of the security sector
can be complete without the contribution and involvement of independent monitoring
actors such as civil-society organizations, which are an essential component of the
consolidation of any viable democratic process.
In addition, the promotion of youth, gender and the principle of gender
equality should be supported, in accordance with article 63 of the revised Treaty
of ECOWAS (1993), the organization’s Gender Policy (2004) and article 81 of the
ECOWAS Conflict Prevention Framework, as well as its regional Plan of Action for
the implementation of Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2010).
This inclusive approach should also properly take into account and address emerging
threats to peace and security, including terrorism, climate change and pandemics.
While welcoming recent developments in the area of security-sector
governance, my delegation reiterates the need for national ownership of the process.
It is indeed vital that security-sector reform policies and programmes be developed,
managed and implemented by national rather than external actors, as stated by
experts and confirmed by examples of successful processes.
I cannot conclude without mentioning the important role played by
United Nations peacekeeping missions and the Peacebuilding Commission in
the process of transforming the security sector through their vital support for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes.

20-1669929/35

S/2020/1176

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
We welcome your personal participation, Madam President, in this videoteleconference as President of the Security Council. This reaffirms the importance
of the topic under discussion today: security-sector governance and reform, in
particular for African countries.
Security-sector reform, of course, is one of the main components of
international assistance in the area of peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Such efforts
are particularly needed in a post-conflict period, when countries that are emerging
from or have recently overcome the worst part of a crisis have limited resources
for ensuring security and as a result risk encountering insurmountable challenges
such as terrorism and crime. In that regard, restoring State authority and ensuring
control in all sectors, including the armed forces and law-enforcement agencies, is a
prerequisite for ensuring lasting peace and stability as well as strengthening the rule
of law at the national level in the post-conflict period.
Changes in this area lead to enhancing people’s trust in the State and to the
creation of favourable conditions for a return to normal life. When citizens lend
broad support to the authorities’ comprehensive reforms and to the security forces, it
can play a decisive role in the process of national reconciliation.
A transition from weak security bodies to effective and professional ones
is never going to be easy. That is why international assistance, including through
the United Nations, is particularly important. We believe that the State bears the
main responsibility for ensuring security on its territory, and that therefore it is
the Government’s sovereign right to determine and implement its own national
approaches and priorities in the area of security-sector reform, taking account of the
needs of the population.
When providing international assistance to national security-sector reform
efforts, it is crucial to respect fundamental principles such as the consent of the State
receiving help and respect for its national sovereignty and political independence.
When proposing support to post-conflict countries in implementing securitysector reform, there is a need to be constantly guided by the principle of national
ownership. Consultative assistance should be provided based on full respect for the
needs of the relevant countries and those countries’ own experience and culture.
That will help build States’ national capacities. As we know from experience,
taking into consideration the specific characteristics of States when providing them
with assistance is crucial. However, such assistance should not be perceived as the
imposition of blanket solutions, as we have often reiterated. Attempts to apply a
universal approach to such important and sensitive areas as security will undoubtedly
lead to failure and can actually provoke a resumption of conflict.
We should also understand that security-sector reform cannot be a panacea.
In and of itself it is unable to fundamentally change the situation in a given country.
In order for the process to be successful, its implementation must be accompanied
by other peacebuilding efforts and by a political process that includes national
reconciliation and the strengthening of State institutions.
An important role in providing assistance to post-conflict countries is
played by United Nations peacekeeping missions, many of which also carry out
peacebuilding tasks. Peacekeepers, where mandated to do so, play an important
30/35

20-16699

S/2020/1176

role in assisting security-sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes, as well as restoring law enforcement and the rule of law
in general.
The Peacebuilding Commission also plays a key role in post-conflict
recovery, and in particular in security-sector reform. Assisting it in developing a
balanced strategy and a comprehensive approach to providing advisory and financial
assistance to the countries on its agenda will also help to ensure the sustainability of
national security structures.
Inter-State cooperation within regions and coordination and interaction with
regional and subregional organizations are also crucial for security sector reform.
The exchange of best practices allows us to address current and emerging problems
more effectively. The African Union is a vivid example of regional interaction.
We appreciate the efforts of the South African delegation to coordinate the
work of the Security Council in its negotiation of a draft resolution (S/2020/1158)
regarding security sector reform, and we support its adoption.

20-1669931/35

S/2020/1176

Annex XVI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, Jonathan Allen
The United Kingdom very much welcomes this open debate. Security sector
reform is not just a process focused on building military and police institutions; it is
an important part of a broader peacebuilding enterprise and supports States in their
own constitutional and political development.
The United Kingdom has invested extensively in security sector governance
and reform at home and overseas. We do so because, as we see it, a democratic,
accountable and well-functioning security sector is an integral element in a broader
system of Government that provides protections for all citizens based on the
fundamental principles of universal human rights and respect for the rule of law.
That is what makes security sector reform relevant not just in post-conflict
reconstruction but also in conflict prevention, because trust between citizens and the
State is premised on the existence of institutions that serve and protect the needs of
those citizens. If that trust is undermined, instability is rarely far behind. Police are
often the first point of contact between a State and its citizens; but when corruption
and abuse are allowed to flourish, that social contract begins to erode. All too often,
we have seen examples of security sector institutions harnessed as instruments of
repression. Sadly, the world knows well the direction that leads.
Security sector reform is therefore of great importance for peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. It should be approached as part of a broader set of institutional
safeguards — including law reform processes, work to strengthen accountability,
judicial independence and access to justice.
Those are the building blocks of societies in which the rule of law provides
protections for people and peace can take root. But they also provide the enabling
environment for sustainable development and investment. The General Assembly
recognized that in its articulation of Sustainable Development Goal 16, which is
fundamentally about peace, justice and accountable institutions.
The Organization’s work on security sector reform is a key part of international
efforts to support countries to strengthen the rule of law at the national level. That
is why the United Kingdom supports the Organization’s global efforts in this field,
including the United Nations Global Focal Point for Rule of Law arrangement — the
principal mechanism of the United Nations for system-wide assistance on the rule of
law, including security sector reform.
This mechanism, funded through the United Nations Development
Programme’s Global Programme on Strengthening the Rule of Law and Human
Rights for Sustaining Peace and Fostering Development, has enabled the
United Nations to deliver critical results in support of national security sector reform
efforts through effective joint approaches between United Nations peace operations
and United Nations country teams in countries from Somalia to Libya to the Central
African Republic.
Meanwhile, the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund — to which, I might add,
the United Kingdom also remains a key donor — has worked hard to carve out an
impressive portfolio of work on security sector reform directly related to building
and sustaining peace in countries affected by conflict.
The United Kingdom will continue to be a staunch advocate for security sector
governance and reform and will work with the United Nations and other partners to
enhance the impact of our collective support through maximizing our joint efforts.
32/35

20-16699

S/2020/1176

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I would like to thank today’s briefers. We welcome this discussion as a way to
highlight how important it is to reform a country’s security sector to help bring about
sustainable peace, development and good governance.
Effective security sector governance is vital to any nation’s long-term
growth, stability and security. Additionally, successful security sector reform must
encompass all elements of a country’s security sector, including the military, police,
border security and justice systems.
We have seen that effective security sector reform strengthens institutions,
which leads to increased transparency and accountability. On the other hand,
we have seen that corruption and insufficient political will undermine reform
efforts, especially at the strategic level. It is essential that national leaders show
their commitment to long-term security sector reform and the transparency and
accountability that are tied to it.
While the United Nations can and does play an important role in promoting
security sector governance and reform, we believe that national and local-level
ownership of the process is essential. Local Governments, civil society and nongovernmental organizations provide key contributions to both initial reforms and to
successful long-term governance.
We would also like to underscore that effective security sector reform requires
dedicated resources and follow through. It is important that nations not only express
verbal support for improved security sector governance and reform but align national
resources with the promises they make. Without national ownership and sustained
financial commitments, security sector reform can falter. We have seen that when a
Government’s commitment is consistent and clear, success inevitably follows.
The United States is deeply committed to the inclusion of security sector
governance and reform in justice and accountability. A good example is Liberia,
which, after recovering from 14 years of civil war, has resisted a return to conflict
and is continuing to make progress in rebuilding an accountable, impartial and
functional security sector. The United States has provided more than $4 billion in
assistance to support Liberian stabilization and development over the past 20 years.
The United States will continue to support Liberia and other States enacting security
sector reforms and will continue to use our voice on the Security Council to push
for strong security sectors that are responsive to their people and to help build longterm peace.
I will end by highlighting the essential role that women play in security sector
governance and reform. The United States appreciates all efforts to ensure women’s
participation in security sector reform dialogues, which is critical to ensuring
successful and sustainable security sector reform.

20-1669933/35

S/2020/1176

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
Viet Nam would like to thank South Africa for organizing today’s debate. I
also thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita, Assistant Secretary-General Zouev
and Mr. Chergui for their briefings. I welcome Her Excellency Ms. Naledi Pandor,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of South Africa, to
this meeting.
Viet Nam appreciates and supports Africa’s leading role on this subject. Africa
leads by overcoming its turbulent past and being steadfast in building a peaceful
and prosperous future for the African people. With examples and past experience,
African countries have determined the need for, and led efforts on, security sector
reform in order to better protect vulnerable populations and ensure sustainable peace.
Those efforts have led the Security Council to adopt many presidential
statements and resolution 2151 (2014), and a new draft resolution (S/2020/1158) will
soon be adopted on this subject. They have also led to the inclusion of security sector
reform in many peace agreements and United Nations missions in Africa, especially
the African Union’s Silencing the Guns initiative.
Countries emerging from years — or even decades — of war and conflict are
inevitably challenged by enormous issues in the post-conflict security environment,
as well as the haunting past. Those challenges include disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants, reconciliation, justice and the many
shortcomings of the new security sector, which need to be effectively addressed in
order to build trust and peace within each country and its population.
Security sector reform can play a critical role in strengthening post-conflict
peace, promoting national reconciliation and reconstruction and lowering the risks
of relapse into conflict. Such efforts should address the impact of conflicts on the
most vulnerable groups in society, especially women and children, as victims of, and
participants in, armed conflicts.
In that regard, we support nationally identified and led reforms, as they
respond to the particular needs of a given situation. Such reforms can produce
long-term positive impact and need to be actively supported by the United Nations
and the international community. A strong sense of national ownership of current
peacebuilding efforts will ensure a greater degree of success in future with regard to
meeting the specific context, needs and priorities of each country.
In addition, we see the merit in promoting the participation of a diverse range
of relevant stakeholders in peace processes, including in the security sector, as an
important factor in building a sustainable and peaceful nation and ensuring longlasting stability.
We wish to highlight the necessity of ensuring the equal representation and
full involvement of women in decision-making and post-conflict peacebuilding
processes, as they offer a unique perspective to peace and conflict and are the
backbone of communities.
We welcome the progress achieved in this field in a number of countries
and regions. This has contributed to promoting dialogue between the parties and
stakeholders concerned and supporting the security and stability of all relevant
countries and regions.
We will actively discuss this issue at the United Nations level in the review
of the peacebuilding architecture, as well as at the Council level and mission level,
34/35

20-16699

S/2020/1176

as we continue to strengthen our participation in United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Africa.
I wish to conclude by reiterating the important role that the international
community, especially the United Nations and regional organizations, can play in the
area of security sector reform to support post-conflict countries, while respecting
national ownership and in accordance with their wishes and priorities.
Cooperation efforts between the United Nations and regional organizations
should also be encouraged to promote and share experiences on how to better support
countries concerned in their efforts towards a stable, peaceful and prosperous society
and country.

20-1669935/35
