UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/26460*
6 October 1993
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND SPANISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3278th meeting of the Security Council, held on 17 September 1993,
in connection with the Council’s consideration of the item "The question
concerning Haiti", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council deplores the recent upsurge in violence in
Haiti, particularly the events of 11 and 12 September, when at least a
dozen people were assassinated, including a prominent supporter of
President Aristide during a church service.
"The Council is deeply concerned at these developments as well as at
the existence of organized armed civilian groups in the capital which are
attempting to interfere with the new Constitutional Government’s proper
assumption of its functions.
"The Security Council considers it imperative that the Constitutional
Government of Haiti assume control over the security forces of the country,
and that those responsible for the activities of the organized armed
civilian groups throughout the country, and particularly in Port-au-Prince,
be held personally accountable for their actions and removed from their
functions. The Council also urges the Haitian authorities to take
immediate measures with a view to disarming these groups.
"The Council strongly calls on the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed
Forces, also in his capacity as signatory to the Governors Island
Agreement, to carry out his responsibilities to the fullest by ensuring
immediate compliance with the letter and the spirit of the Governors Island
Agreement.
"The Council will hold the Haitian military and security authorities
personally responsible for the safety of all United Nations personnel in
Haiti.

*

Reissued for technical reasons.

93-54199 (E)

061093

/...

S/26460
English
Page 2

"Unless there is a clear and immediate effort by the security forces
to put an end to the present levels of violence and intimidation and unless
the above requirements are met, the Security Council will have no
alternative but to consider that the authorities responsible for public
order in Haiti are not complying in good faith with the Governors Island
Agreement.
"Therefore, should the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 861 (1993) and having received
the views of the Secretary-General of the Organization of American States
(OAS), inform the Security Council that, in his opinion, there is a serious
and consistent non-compliance with the Governors Island Agreement, the
Council will immediately reinstate those measures provided for in its
resolution 841 (1993) appropriate to the situation, with particular
emphasis on those measures aimed at those deemed responsible for the
non-compliance with the Agreement.
"The Council reaffirms that all the parties in Haiti are bound to
comply with their obligations under the Governors Island Agreement, as well
as with those embodied in the relevant international treaties to which
Haiti is party and in all relevant Security Council resolutions.
"The Council will closely monitor the situation in Haiti in the coming
days."

-----
