TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

nd
MEETING:

NEW

12 JUNE

1973

YORK

CONTENTS

Page
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ l”722)

Adoption

of the agenda

.. . . . . . . . . . . I . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . .

. . , . . , . . . . .

, , , , . . . . . . . . . 1. . . . . . . . . . . .

The situation in the Middle East:
(al Security Council resolution 33 1 (1973):
under Security
Council
resolution
fb) Report
of the Secretary-General
331(1973)
(S/10929)
. . . . , . . . . . . . , , . , , . . . . . . , , . .*. , . . ,. ,.

S/W.1722

1

:i

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SECOND MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 12 June 1.973, al: 10.30 a.m.
Presidelzt: Mr. Yakov MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics).

Council is seized, which will be circulated to all members of
the Council.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

2. In accordance with decisions adopted by the Security
Council at previous meetings, I propose, with the Council’s
consent, to invite the representatives of Egypt, Israel,
Jordan, the United Republic of Tanzania, Chad, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Nigeria, Algeria, Morocco, the United Arab
Emirates, Somalia, Guyana, Mauritania, Kuwait, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia and Lebanon to take part, without the right
to vote, in the Council’s examination of the situation in the
Middle East,

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1722)
1. Adoption of the agenda.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. 1% El-Zayyat
(Egypt), Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) and Mr. A. H. Sharaf
(Jordan) took places at the Council table: and Mr. S. Salim
[United Republic of Tanzania),Mr. H. G. Ouangmotching
(Chad), Mr. Ii Kelani (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. E. 0.
Ogbu (Nigeria), Mr. A Bouteflika (Algeria), Mr. M, Zentar
(Morocco), Mr. A. Al-Pachachi (United Arab Emirates),
Mr. H. Nur Elmi (Somalia),Mr. R. E0Jackson (Guyana),
Mr. ni El Hassen(Mauritania), Mr, A. Y. Bishara(Kuwit),
Mr. J. Y. Jamnl (Qatar], Mr. 0. Sakkaf (Saudi Arabia) and
Mr, E. Ghorra (Lebanon) took the placesreservedfor them
at the sideof the Council Chamber.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
[a} Security Council resolution 331 (1973);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under Security
Council resolution 331 (1373) (S/10929).
The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Security Council resolution 331 (1973)
(6) Report
of the Secretary-General under
Council resolution 331 (1973) (S/10929)

3. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian):I should
also like to inform members of the Council that, as
President of the Council, I have received a letter from
AmbassadorHoveyda, the representativeof Iran, requesting
that the delegation of Iran be given an opportunity to take
part in the consideration of the agendaitem before the
Council today. In accordancewith establishedpractice and
the provisional rules of procedureof the Security Council I
propose to Invite the representativeof Iran to take part,
without the right to vote, in the Security Council’s
examination of the situation in the Middle East. Sincethere
are no objections, it is so decided. Accordingly, I invite
AmbassadorHoveyda, the reprcsentativc of Iran, to take
the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber. He will be invited to take place at the Council
table when it is his turn to speak.

Security

1. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I should
like to inform members of the Security Council that, as
President of the Council, I have received a number of cables
from non-governmental organizations concerning the item
now before the Council-the situation in the Middle East. I
have received cables from the Chairman of the Sixth
International Professional Conference of Transport, Port
and Fishery Workers, which was held in Warsaw from 4 to
6 June 1973, from the leaders of the Moslem and Christian
communities in Jordan, and from the Bulgarian Peace
Committee. In addition, I have received letters from the
Women’s International Democratic Federation of Berlin,
the Federation of Arab Canadian Societies of Toronto,
Canada, and the Manitoba Peace Council of Winnipeg,
Canada. If they wish, members of the Council may look at
these communications in the United Nations Secretariat. I
assume that, in accordance with the appendix to the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council
concerning the procedure for dealing with communications
from private individuals and non-governmental bodies, the
communications I have mentioned will be included in the
next list of communications from private individuals and
non-governmental bodies relating to matters of which the

At the invitation of the President,Mr. F. HoveJida(Iran)
took the place reservedfor him at the sideof the Council
Chamber.
4. The PRESIDENT (translationfrom Russian):I call on
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guinea, who is first on
the list of speakers.
5. Mr. CISSOKO (Guinea) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, before taking up the item on our agendamay
1

I be allowed, on behalf of the delegation of the Republic of
Guinea, to congratulate you on your accession to the
presidency of the Security Council at a time when once
again this body is met to consider one of the most urgent
problems that has confronted it for more than a quarter of
a century. It is also my duty to pay a special tribute to your
personal qualities as an able diplomat whose common sense
and love for peace and freedom of peoples are sure signs of
the success of our deliberations.

cease-fire in the sector of the Canal. On 9 and 10 July the
Councilrepeatedits appealfor respectfor the cease-fire.
13. In resolutions 240 (1967) of 25 October 1967,
248 (1968) of 24 March 1968, 256 (1968) of 16 August
1968, 258 (1968) of 18 September1968,262 (1968) of 31
December 1968 and 265 (1969) of 1 April I969 the
Security Council unequivocally condemnsIsrael for these
violations of the cease-fire,for its premediated military
action againstcivilian targetsin Upper Egypt and in Jordan.

6. It is also my duty to express my gratification concerning the excellent relations of friendship and cooperation which exist between our two countries and the
spirit of active solidarity which has always characterized
the relations between our two Governments.

14. As if to make a further mockery of the international
community, on 28 December 1968, pursuing its expan.
sionist aims, Israel extended its raids to another Arab
country, Lebanon, spreadingdeath and destruction at the
international airport of Beirut, This new act of aggression,
which wasnot the first act of terrorism committed by Israel
againstthe Arab countries, was also condemned by the
Security Council and by world public opinion. Successively
in its resolutionsof 270 (1969) of 26 August 1969 and
ZSO(1970) of 19 May 1970 the Security Council again
condemnsIsrael for its premediatedmilitary action, declaringin its resolutionsthat thesearmed attacks could no
longer be tolerated. It repeatedits solemnwarning to the
effect that if Israel reverted to such actions the Security
Councilwould take effective measuresin pursuance of the
relevant Articles of the Charter to give effect to its
resolutions.

7. I would be derelict in my duty if I failed to greet and
congratulate here the outgoing President, Ambassador
Abdulla of the Democratic Republic of the Sudan, for
having guided ably and wisely the work of the Council
during the month of May.
8. Continuously, for more than a quarter of a century, the
United Nations has been discussing the serious question of
the Middle East, of which it is still seized. No solution
likely to restore peace and security in that part of the world
has yet been found to the problem. The Zionist State of
Israel, encouraged by certain great Powers, systematically
opposes it and is pleased to maintain this region in the
painful situation of neither war nor peace, which we all
know and deplore.

15. As is clear from a readingof the whole of document
S/10929, for the content of which we pay a tribute to the
Secretary-General and to his Special Representative,
AmbassadorGunnar Jarring, we find only condemnations
of Israel and the ever-renewedintention of the Security
Councilto envisagenew measuresprovided by the Charter
againstIsrael.

9. The most explosive development in the situation in the
Middle East goes back, as we know, to 5 June 1967, when
Israel, with the solid support of international imperialism,
launched its war of aggression against three Arab countries-Egypt,
Syria and Jordan-and occupied with impunity a part of their territories. Since that time the United
Nations has adopted many resolutions the result of which,
unfortunately, is a constant defiance of the international
community, despite all of the goodwill displayed by the
Arab States which are in favour of a final solution of the
conflict.

16. My delegationseriouslythinks that the gamehasgone
on too long and that it is time for the Security Council to
dischargeits responsibilities,The defianceof the imperialist
andZionist alliance,which is alsothat of all of the forcesof
colonialism and fascism in Africa and throughout the
world, has lasted too long, endangeringthe credibility of
the United Nations. The United Nations is duty bound to
take up this challengeby energeticandeffective action.

10. It becomes clear from the report of the SecretaryGeneral /S/10929/ that immediately after the hostilities
and following upon the adoption of resolutions 233 (1967)
of 6June 1967 and 234 (1967) of 7 June 1967, the
Governments of Jordan, Syria, Egypt and Israel announced
in turn that they accepted the cease-fire called for, while
Israel at that stage was already instaled on the East Bank of
the Suez Canal in Egypt and also occupied the West Bank
of Jordan and the west region of the Golan Heights in
Syria.

17. How can we tolerate having Israel, which was created
out of whole cloth by a United Nations decision through
deprivingthe Palestinianpeople of their national territory,
able today to defy this Organization to which it owesits
existence? How can we continue to tolerate its intransigenceand its arrogance?
18. We continue to believe that Security Council resolution 242 (1967) is still the most appropriate framework
for a solution. Indeed, the Security Council, under that
resolution,first of all

11. Starting from these strategic positions occupied by
Israel, it was thus easy for it to violate the cease-fire
although it had subscribed to it, and it has violated it
constantly.

“1. Ajj‘kms that the fulfilment of Charter principles
requiresthe establishmentof a just and lasting peacein
the Middle East which shouldinclude the application of
both the following principles:

12. Actually, shortly after the beginning of hostilities on
5 June 1967, the Security Council adopted resolutions
233 (1967) and 234 (1967) which called for an immediate
cease-fire. But, already in July, Israel was violating the

“ (i) Withdrawal of Israel armed forces from territories
occupiedin the recent conflict;
2

“(ii)

“2.

Termination of all claims or states of belligerency
and respect for and acknowledgement of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of every State in the area and their right
to live in peace within secure and recognized
boundaries free from threats or acts of force;

Conference on Trade and Developmentin Chile alSO dealt
with the serious situation in the Middle East and its
dangerousand harmful effects.
24. The Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the non-aligned
countries which met at Georgetown in August 1972
adopted a resolution [see S/10944] on the Middle East
which emphasizedthat all the measures
taken by the Israeli
authorities, that is to say the occupying authorities of
Israel, designedto change the demographic,ethnic and
political structure of the regionsoccupied, were null and
void.

Afj%m further the necessity

“(a) For guaranteeing freedom of navigation through
international waterways in the area;
“(b) For achieving a just settlement of the refugee
problem;

25. Africa, which in times gone by suffered so much
humiliation and still knows foreign domination and its
effects in the southern part of the continent, Africa which
is devoted to the sacredprinciplesof peacealthough it has
been despoiledof someof its territories in upper Egypt, has
not hesitated to give a mandateto 10 of its Headsof State
to contact Israel, Israel the aggressor,
to seekto bring about
the implementation of resolution242 (1967). That mission
of peace was met in Israel by arrogance and contempt.
Africa, again giving a mandateto eight of its Ministers for
Foreign Affairs-and I have the privilege of being one of
them-to come and follow the work of the current seriesof
meetings of the Security Council, once again wanted to
bring its message
of peace.

“{c) For guaranteeingthe territorial inviolability and
politicai independenceof every State in the area,through
measuresincluding the establishmentof demilitarized
zones”.
19. As can be seen,thoseprovisionsof paragraphsI and 2
of resolution 242 (1967) have laid down the basic principles for a peaceful settlement. There is no doubt that
their correct and sincere application could lead to an
equitable settlement. We repeat that if, unfortunately, such
is not the caseand hasnot beenthe caseheretofore, that is
because,above all, of the attitude of Israel which, to say
the least is negative. Indeed, in the face of the constructive
proposalsformulated by the SpecialRepresentativeof the
Secretary-General, Israel always took an attitude that was
negative in the extreme. The Government of the Arab
Republic of Egypt, for its part, has shown courage and
goodwill by respondingpositively to thoseproposals.

26. Will Israel continue to remain deaf to Africa’s
message?
27. The Assembly of Headsof State and Government of
the Organization of African Unity which met at Rabat in
June 1972, and the meetingthat wasrecently held at Addis
Ababa, each adopted a resolution calling upon Israel to
withdraw immediately from the occupied Arab territories
and fall back to the 5 June 1967 positions,in accordance
with the provisions of resolution 242 (1967). By those
sameresolutions, Africa makesa pressingappeal to the
States Members of the United Nations to refrain from
delivering weapons, military equipment and the like to
Israel and to refrain from giving it moral support which
would enable it to strengthenits military potential and to
perpetuatethe occupation of Arab States.

20. Thus, AmbassadorGunnar Jarring’s mission,because
of Israel’s refusal to co-operate, has found itself bogged
down in an impasse.The question still remainsin all its
dimensions and the prospects for a just and lasting
settlement of the problemsof the Middle Eastremain not
very encouraging.
21. Despite the numerous efforts of the international
community, Israel continues to occupy the territories of
three Member States of our Organization and the Arab
populations displaced as a result of that occupation
Continue to live in exile, in despair.Other efforts to restore
peace in the regionhavefailed. The negotiationsof the four
Powers, which were carried out within the framework of
the Security Council, to assistthe Jarring mission,alsomet
with failure.

28. Should a military conquest serve as a pretext for
territorial expansion? Can a State which enlarges its
boundariesby war, destruction and territorial annexation,
claim tD be peaceloving and worthy of beinga Member of
our Organization under the provisionsof the Charter? If
Israeli expansionismproceedsfrom a plan conceivedby the
Zionists, the execution of such a designcertainly restson
the sizable material aid that it receivesfrom international
imperialism.

22. The membersof the Security Council will recall, for
that matter, that the President of the United States of
America and the leaders of the Soviet Union, at their
summit meeting in Moscow in May 1972, restated their
support for any peacefulsettlement in the Middle East, in
accordance with resolution 242 (1967), and confirmed
their desire to contribute to the successof Ambassador
Jarring’s mission.

29. International opinion will recall that on 5 July 1968
the Israeli DefenceMinister expoundedon the plan which,
by stages,wasto result in the creationof a “Greater Israel”.
The ambitious gamble of General Moshe Dayan were
expressedin theseterms:

23. Europe, for its part, has shown a steadily growing
desire to put an end to the situb,:on which is neither war
nor peace that now obtains in the Middle East. The Jidda
Conference and the third sessionof the United Nations

“Our fathers reached the frontiers recognized in the
partition plan of 1947. Our generation has reached the
frontiers of 1949. But the generationof the six-day war
3

was able to reach Suez, Jordan and the Golan Heights in
Syria, And that is not the end because, after the present
cease-fire lines, there will be other new lines, but they will
extend beyond the Jordan, perhaps as far as Lebanon and
perhaps even into central Syria.”
30. That statement, as the Council can note, testifies to
the unbridled ambitions of Israel and explains the reasons
for its persistent refusal to give effect to the Security
Council resolutions and in particular resolution 242 (1967).
31. In its reply to the special envoy of the SecretaryGeneral on 26 February 197 1, Israel declared /3/IO403,
annex X1] that it would not withdraw
to the lines
obtaining prior to 5 June 1967. It has stated repeatedly
that it will not withdraw from the City of Jerusalem, that it
would continue to occupy the Golan Heights and the Gaza
Strip, and that it would appropriate sizable segments of
territory on the West Bank of the Jordan. Those tendencies
of Israel were confirmed by the Prime Minister, Mrs. Golda
Meir, herself, when on 23 November 1972, in an interview
which she granted to the Italian magazine Europeo, she
stated:
“Israel will never abandon Jerusalem. It is inadmissible,
Jerusalem is out of the question. We will not even agree
to discuss Jerusalem.”
As far as the West Bank of the Jordan is concerned, she
confided:
“Although the Israeli Government has not yet taken
any decision on the subject, the majority of Israelis would
be ready to give back to Jordan a part of the West Bank
of the Jordan.”
32. With respect to the Palestine sector of the Gaza Strip,
she stated that Gaza would remain a part of Israel, although
she would have no objection to the Arabs raising the
question of Gaza if negotiations were to take place.
33. On the question of the Golan Heights, which belong to
Syria, she said she was ready to negotiate with Syria on the
condition that new frontiers would guarantee Israel a
presence on the Syrian Heights.
“In other words,” she stated, “the Syrians are today
precisely at the point where the frontier should be fixed.
On this point, we shall not yield. I will not give way,”
34. With respect to the Egyptian peninsula of the Sinai, in
this interview Mrs. Golda Meir stated that Israel wanted
only to control Sharm-el-Sheikh and a strip of the desert
linking Israel to it.
35. Speaking about the Palestinians, Prime Minister Golda
Meir ruled out any possibility of their coming back to Israel
and said that she could not accept the creation of a third
State between Israel and Jordan-that
is, she does not
accept the creation of a Palestinian State. However, in
considering what the United Nations calls the problem of
the Palestine refugees, the General Assembly has year after
year-in 1969, 1970, 1971 and 1972-adopted resolutions
in which it has recognized that the problem derives from

the fact that the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
refugees, as those rights are proclaimed in the United
Nations Charter and in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, have been denied them and that full respect for the
inalienable rights of the people of Palestine is indispensable
to the restoration of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.
36. Even today, the Palestinian people lives enclosed in
refugee camps or wanders throughout the world prey to
despair and injustice. Deprived of its inalienable right to
life, deprived of its existence as a nation, it strikes wherever
it can.
37. The delegation of the Republic of Guinea reaffirms its
unqualified support for the just cause of the Palestinian
people. Like Israel, Palestine has the right to a homeland, to
a country. The United Nations, which created the problem
of the Middle East, is in duty bound to find a solution to it.
The great Powers, which we have repeatedly held respon.
sible for the maintenance of the explosive situation in the
Middle East, are in duty bound to take more appropriate
measures.
38. Will the Security Council, which, we repeat, has ever
since 1967 proposed taking appropriate measures against
Israel, now be prepared to do so? Will the allies of Israel
finally be prepared to help the international community
emerge from this impasse?
39. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, Ambassador El-Zayyat, in his moving statement of 6 June [I 717th
meeting] reaffirmed his faith in the principles of the United
Nations Charter and proclaimed his Government’s
acceptance of all United Nations resolutions concerning the
present problem. However, he emphasized that the price
would not be abandonment of territorial integrity or the
inalienable right of the Palestinian people as a nation to live
in peace within secure and recognized boundaries.
40. Israel, assured of the unconditional support of its
allies, for its part reaffirms through the mouth of its
permanent representative, Mr. Yosef Tekoah, that it will
not abandon its “right” at any price; it will not accept any
other substantive changes-changes in balance or interpretation-in resolution 242 (1967). Now, that is clear.
41. We repeat that the time has come for the Security
Council to face up to its responsibilities.
Like all the
previous speakers, we reaffirm that the eyes of the world
are fixed on the Security Council. Is it going to measure up
to this historic test? Is it now going to abandon the
methods which have proved fruitless in the past? Is it
finally going to take the efficacious measures provided by
the Charter to give effect to its decisions? It is for you, the
members of the Council, to answer those questions.
42. The continuing alliance between imperialism and
Zionismand the encirclingnooseextended by South Africa,
Portugal, Rhodesiaand Israel and tightened by their allies
causea seriousthreat to hang over peace and security in
Africa and throughout the world. My colleagues from
Algeria, Nigeria, Chad, the United Republic of Tanzania,
the Sudanand Kenya and I have, with a mandate from our

i

-

with respect to Palestine, the Palestinian people and the
neighbouring Arab countries.

Heads of State, come here to emphasize to you once
more-no
longer only in the name of our respective
countries but on behalf of the whole of Africa united
within the framework of the Organization of African
Unity-the
serious danger that hangs over our continent.
The threat of such a danger would be confirmed by the
incapacity of the Security Council to remove the causes of
the persistent disruption of peace which has existed since
196’7.

49. It is true that the minds of the Arab peoples directly
concerned, and more particularly the Palestinian people,
were already made up, For them the settled determination
of the Zionists to establish themselves and to spread out in
the region was no longer open to doubt, A typical
colonialist type of operation was going on in their
territories to the detriment of their interests, their sovereignty, their very existence.

43. In any event, the delegation of the Organization of
African Unity will draw the appropriate conclusions from
this historic series of meetings, once again held in June.

50. But a doubtful international opinion had to be
convinced of this fact, an opinion that was still under the
sway of sympathy, which was legitimate at the outset but
which was all too soon enlisted in the service of a tragic
hoax on an unprecedented scale which plunged the Middle
East into an era of violence and killing which has been
going on for a quarter of a century and which, alas, is far
from being over.

44. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guinea for his statement
and for the remarks which he addressed to my country and
to me personally. For my part, I should like to note with
great pleasure that the relations of friendship, mutual
understanding and co-operation between the Soviet Union
and Guinea have been developing and growing stronger
since the independence of the Republic of Guinea was first
proclaimed, The Republic of Guinea was one of the first
African countries to gain independence and since that time
it has played an active part in the life of the African
continent, in international life as a whole and in the work
of the United Nations, The Republic of Guinea has set a
very good example in appointing as its representative
Ambassador C&B, who is one of her country’s outstanding
politicians; we have great respect for her and take great
pleasure in working with her in considering the problems
which arise both in the General Assembly and in the
Security Council.

5 1. The Israeli aggression of June 1967 and its far-reaching
consequences for the military balance in the region to the
benefit of the aggressor have had the unexpected effect,
particularly for us Africans, of unmasking once and for all
the true face of the Zionist State, its racist nature and its
expansionist aims.
52. Thanks to an eloquence which owes much to the
heady Intoxication of success, many Israeli leaders no
Ionger make any secret of their designs or of their appetites.
They throw down arrogant challenges to the international
community, to the charters and to the laws with which it
has vested itself and to the decisions and the resolutions
adopted by its organs.

45. The representative of Morocco is next on the list of
speakers. I invite the representative of Morocco to take a
place at the Council table.

53. The report submitted to this Council by the SecretaryGeneral pursuant to resolution 331 (1973), despite its
brevity and its circumspection, offers proof of Israel’s
standing refusal to co-operate with the United Nations and
with its qualified representatives with a view to the
restoration in the region of a situation in conformity with
law, justice and the fundamental principles which govern
the international community.

46. Mr. ZENTAR
(Morocco)
(interpretation
from
French]: Mr. President, first of all I should like to thank
you and all the members of the Council for allowing me to
speak in a debate which is of concern to my country-as an
Arab and African country of course, but also as a State
Member of the United Nations aware of its duties in
everything having regard to the defence of justice and the
safeguarding of international peace and security.

54. But we have even more overwhelming and unambiguous testimony, this time emanating from the highest
Zionist authorities themselves, which shows why all the
international efforts so far have been fruitless and why they
can never be successful. Many preceding speakers, and most
recently the Foreign Minister of Guinea, have already
referred to this testimony, but it may be useful to repeat
some of these statements, because they are so clear and
symptomatic that we need to consider them very closely.
Thus, Mrs, Golda Meir stated in May 1971 that Jerusalem
will remain unified and an integral part of Israel; that Israel
will never leave the Golan Heights; that Arab troops shall
never again cross the Jordan.

47. I should also like to hail your personal accession to the
presidency of the Council this month not only because of
your personal qualities, which have always been of the
greatest benefit to our Organization, but also because many
of us regard your presidency as a good omen at a time when
the Council is beginning its debate on so important and SO
sensitive a topic, Your country, the Soviet Union, in view
of its international responsibilities, in view of its power and
the great influence it wields, has played and is still called
upon to play a role of the first importance in the service of
justice and law in the solution of the problem which is once
again before the Council today.

5.5. General Moshe Dayan, for his part, said much the
same thing, and here I am again repeating what the Foreign
Minister of Guinea quoted. Mr. Moshe Dayan stated:

48. There was a time when all of ~1.1swould hang on every
word of the Israeli spokesmen, looking for an indiscretion
or an unguarded statement which might at last give some
hint of the deep-seated intentions of the Zionist authorities

“Our fathers reached the frontiers recognized in the
partition plan of 1947. Our generation has reached the
5

frontiers of 1949. But the generation of’ the six-day war
was able to reach Suez, Jordan and the Golan Heights in
Syria. . . . That is not the end, because after the present
cease-fire lines there will be other new lines, but they will
extend beyond Jordan, perhaps as far as Lebanon and
perhaps even into central Syria.”

63. But then everything is clear. That is why Israel
stubbornly demandsat any price that the Arab countries
cometo the negotiatingtable asvanquishedcountries.
G4. Israel refuses to subscribe to the principle of tile
non-acquisitionof territory by force.

We took careful note of this.

65. Israel refusesto give the African wise men the only
proof of good will which they really need: and that was
that Israel should state that it was not interested in the
annexationof Arab territory.

56. Mr. Abba Eban, the Foreign Minister of Israel, also
stated late in 197 1:
“ . . . the kibbutzim established in territory under Israeli

66. Israel refuses to give a favourable response to
Mr. Jarring’s aide-mCmoireof 8 February 1971 because
Israelcannotacceptthe return to the internationaI frontiers
that existedbefore the aggression.

control in Sinai, Gaza, Jordania and Golan are in places
that Israel intends to keep in the future and has no
intention of giving back to the Arab countries.”
57, The other day these words were corroborated in this
Council by Ambassador
Sharaf of Jordan [1717th
meeting/, who told us that to hisGovernment’sknowledge
some50 settIementshad alreadybeenestablishedin various
placesin the occupied territories, andhe gave ustheir exact
names and geographical locations, some of them being
placesvery far from the old demarcationlines.
58. There has been no denial of this statement and for
good reason.
59. If I have referred to statementsto which I have
already made reference in the past and which have been
followed by others since, and in the samevein, it was to
illustrate once again the fact that Israelis pursuingin the
Middle East a standing policy of aggression
and annexation
in an inexorable process which is going forward unremittingly and more and more without the mystery in
which international skulduggery on this scaleis ordinarily
veiled.
60. Israel takes no more account today than it did in the
past, in 1967, in 1956, or in 1949,of the rights of peoples,
of international laws or of the authority and prestigeof the
United Nations.
61. But what is the representativeof Israel JIOW saying’?
What replies doeshe make to the overwhelmingaccusations
levelled againsthis Government? What washis reply to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, Mr. El-Zayyat, who
simply askedhim whether his Government recognizedthe
principle of the non-acquisirionof territories by force?
62. Far from protesting againsttheseaccusations,far from
offering us the slightest hint of evidence that the Zionist
regime was not pursuing a policy of aggressionand
unilateral annexation of territories belonging to States
whose integrity is guaranteed by the United Nations
Charter, the representative of Israel more or lesssaidthe
following: that resolution 242 (1967) was accepted by
Israel, but that it was accepted becauseit createsa new
situation, and he explained to us that that resolution did
not meanthe restitution of all the territories occupied after
the June 1967 aggression.He alsoaddedthat there wasno
rule or international principle to prevent changesthrough
treaty of pre-existing and recognizedfrontiers. He repeated
severaltimes subsequently that recognizedboundarieswere
not inviolable.

67. Lastly, Israel interprets resolution 242 (1967) asnot
implying the restitution of all territories occupied by force,
Israel thus wants secureand recognized boundaries, but it
demandsand wishesto impose a solution whereby these
frontiers would passsomewherethrough Egyptian national
territory, through Syrian national territory and through
Jordaniannational territory. This is not only a challengeto
international conscience,to our Charter and to our institutions. It is a provocation.
68. Israel seemsto be in no hurry to abandon so unjust
and so intransigent an attitude. Other calculations have
given it reasonto supposethat with the passageof time it
can improve still further on its conquests.Meanwhile Arab
Jerusalemcontinues to be occupied. The holy places of
Islam and the holy Christian places remain in captivity,
despitethe woundedsensibilitiesof hundredsof millions of
Muslimsand Christiansthe world over.
69. Throughout this time the Palestinianpeople, shuttled
betweenghettos and campsthat are scarcelyany better, are
being transformed into a phantom people no longer
referred to except in terms of “refugees”, stripped of
personality,identity and even territory.
70. During this period Israel, so sensitive to the introduction of a singlerifle in the region, continues its policy of
arming itself from all possiblesources, in the name of
declared solidarities, the reliability of which will be
demonstratedin the near future, or through shady deals
which always come to light in the end. The Arab peopIes
will thus distinguishbetween their friends and those who
let passgoodopportunities to becomeor to remain such.
71. The assertionthat Israel must, among other things,
enjoy permanentmilitary superiority over all its neighbours
combined indicates better than any other argument the
nature of the Zionist military rCgime and how much
confidenceit hasin the justice of its cause,and in any event
leavesno doubt as to the instrument it meansto use once
againin order to resolvewith the countries and peoplesof
the regionthe difficult disputeof which it, Israel, is the sole
sourceandorigin.
72. It would be wearisometo go over the impressive sum
total of resolutionsadopted by the tieneral Assembly and
the Security Council on the Middle East crisis and more

6

particularly on the conduct of Israel vis-&is the populations of the occupied territories, of their property, of the
holy places, of respect for international law in the occupied
territories and outside them. Nevertheless it may be useful
to note that the two following essential elements show up
in many pertinent resolutions.
73. The first is the continous reference by United Nations
bodies to the Charter of the Organization, to the obliga.
tions flowing from international conventions, to the fundamental principles of our community as reaffirmed in the
solemn Declaration on the strengthening of international
Security (General Assembly resolution 2734 (XXV}],
74. The second element to be noted is the insistent
appeals addressed to Israel that it act in conformity with
the principles set forth in the Charter, with the decisions
taken by the Organization-appeals warning Israel again and
again that in case of further non-compliance adequate
steps would be taken in order to implement the resolutions.
75, These two elements constitute for us the essential
poles on which our present concerns and also our need to
establish the duties and responsibilities of all concerned are
founded.
76. His Majesty King Hassan II, at the beginning of this
present debate, sent a message to Mr. Kurt Waldheim, the
Secretary-General, conveying to him his deep concern at
the grave situation prevailing in the region. The King added
in his message:
“Six years after its aggression, Israel still persists in its
uncompromising and negative attitude to all the peace
initiatives taken by the United Nations and by the great
Powers and the Organization of African Unity; it obstinately refuses to comply with the various General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions and with the
resolution adopted unanimously by the Council on 22
November 1967, in particular. Consequently we feel it is
a matter of necessity and urgency that the United Nations
should discharge, in these serious circumstances, all its
responsibilities by taking definite and energetic action to
compel Israel to comply with and implement strictly
those resolutions, which entail the withdrawal of Israeli
armed forces from all the occupied Arab territories, and
respect for a guarantee of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people. Any other attitude than one of
firmness on the part of the Council is liable to weaken
decisively the confidence in the Organization still shown
by the peoples and to lead inevitably to a new flare-up in
the region, thus seriously threatening peace and security
in the world.“[S/10942.]
77. Thus we are confronted with Israel’s intransigent
refusal to co-operate with our Organization and its qualified
representatives in their efforts to restore peace in the region
by bringing to bear just and equitable solutions in conformity with law and the principles recognized by the
international community.
78. Israel, taking advantage of the present fait accompli
that is the result of the force of arms and has been
maintained in the same manner, stands by resolution

242 (1967) while giving it the tendentious interpretation
with which we are all familiar, that is that Israel regards
that resoIution as allowing it to legitimize annexations
carried out and maintained by force. This tendentious claim
will not hold water: the resolutions of the United Nations
are inseparable from the principles and objectives of the
Charter; inseparable too from the solemn declarations of
the Organization, such as the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security; inseparable from all our
obligations flowing from conventions and international
rules; inseparable, finally, from the other resolutions
adopted in the same area. These resolutions frequently
affirm the fundamental principles which we espouse. Such
is the case also of resolution 242 (1967). Does not that
resolution speak first and foremost of the inadmissibility of
the acquisition of territory by force? Does it not refer
specifically to Article 2 of the Charter, which stipulates in
particular that the Members of the Organization shall
“refrain . . from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity of any State . , .“?
79, How, in these circumstances, can Israel interpret the
resolution as an authorization given it by the Security
Council to define its boundaries wherever it sees fit through
territory
belonging to countries enjoying international
frontiers clearly identified and recognized?
80. Before this organ and in this Organization only law
and justice count. Blackmail based on the use of force and
pressure must be, and happily is, outlawed here.
81. The representative of Israel complained the other day
before this Council of coercion brought to bear on his
country-coercion
to which, he asserted, Israel would not
yield. What coercion was he referring to? He told us
himself: it was coercion by resolutions of the United
Nations and other international organizations, it was
coercion by the two great Powers, the four great Powers,
the ad hoc committees, the special committees, the
advisory committees-and,
I might add, probably the 10
wise men of Africa, Mr. Jarring and so forth. It is true that
the Arab countries have had recourse to these means of
coercion, but they have done so because they perhaps have
made the mistake for six long years of trying to prevail on
Israel through these entirely peaceful means, to respect law,
justice and freedom, and to bring Israel to heed the
injunctions of the international community. In this Organization we can have recourse to no other weapons, no other
means of coercion than those about which the Israeli
representative complained.
82. Israel, which is one of the few Members of the United
Nations to elevate terrorism to the rank of a State doctrine,
is using barbarous and genocidal methods against the people
of Palestine in order once and for all to eliminate that
embarrassing and accusing witness to the intolerable injustice on which the structures of the Zionist State rest.
83. We can never repeat too often before this Council that
there is no hope for peace in the MiddIe East unless justice
and dignity are restored to the Palestinian people, whose
misfortunes are the starting-point and the standing cause of
the entire Middle East crisis.

Bahrain to take the place reserved for him in the Council
chamber, on the understanding that he will be invited to
take a place at the Council table when it is his turn to

84. In the face of Israel’s defiant and arrogant attitude, I
shoufd nevertheless like to welcome the wisdom and spirit
of co-operation displayed by the Arab Republic of Egypt,
which, confident in the rightness and legitimacy of its
cause, is giving its unstinting support to all international
efforts to bring about a peaceful and equitable solution,
which is desired so much by the international community.
Similarly, I should like to hail the determination of the
Arab Republic of Egypt to yield at no price and in no
circumstances a single inch of its national territory to the
aggressor. In showing that determination, Egypt is protecting its territory, but it is at the same time protecting
and consolidating the rule of law and international order
for the benefit of all peace-loving States of the world. In
defending its sovereignty and territorial integrity, the Arab
Republic of Egypt, like Syria and Jordan, can count on our
unreserved support and on our full solidarity.

speak.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. S. M. AI-&flat
(Bahrain) took the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council Chamber.
91. Mr. MOJSOV (Yugoslavia): Mr. President, for two
reasons it gives me special pleasure indeed to congratulate
you on assuming the presidency of the Council for the
month of June. The first reason is that you are a most
worthy representative of your great country, the Soviet
Union, with which independent, socialist and non-aligned
Yugoslavia enjoys friendly and developing relations in many
important fields. Our two countries, during the trials of the
Second World War, stood firmly together in those most
crucial moments of modern history, and their equal
co-operation has always been to the benefit of both of
them and in the interests of co-operation, security and
peace in the world. The second reason is that we know your
quite exceptional personal qualities and your almost unprecedented experience in the field of world affairs, especially
in the work of the United Nations and particularly of the
Security Council, These qualities eminently qualify YOU to
guide us through the complex tasks of the Security Council
in this month of June. The month of June has never been
an easy one for the Security Council, as I remember from
last year. This year the responsibility of steering us through
the historic Middle East debate, among other things, has
fallen to your lot, and we do not see how we could be in
better hands. These reasons, as well as our exceIlent
personal relations, make it doubly sure that you can count
on our readiness to make your tasks easier.

8.5. The Powers that are giving economic and military
support to Israel must understand the grave responsibilities
they are assuming before history in supporting an enterprise
of violence and criminality against the elementary rights of
a people, the people of Palestine, and of a number of
sovereign States, the Arab States victims of aggression and
military occupation at the hands of Israel.
86. We think that the United Nations for its part is far
from having exhausted its entire arsenal, and that it has too
often brandished, without ever using, the weapons which it
could long since have effectively wielded.
87. Once again, today, we call on this Council, to which
the Charter has conferred primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, to discharge those responsibilities by taking specific and energetic
measures to oblige Israel to abide by the resolutions of the
United Nations and to withdraw its armed forces from all
the occupied Arab territories without delay, to respect and
guarantee the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people
in its national territory.

92. Allow me to take this opportunity
to stress how
impressed we were with the splendid manner in which my
good colleague and friend the Ambassador of the Sudan,
Mr. Abdulla, led us through the important events of the
month of May.

88. The prestige and authority of our irreplaceable Organization have suffered most grievous blows from the successive challenges of Israel, from the constant contempt of the
Zionist State for our debates, our resdlutions, our laws and
our principles.

93. The Yugoslav delegation approaches the current COD
sideration of the situation in the Middle East by the
Security Council under resolution 331 (1973) with an
earnest sense of responsibility, for several major reasons.

89. This Council must one day at last understand this
situation which imperils, first of all, the credibility of the
Organization but also, and above all, international peace
and security, o,f which you, the members of the Security
Council, are the protectors and guarantors.

94. Far from being solved, the grave situation, fraught
with immediate and future dangers, is being further
complicated by new disquieting developments within the
narrower and broader region of the Near and Middle East.
The Secretary-General’s report describes in detail how the
period of the cease-fire has been actually a period of ever
more frequent and dangerous aggressive attacks by Israel
against the neighbouring Arab countries.

90. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): Before
calling on the next speaker, I should like to inform
members of the Security Council that, as President of the
Security Council, I have received a letter from the
representative of Bahrain requesting that he be permitted to
take part in the Council’s examination of the situation in
the Middle East. In accordance with established practice, I
propose to invite the representative of Bahrain to take part,
without the right to vote, in the examination of the
situation in the Middle East. Since there are no objections,
it is SO decided. Accordingly, I invite the representative of

95. At the same time, the territories conquered by force
remain under occupation, and vital resolutions
of the
Security Council and decisions of other United Nations
bodies remain unimplemented, while the fundamen ta!
principles of the United Nations Charter are vioIated and
trampled upon, precisely at a time when their observance is
most needed by the largest number of members of the
international community.
8

96. The situation in the occupied territories is worsening
all the time, while Israel, contrary to United Nations
resolutions and elementary and uncontested norms of
international law, is in the process of changing the
demographic, economic, political and social structures of
those territories.

to perpetuate and legalize the occupation and to sanction
the fruits of conquest.
103. As far as the Arab States and peoples of this region
are concerned, the occupation of their territories, the
armed attacks and vast devastation to which they are
subjected and the spending of a very large part of the
national wealth for their self-defence prevent or greatly
hamper the over-all development of these otherwise rich,
talented and industrious peoples and countries. Mankind is
deprived of their full contribution to the economy, culture
and science of the world and to its peace and security, just
at a time when it is in the greatest need of them and when,
without such a contribution, mankind finds it ever more
difficult to satisfy some of its primary interests and needs.

97. The position of Palestinians, of a people deprived of
the right to its homeland, is becoming ever more serious.
98. Yugoslavia, as a European and Mediterranean country,
situated in an area closely linked to developments in the
Middle East, is directly interested in the removal of the
causes of the crisis through a just settlement of the Middle
East problem. As a non-aligned country, it wishes, together
with all the members and active factors of the policy of
non-alignment, to contribute, as much as it can, to the
overcoming of the Middle East crisis on the basis of
elimination of the consequences of the aggression and
respect for all the basic principles embodied in the relevant
decisions of the United Nations.

104. On the other hand, for its part, instead of being a
factor of coexistence and equitable co-operation between
its own people and the neighbouring Arab peoples, with
whom it is bound by fate in the same area, Israel devotes a
huge part of its energies to means of war and occupation,
undermining thereby its own true national interests, while
its position in the international community is constantly
deteriorating.

99. When now the Security Council, as the United Nations
organ upon which the Member States have conferred, under
the Charter, primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, approaches a debate like
this one, probably the first question to be considered is a
determination and appraisal of the scope and gravity of the
crisis, the degree of the threat to international peace and
security. We feel that the following facts cannot be
seriously questioned.

105. It is high time for the simple truth to be realised that
in “one and an ever smaller world” no one can fare well
because someone eIse fares badly, and that the maintenance
of the present state of affairs is not in Israel’s interest
either.
106. My delegation fully agrees that the gravity of the
situation, the seriousness of this debate, and the imperative
need to do all in our power to overcome the present state
of paralysis and to advance the cause of peace in the Middle
East by making the most careful use of all existing and
potentially favourable and useful elements, wherever they
may be found, make it incumbent upon us to approach our
common task with the deepest sense of responsibility.

100. The Middle East crisis is not of a narrow, local,
regional character. What is in question is a conflict and a
constant trouble spot which, owing to the involvement of
so many vital interests and principles, has resulted and may
again result in widespread confrontation, with unforeseen
consequences.
101. The crisis in the Middle East, as the major hotbed of
war and tension in the world, has not at all been affected
by the trends of d&me. If anyone supposed that the
unresolved Middle East crisis could be safely built into the
system of de’tente, then the further possible escalation of
the conflict in the field would indicate that this cannot be
considered to be a reliable calculation. We have seen, time
and again, that the cycles of Israel’s frequent armed attacks
and the consequent increase of armaments in the area and
around it, as well as the intensification of tensions because
of strategic considerations are liable to lead, in this region,
to the outbreak of war or to international crises such as
those that have already brought the world to the brink of
conflagration several times, If no essential changes take
place soon in this situation, it will not be possible to avoid
this pattern either now or in the future. The negative
consequences of this crisis are affecting, in a very palpable
manner, the actual political and economic interests of the
whole international community, the interests of every one
of us.

107. Proceeding from these considerations, we have again
noted that we are, in fact, confronted with two policies, On
the one side is the policy of the Arab Republic of Egypt
and other Arab States, which is a policy of basic orientation
towards the solution of the crisis and the satisfaction, by
peaceful means, of their legitimate and universally recognized interests, in accordance with the United Nations
Charter and Security Council resolutions, as well as
readiness to pave the way to an agreed over-all political
settlement. On the other hand, the world is confronted
with the policy of Israel which manifests itself as a policy
of occupation, of retaining of occupied territories, of
territorial expansion and annexation, contrary to the
United Nations Charter and the resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly.
108. We are, of course, aware that there exist also
different interpretations of various resolutions or parts
thereof, and of the sequences of the causes and consequences of the situation in the Middle East. But it seems to
us that nothing illustrates with such clarity and in such an
incontestable manner the differences between the two
policies I have outlined as a juxtaposition of the following
two passages from the replies of the Arab Republic of

102. The so-called state of “no war and no peace” is
actually an illusion, as war is constantly being waged against
the Palestinian people and the neighbouring Arab countries.
On the other hand, use is being made of this state of affairs
9

112. The contrast between the two policies, between the
two ways of formulating positions and attitudes towards
the conditions of settlement, is, unfortunately, only a
formal diplomatic expression of material behaviour and
Arab Republic of Egypt: ‘When Israel gives these
reality. We are merely quoting data from the first part of
commitments, the United Arab Republic will be ready to
the Secretary-General’sreport when we say that in 8 out of
enter into a peace agreement with Israel containing all the
a total of 17 resolutions and decisions adopted by the
aforementioned obligations as provided for in the
Security Council sinceJuly I967 Israelwascondemned for
Security
Council resolution 242 (1967).”
[Ibid.,
its military actionsin 8 resolutions, while in 11 resolutions
annex II.]
Israelwascalledupon to desistfrom suchactions,that is to
say, not to resort to them again. Several resolutions
Israel: “Withdrawal of Israel armedforces from the deplored all acts of violence and one of them condemned
Israel-UnitedArab Republiccease-fireline to the secure,
all suchacts.The Security Council resolutionson Jerusalem
recognizedand agreedboundariesto be established
in the
have either condemned Israel or have proclaimed its
peace agreement, Israel will not withdraw to the
measures
of annexation asnull and void.
pre-pre-5June 1967lines.”(Ibid., annexIll./

Egypt and Israel to the aide-mimoire of 8 February 1971
of Ambassador Jarring, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General [S/10403, annex I/:

109. In previousdebatesin the Security Councilwe have 113. It is a fact that, in spite of all the insistenceof Israel
had the opportunity to drawattention to the characteristic upon being endangered,we are faced with the following
attitude adoptedby Israelwhich, wheneverwhat hadbeen paralleland mutually linked phenomenain its activities and
allegedto be a seeminglyinsurmountableobstacleto the positionssince the proclamation of its independence 25
years ago: through consecutive fighting the territory
solving of the conflict was removed, would respondby
annexedand occupied by Israel hasgrown bigger,while the
raisingthe next one,againasan “absolute”requirementfor
number
of Arab refugees and displaced persons was
making any progress.When the Go ernment of the Arab
Republic of Egypt and Governmentsof other neighbouring constantly growing; the number of Israel’ssettlements in
Arab countries endorsedthe principle of indispensable occupiedterritories is augmenting;the number of Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions condemning
respect for, and guaranteeof, the sovereignty,territorial
integrity and political independenceof every State of the Israelfor its ever more frequent and seriousmilitary attacks
region and its right to live in peacewithin recognizedand hasincreased;the number of States Member of the United
secureboundaries,free from the threat or useof force, then Nations, from all regions, voting for those resolutions has
beenon the increaseall the time.
the demandfor a direct conclusionof a peacetreaty with
Israelwasput forward.
114. International experience and history teach us that
110. When the Government of the Arab Republic of
countries,particularly small ones, fighting for a just cause
Egypt, as an essentialfactor, agreedto this, then it was usually increase,with the passageof time, the number of
stressed that the military presenceof a foreign factor
their supportersand find wider support in the international
rendered the solutionimpossible,Whena changeoccurred community, andnot vice versa.
also in this situation, then the impossibleand, consequently, unreasonable
demandwasmadeto the effect that
115. Here I should also like to comment that in the
each Arab Government should bear direct responsibility contemporary world, which is not the world of the
for, and shouldabsolutelyprevent, any action undertaken nineteenth century, or the beginning of the twentieth
anywhere by PalestinianorganizationsagainstIsraelioccu- century, what makes one’s borders secure is not thr
pation, otherwise there cannot be any solution-not to
possession
of this or that strategically superior ground. In
mention the fact that the aforementionedArab factorshave our time and ageof sophisticatedarms,to interpret secure
accepted the principle of free navigation through inter- borders only in territorial, physical terms is, to sap the
national waterways, the principle of demilitarizedzones, least, outmoded, The security of one’s borders is best
the presenceof the United Nationsasan additionalmeasure maintainedthrough policies and realities of coexistence.
of security, andsoon.
co-operation and good-neighbourly policy, and not by
meansof inherently unstable annexations through con1I I. Not only have theseand other important proofs of
quest.
readinessand ability for ensuringa peacefulsolutionof the
conflict given repeatedly by the Governmentsof neigh- 116. The total and constant dedication of Yugoslavia I(!
bouring Arab countries,essentialfactors in the solution of
peace, to the active and peaceful coexistence of all
the conflict, not been madeuseof, but they havenot even countries and peoples,regardlessof differences or simibeen properly acknowledged,while, on the other hand, larities of socialsystems,size and levelsof development, as
abundant usehasbeenmadeof standsandstatementsmade well as the reasons-mentionedby me at the beginning of
in different contexts which are lesstopical and more this statement-for our approaching this debate with such
removed as to time and space.And this with a view to
an earnestsenseof responsibility, have guided and pro.
Proving the outdated thesisthat the Arab neighboursare moted Yugoslavia’s persistent and active search for a
not prepared to admit the fact of the existenceof Israel solution to the Middle East problem throughout the period
with its legitimate rights as they are recognizedby the since1967.
United Nations.It is evidentthat the actualpurposeof this
is only to conceal the real policy of annexation and
117. There is no doubt that in this the role and personal
domination behindthe, by now, untenablenotion that what
initiatives of PresidentTito have held a particular place. Iiis
is involved is the very survivalof Israel.
visit under the most complicated circumstances, irnmc.
10

diately after the June war in 1967, to the Middle East,
where he proposed and obtained important acceptance for
the well known five points, his participation in the Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries in Lusaka in 1970, his numerous meetings with
Presidents Nasser and Sadat, and his exchanges of messages
and visits with the Heads of State of great Powers and other
partners, have constituted a special and tireless personal
effort on his part. The activity of the Yugoslav Government
and diplomacy in all actions of non-aligned countries, at the
Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries
in Georgetown in 1972, at the sessions of the General
Assembly and during our membership in the Security
Council, are also a matter of public record.

mean that the oppressed and occupied peoples are deprived of the right to fight for their liberation, The demand
for a peaceful solution, by political means, makes sense
only if the other side, too, is prepared for such a
settlement.
125. We are convinced that in their logical correlation
these principles constitute a platform with which no one in
favour of a solution of the Middle East question that would
combine the legitimate interests of all the factors involved
could find any substantive fault,
126. In our opinion, these principles also constitute the
foundation upon which a just and lasting peace should be
based. The achievement of such a just and lasting solution is
precisely the aim of resolution 242 j1967), adopted unanimously by the Security Council.

118. From the very outset the Yugoslav stand proceeded
from the following basic principles and positions that we
have not changed and which, in the opinion of my
delegation, have always provided a sound foundation for
overcoming the impasse in which the crisis and fighting in
the Middle East have been stagnating so dangerously for
many years.

127. If all the parties concerned endorse these principles
clearIy and unequivocally in spite of the different approaches adopted and the difficulties so far encountered in
the search for a peacefu1 solution, then we are convinced
that the way to peacewill be finally opened.In particular,
if Israel acceptswhat is actually the core of the problemthe non-acquisition of territory by force and respect for
international boundaries-we are certain it will then be
possible to find mutually acceptable solutions for the
remainingproblems. Actually, it would be easierto reach
agreement concerning the definitive and comprehensive
peaceful solution of the conflict if agreementwasreached
beforehand with regardto the common foundation upon
which peace in the Middle East can alone be based. The
absenceof such a cIear approach on the part of Israel
towards these basicissues,and its reluctance to accept the
principles of non-acquisition of territory by force and
respect for international boundaries-as shown by the
whole courseof the efforts exerted by the United Nations
over a period of six years with a view to achieving a
peaceful solution-have also prevented the reaching of
agreementon modalitiesandon the successful
operation of
the mechanism for negotiations foreseen by resolution

119. The first principle is the rejection of policy based on
force, non-recognition of gains through conquest; the
inadmissibility of Israel’s acquisition of any territories by
force, as a result of the aggressive war against its neighbours, and restoration of territories taken by force. This is
one of the most crucial principles of the entire body of
United Nations decisions and resolutions. Consequently, no
changes effected in the occupied territories can be recognized.
120. Second, total and unconditional withdrawal
of
Jsrael’s armed forces from all territories occupied as a result
of the 1967 war; withdrawal to the pre-5 June 1967 lines.
121, Third, respect for all international, internationally
recognized, boundaries in the region.
i22. Fourth, the right of all States of the Middle East,
including Israel, to independence, national sovereignty,
territorial integrity, non-interference; the right to live in
peace and free development within secure and recognized
borders. We have always made a difference between Israel’s
right to existence, security, recognition of its sovereignty
and national identity, which Yugoslavia, as is well known,
has never’ brought into question, and the repudiation of
Israel’s policy of territorial expansion to the detriment of
its Arab neighbours, its policy based on force and annexation.

242(1967).
128. We also consider very important the statements
contained in the concludingpart of the Secretary-General’s
report that

“For more than 25 years, the United Nations, and in
particular the Security Council, has had a major and
universally recognized responsibility in relation to the
Middle Eastquestion” [S/l 0929, para. 115.1
and that

123. Fifth, respect for the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, as peace in the Middle East can be
lasting only if it respects the legitimate interests of ail the
peoples of the region. Nothing of lasting value can be built,
either in the Middle East or elsewhere, on the enslavement
of a people whose only demand is that its right to its
homeland should be also secured and recognized.

“no Government or group of Governmentshasbeen able
to solve [this problem] outside the framework of the
United Nations”. [Ibid., para. I1 6.1
129. The Yugoslav delegation has repeatedly had the
opportunity to explain in the General Assemblyand in the
Security Council the reasonswhy the Middle East question,
asone of the major international problemslinked with the
United Nations from its inception, should,canand must be
solved only within the framework of and in co-operation
with the United Nations.

124. Sixth and finally, the solution of the Middle East
conflict by peaceful, political means, which is a basic
interest and constant demand of the international community as a whole. Of course, this cannot be construed to
I.1

September of this year-and their dynamic presence in the
United Nations and elsewhere should not lightly be
discounted as representing only some numerical automatic
strength. Both newly born countries and those that have
existed for a long time are entering the ranks of non.
alignment.Their views on the Middle Eastareprecisely the
viewsof that largenumber of countrieswhich havesuffered
most from aggression,annexations, oppression,insecure
borders, threats or use of force, coercion, hegemonistic
designs,and so on. Therefore they cannot be unmindful of
the rightsand interestsof all small and weakercountries,

130. At the same time we continue to believe that the
great Powers or the permanent members of the Security
Council could make a concrete contribution provided they
proceed from the position and necessity of ensuring the
implementation of the basic decisions of the United
Nations that take into account the legitimate interests of all
the parties concerned, and provided they secure the
broadest support of the international community for their
action. There exist instances of useful international experience showing that such responsible action by the great
Powers can produce valuable and universally acceptable
results ,

133. Wehope that this long overdue considerationof the
whole Middle East problem and all relevant efforts within
the United Nations framework will make it easier to
overcomethe obstaclesthat have madeit impossibleso far
to makeany progresstowards a just and lastingpeace in the
Middle East.

131. The great Powers, which as permanent members of
the Security Council undoubtedly bear a special responsibility with regard to the finding of a peaceful solutionand that is in their own interest also-could in this way
exercise influence for the more rapid maturing of conditions for the final implementation of the resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly and the Security Council.

134. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian):I thank
AmbassadorMojsov, the representative of Yugoslavia,
for his statement and for the friendly remarkswhich he
addressed
to the Soviet Union and to me personally. I fully
sharehis opinion and can, for my part, express sincere
satisfactionat the development and strengtheningof the
relations of friendship, co-operation and mutual trust
betweenthe Soviet Union and Yugoslavia. I can assurethe
representativeof Yugoslavia that the Soviet Union will
continue to do everything necessaryto ensurethe further
developmentand strengthening of friendly relations with
Yugoslavia.

132. In the formulation of those positions and views, our
policy is firmly based on resolution 242 (1967) and other
resolutions of the Security Council, on the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly-especially
those
adopted at its twenty-fifth,
twenty-sixth
and twentyseventh sessions-and on the resolutions of the meetings of
non-aligned countries which in relation to the Middle East
have always tried to exert political influence in the sense of
a just and peaceful solution, The growing number of
non-aligned countries-a phenomenon which will manifest
itself so impressively at the summit meeting of Heads of
State or Government of non-aligned countries in Algiers in

Themeetingroseat 12.50p.m.

12

HOW

TO ORTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Unit<* I Nations
publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the world. Consult
your bookstore
or write to: IJnited
Nations,
Sales
Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en ventc dans les librairies
ct les agences
dEpositnires
du monde cnticr. Informez-voua
aup&
de votre lihreire ou adressez-vous
A : Nations LJnies. Section des ventes. New York ou Gen&ve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las puhlicaciones
de las Nacionec Unidas estin en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase
a: Nariones
Unidas, Seccicin de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.

..Litho

in United

Natians,

New ‘!c: k

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other currencies)

73-82001~July

1979--2,200
