S/PV.7624

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7624th meeting

Wednesday, 17 February 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ramírez Carreño. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of))

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng
Mr. Iwad
Mr. Stehelin
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (S/2016/141)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-04071 (E)
*1604071*

S/PV.7624

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

response, the PAIGC decided to expel them and called
for their replacement in the National Assembly. To that
end, the Permanent Commission met on 15 January
2016 and declared the revocation of the terms of office
the 15 members.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and the
activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(S/2016/141)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Guinea-Bissau
and Timor-Leste to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Miguel
Trovoada, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, and His
Excellency Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Brazil.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/141, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau.
I now give the floor to Mr. Trovoada.
Mr. Trovoada (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to present to the
Security Council the report of the Secretary-General
on developments in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (S/2016/141).
Since the publication of the report, the situation in
Guinea-Bissau has continued to be characterized by
ongoing differences within the political class. Those
differences were in evidence during the vote on the
Government’s programme on 23 December 2015, during
which 15 members of the ruling African Party for the
Independence of Guinea and Cabo Verde (PAIGC)
abstained, despite instructions from the party. In
2/8

17/02/2016

Today, these political differences, which had been
confined to Parliament, have unleashed a true political
and legal imbroglio. The Speaker of the National
Assembly, on the one hand, and 3 of the 15 expelled
members, on the other, have separately petitioned the
Regional Court of Bissau to adjudicate the decision
of the Permanent Commission to revoke the mandates
of the aforementioned members of Parliament.
On 8 February, the Court issued an interim order
invalidating the suspension of the mandate revocation,
contrary to its original decision, which ordered those
same members to comply with the decision of the
Permanent Commission of the National Assembly.
In that context, on 1 February the President of
the Republic took the initiative of bringing together
the different parties to the conflict to seek, through
dialogue, a consensus outcome to the current political
impasse in Parliament. He decided to invite to the
presidential palace the Speaker of the National
Assembly and representatives of the PAIGC, the Party
for Social Renewal (PRS), the 15 Assembly members
whose mandates had been revoked, and representatives
of civil society for meetings that took place in the
presence of representatives of the group of five
international partners of Guinea-Bissau: the African
Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP), the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), the European Union
and the United Nations. President Vaz shared the
correspondence he had received concerning the current
crisis, including that in which he had been asked to use
his judicial influence to resolve the crisis. Each party
presented its position and its underlying political and
legal arguments.
On 2 February, the President convened a second
meeting at which the parties reiterated their respective
positions. On the one hand, the National Assembly
and the PAIGC maintained that the members had been
excluded legally; on the other, the 15 expelled members
were supported by the PRS, which considered their
exclusion to be illegal. Following the second round of
discussions, on 4 February the leader of the PAIGC sent
a letter to the President of the Republic, requesting that
the format of the meetings be modified and arguing that
16-04071

17/02/2016

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

S/PV.7624

the dialogue should be conducted among institutions
rather than individuals.

difficult by demonstrating restraint and outstanding
civic spirit.

Consequently, neither the National Assembly nor
the PAIGC have participated in subsequent meetings,
including that of 10 February, which took place in
the presence of former President Olusegun Obasanjo,
the Special Envoy of the President of Nigeria, and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of TimorLeste, Mr. Hernâni Coelho, who holds the rotating
presidency of the CPLP, accompanied by Mr. Murade
Murargy, Executive Secretary of that organization,
in addition to representatives of the group of five
international partners.

I therefore reiterate my appeal to the political
leaders to put the national interest above all individual
or group considerations. It is time for these leaders
to focus on seeking sustainable solutions instead of
indulging in mutual accusations that do nothing to settle
the crisis. For its part, the international community
has repeatedly demonstrated its determination to
help Guinea-Bissau to continue along the path of
development and peace. I encourage it to pursue its
activites on behalf of the country in an even more
concerted and coordinated manner.

In the meantime, I went to Senegal and Guinea from
3 to 8 February to talk with the leaders of those two
neighbouring States about recent political developments
in Guinea-Bissau. During our meeting, President Macky
Sall, Acting Chair of ECOWAS, expressed his concern
about the current political stalemate and assured me that
ECOWAS would continue to support the stabilization
process in Guinea-Bissau. He stressed, however,
the importance for the subregional organization of
receiving financial assistance to maintain its military
mission, the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau,
beyond 30 June. President Alpha Condé, who is also
ECOWAS Mediator for Guinea-Bissau, shared with me
the same concerns as his Senegalese counterpart.

If the institutions of the Republic and key
stakeholders were to agree on a road map or a stability
pact, that could be a starting point for establishing
conditions conducive to institutional stability, at least
until the end of current legislature. This prerequisite
is fundamental to the implementation of the “Terra
Ranka” development programme, which was endorsed
by international partners at the round table of Brussels,
in March 2015, and enjoys significant approval among
the people of Guinea-Bissau.

The more the institutions of the State and the
principal political players are divided, the more the
ongoing political situation will gain in complexity,
thereby delaying the implementation of essential
reforms. As the national stakeholders attempt to
resolve their differences, and following the recent
contradictory decisions of the Regional Court of
Bissau, I again urgently appeal to them to attach all due
importance and priority to frank and sincere dialogue,
in strict compliance with the Constitution and the law.
Any other formula outside these parameters will only
perpetuate the cycle of political instability that has so
long prevailed in the country.
Moreover, if it were to persist, this institutional
stalemate would damage the people’s chances of
enjoying basic social services such as health care and
education, condemning them to continue to pay the
price for the failure of their political elite to keep their
promises for a future better. I take this opportunity
to congratulate the people of Guinea-Bissau on the
role constructive they have played during this period

I therefore urge all stakeholders, especially the
President of the Republic, the Speaker of the National
Assembly, the Prime Minister and the political parties,
to stick to the path of dialogue and to consider the
possibility of adopting a stability pact in the interests
of the nation. As the Secretary-General indicates in
his latest report on Guinea-Bissau, the United Nations
stands ready to support any initiative to strengthen
stability in that country, provided that its leaders
demonstrate the political will to commit themselves to
that end.
Despite the progress made in strengthening
domestic security, I remain concerned about the
increase in organized crime in the country, due to the
current crisis and the concommitent weakening of
State institutions. The recent acts of armed robbery
at the home of a member of the Government and the
residence of a United Nations international staff
member illustrate the deterioration of the environment
security in Guinea-Bissau.
As members can see, the political situation in the
country is worrisome, and maintaining United Nations
commitment remains essential. I therefore reiterate the
Secretary-General’s request that the Security Council
extend the mandate of the United Nations Integrated

16-040713/8

S/PV.7624

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, which expires
on 29 February, in order to allow the mission to maintain
its activities and programmes to consolidate peace and
the rule of law in Guinea-Bissau.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Trovoada for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. De Aguiar Patriota.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): Let me start by
thanking you, Sir, for inviting me today and giving me
the opportunity to address the Council in my capacity
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), in the presence of
Mr. Miguel Trovoada, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), whose timely briefing is welcome and
useful to the future deliberations and decisions of this
Council.
The current political impasse in Guinea-Bissau is
riddled with institutional challenges that continue to
affect the lives of Bissau-Guineans while preventing
them from reaping the fruits of progress and a better
life. Since the last time I briefed the Council, on
28 August 2015 (see S/PV.7514, p. 3), the Peacebuilding
Commission has remained actively engaged with the
relevant stakeholders. We have issued three statements
expressing support for finding a lasting solution to the
crisis while signalling the responsibility of the political
actors to swiftly step up their efforts to enable the
country to move forward with its peacebuilding agenda.
I have personally engaged with a large number
of key stakeholders, including the Department of
Political Affairs in the United Nations Secretariat, as
well as the leadership of UNIOGBIS and countries
in the region. In that regard, I would like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to Mr. Trovoada’s ongoing
efforts to exercise his good offices and to welcome the
recent visit by Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo, Special Envoy
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), and representatives of the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries. We greatly value
their cooperation with the PBC in working to link
the peacebuilding agenda for Guinea-Bissau to the
country’s long-term priorities.
With regard to the situation unfolding before us, the
PBC believes that the political class’s failure to reach
the consensus on decisive issues that could put Guinea-

4/8

17/02/2016

Bissau back on the path to stability has generated an
unfortunate and prolonged period of uncertainty. It is
equally disappointing and regrettable considering that
the lack of conditions for stability in the country has
forced international partners to delay the disbursement
of the considerable financial resources pledged last
March in Brussels at a donor conference for funding the
national peacebuilding programme. It is disheartening
that the momentum gained last year in the wake of
the donor conference is losing steam, and the fact that
disbursement has taken so long may only worsen the
current situation in Guinea-Bissau.
However, amid the political turbulence, we continue
to see reassuring signs, such as the fact that the divisions
among politicians have not translated into violence in
the streets or regions of the country. We would also
like to highlight the stance of the armed forces and the
independence of the justice system, both of which have
been respecting and upholding the constitutional order,
as well as the role of the ECOWAS Mission in GuineaBissau (ECOMIB) in defusing potential flare-ups of
violence during the tense times the country has been
dealing with. In that regard, the PBC believes it is crucial
that the Security Council endorse the continuation of
the ECOWAS Mission beyond its mandate’s expiration
in June. I urge Council members and other countries
to provide the political and financial support necessary
for ECOMIB’s extension. Our support for the people of
Guinea-Bissau should emphasize these signs, as well
as empowering civil society actors, especially women
and young people, who are among those continuing to
demand that their elected representatives be sensitive to
their grievances and show civic responsibility.
The PBC is committed to working with the
Council to support and strengthen the role of the
United Nations and of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of UNIOGBIS, along
with the mission’s continued presence in GuineaBissau. Today more than ever, it is crucial to ensure
a solid and effective United Nations presence in
Guinea-Bissau that coordinates and promotes the
international community’s efforts to assist the country
and its authorities and people. We also encourage the
efforts of regional actors such as the African Union
and ECOWAS, which have been coherently articulating
the urgent need to overcome the current impasse. Our
joint efforts should continue to aim at preventing the
political crisis from undermining the progress achieved
so far.

16-04071

17/02/2016

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Because the solutions to Guinea-Bissau’s endemic
problems must be initiated and carried out by the
Bissau-Guineans themselves, the importance of
national leadership and ownership as catalysts for
political change cannot be overemphasized. Political
will and constructive and consensual dialogue, coupled
with courageous leadership, such as we know BissauGuineans are capable of, are needed more than ever,
and should be transformed into a powerful force that
can outweigh the actions of spoilers.
The seeds of economic and social growth have been
sown in Guinea-Bissau by the Bissau-Guineans through
their adoption of a long-term vision for peacebuilding
and institutional reform. Their motivation is clear — to
leave behind the dark days of widespread poverty and
political instability. The popular cry in favour of a
sovereign choice to return to democracy must not be
ignored or silenced. It should be upheld, and we are
therefore called on to act with determination. The
international community has the important task of
helping to make that vision become a reality. To achieve
it, we must be coherent and consistent in our messages
and deeds. It is therefore incumbent on the international
partners to work together and remain engaged long
after the end of the current crisis.
The difficulties in improving governance in
Guinea-Bissau should not prevent the country from
moving forward on key development opportunities.
The PBC believes it is important to deliver consistent
messages to the national authorities and stakeholders
in which the emphasis is on confidence-building and
on realizing the magnitude of the opportunity to move
forward with reforms. The PBC would encourage
the holding of a meeting of the International Contact
Group on Guinea-Bissau as an opportunity to deepen
the dialogue and cooperation between the international
community and the Government of Guinea-Bissau.
I would like to conclude by saying that the PBC
considers it extremely important to develop and nurture
its cooperation and relationship with the Council.
We value the complementarity that the PBC and the
Security Council can bring to addressing politically
charged situations. In the specific context of GuineaBissau, we see an opportunity to apply joint positive
leverage to find a solution to the current impasse and
work towards an outcome that will benefit a country in
dire need.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador De Patriota for his informative briefing.

S/PV.7624

I now give the floor to the representative of GuineaBissau.
Mrs. Pinto Lopes D’Alva (Guinea-Bissau): We
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
accession to the presidency of the Council for the month
of February, and to wish you success in your work.
I would especially like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for the report on Guinea-Bissau (S/2016/141)
that has just been presented and for his personal
engagement with the latest developments in my country.
We very much appreciate and commend the work of his
Special Representative, Mr. Miguel Trovoada, and his
team. I would also like to thank Ambassadors Antonio
de Aguiar Patriota, Permanent Representative of Brazil;
Sofia Mesquita Borges, Permanent Representative of
Timor-Leste; and Fodé Seck, Permanent Representative
of Senegal, the Chairs, respectively, of the GuineaBissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP) and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), for their statements and engagement
on Guinea-Bissau.
Today’s meeting of the Council is taking place at the
time when Guinea-Bissau is facing a serious political
crisis that is compromising the normal functioning
of State institutions and jeopardizing all the gains
achieved after the general elections of 2014, including
the very encouraging results of the Brussels roundtable donor conference. As we can see, the instability
in Guinea-Bissau has not ended with its elections, and
the situation the country is currently facing clearly
illustrates that. That is why we are appealing to the
international community to remain engaged with
us in helping to strengthen our institutions and work
much more closely with the national authorities and all
political stakeholders in order to guide us, through open
and frank dialogue, so as to mitigate the crisis situation
that is endangering our peace and stability.
Despite of the tensions that exist within the
Republic’s major institutions and the country’s main
political parties, Bissau-Guineans throughout the
country continue to behave relatively peacefully and
calmly even as their socioeconomic well-being is being
severely affected and their dreams and aspirations are
once again on hold. We know that it is our primary
responsibility to bring peace and stability to our
country in order to achieve economic development and
prosperity for all. But the long-suffering population
does not deserve to pay a high price for the difficulties

16-040715/8

S/PV.7624

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

encountered along the hard road to peace in GuineaBissau. They are counting on the international
community to remain engaged and to not abandon
Guinea-Bissau.
For Guinea-Bissau, the path to democracy has
not been easy to traverse. However, we believe that
the latest crisis, although more complicated in some
ways and costly to our people, is bringing us much
closer to the stable democracy we seek. The fact
that all the parties involved in the current political
crisis have been undertaking legal steps to resolve
their differences through the national courts is to be
highlighted and commended. We can say that these
little democratic achievements are in part the result
of a series of institutional reforms initiated by the
Government. Notwithstanding all the reforms on its
agenda, including public administration and justice,
security sector reform still is one of the priorities for
the Government, which is very engaged through the
Ministry of Defence and its security sector reform
steering committee, established for better follow-up and
proper implementation of this important reform. In that
vein, it is crucial that partners fulfil their commitment
to Guinea-Bissau with regard to the reform process by
providing their financial support to the pension fund
for the demobilization of military and police officers,
as well as by contributing financially to the special
fund for retired former freedom fighters.
The position of the military during the latest crisis
is to be commended, and the best way to ensure this
attitude prevails is to complete the security sector
reform to guarantee a smooth demobilization process
and dignified retirement or return to civilian life. We
are convinced that, with the effective implementation
of all reforms in the country, Guinea-Bissau will be
able to really achieve the needed peace and stability,
which consequently would help to create an enabling
environment to attract foreign and domestic investment,
create jobs for youth, reinforce women’s empowerment
through more opportunities for decent jobs, and reduce
poverty, leading to the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals for our people.
Allow me to commend before the Council the fact
that, despite the current political situation in GuineaBissau, last week the Republic of Timor-Leste disbursed
$250,000 for the national dialogue and reconciliation
process, as part of their pledge at the Brussels round
table conference last year. The gesture of honouring the
commitment they made in Brussels should be followed
6/8

17/02/2016

by other friends and partners of Guinea-Bissau. In that
regard, as it will soon be one year since the Brussels
conference, the Government intends to hold a meeting
in Bissau, in late March, to review its results and assess
the best follow-up mechanisms for its implementation.
Therefore, the fulfilment of the pledges made is very
important to us.
The engagement of our regional and subregional
partners, friends and the entire international community
has been very helpful to peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau.
That is why, in consultation with ECOWAS, the CPLP
and the co-Chairs of the International Contact Group on
Guinea-Bissau, the Government wishes to have the next
meeting of the group take place here in New York at the
end March. The engagement of ECOWAS — through
its Chair, the President of Senegal, our neighbour, and
its Special Envoy, former President of Nigeria, as well
as the President of Guinea — on bringing Guineans to
dialogue is very much appreciated.
We commend the work that the ECOWAS Mission
in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) has been doing in GuineaBissau, and welcome the renewal of its mandate. We
appeal to all other partners of Guinea-Bissau to provide
the financial support needed for ECOMIB to continue
the important mission of ensuring peace and security
in the country.
We welcome the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), and hope that through
the lessons learned from past mandates, the renewed
mandate would bring new perspectives to better
help Guinea-Bissau in its peacebuilding efforts. The
Government of Guinea-Bissau supports the one-strong
office of UNIOGBIS in Bissau, where all efforts
and resources are centred on the purpose of helping
peacebuilding efforts and bringing stability to the
country.
In conclusion, allow me to thank the members of
the Council and the entire international community for
their continuous support to Guinea-Bissau.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Timor-Leste.
Mrs. Mesquita-Borges (Timor-Leste): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Sir, for assuming
the rotating presidency for this month. I also thank
you for convening this meeting. I also want to thank
Miguel Trovoada, Special Representative of the
16-04071

17/02/2016

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau, for his briefing
to the Council and for his strenuous efforts to assist the
Bissau-Guinean authorities to resolve the crisis.
I am honoured to address the Council on behalf
of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries
(CPLP), whose members are Angola, Brazil, Cabo
Verde, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique,
Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe and my own country,
Timor-Leste.
The CPLP member States regret the current
political impasse and remain deeply concerned about
the current situation in Guinea-Bissau. We call on all
stakeholders — namely, the organs of sovereignty, the
political parties, civil society and others — to engage
in constructive, inclusive political dialogue, while
respecting democratic principles and the Constitution.
Statesmanship is required to move forward with
both the national reform agenda and along the path
to stability, which requires national leadership and
ownership. In that connection, we highlight the fact
that the constitutional order, as well as the role played
by the judicial system, continue to be upheld in GuineaBissau. We also highlight the non-involvement of the
armed forces. While it is the sole responsibility of the
authorities in Guinea-Bissau to resolve the political
crisis, it is crucial that the process fully respect the
Constitution and the rule of law. The current impasse
has impacted the reform agenda that has been initiated,
in particular in the security and justice sectors, which
have been stalled for over six months.
The national strategic development plan — entitled
“Terra Ranka” — reflects the aspirations of the BissauGuineans for greater political stability and socioeconomic
development, as well as for the consolidation of the
rule of law and the protection and promotion of civil,
political, economic, social and cultural rights. The
document, presented by President José Mário Vaz and
the former Prime Minister Domingos Simões Pereira at
the donor round table in Brussels in March, garnered
the support of the international partners. It is deeply
concerning that the instability in the country has forced
international partners to delay disbursements of pledges
made in March. Such delays will only affect the people
of Guinea-Bissau, who are already suffering a highly
negative social and economic impact.
We call on the international community to continue
supporting Guinea-Bissau and its people in the
implementation of the State reforms and development
plans, while stressing that the key responsibility

S/PV.7624

for achieving the necessary stable environment for
political and institutional cooperation rests with the
national stakeholders. Last week, my country provided
$250,000, as the first tranche of a pledge made during
the Brussels round table, as part of an effort to support
national reconciliation dialogue activities. Last July,
Portugal also began the implementation of its strategic
cooperation programme as follow-up to the €40 million
pledge announced at the Brussels round table.
The CPLP wishes to recognize the concerted efforts
of the international community to assist Guinea-Bissau
in this crisis. In that regard, we appreciate and commend
the efforts of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), in
particular those of Ambassador De Patriota as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the PBC.
We also welcome the efforts made by regional
leaders and by regional organizations such as the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). In particular, we thank
ECOWAS for the important role played by the ECOWAS
Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) in maintaining
peace and security in Guinea-Bissau. We also welcome
the recent visit by the ECOWAS Special Envoy, His
Excellency Mr. Obasanjo, and express appreciation
for all his efforts. ECOMIB has played a critical role
during this time of instability, and the CPLP expresses
its full support for a possible extension of its mandate.
We encourage donor countries and the Security Council
to provide sufficient political and financial support for
ECOMIB’s work.
This indeed is a crucial moment for Guinea-Bissau.
It is of the utmost importance that the international
community stand by the country in consolidating
the much-needed path to stability and development.
The extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Bissau in its present format
would definitely rightly express the United Nations
commitment and engagement towards Guinea-Bissau
and its people.
To conclude, we take this opportunity to highlight
the recent visit made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Timor-Leste and current Chair of
the Council of Ministers of the CPLP, His Excellency
Mr. Hernâni Coelho, and the Executive Secretary of the
CPLP, Ambassador Murargy, to Guinea-Bissau from
10 to 12 February. In that regard, we call for the early
convening of the International Contact Group, in line
with the call made by ECOWAS in December, in order
to support the process of national dialogue towards

16-040717/8

S/PV.7624

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

the consolidation of peace and democracy in GuineaBissau. We, the CPLP, remain ready to assist in the
holding of the meeting in March, as just stated by the
representative of Guinea-Bissau.
The CPLP stands ready, together with the rest of
the international community, to continue our support to
Guinea-Bissau in respect of national ownership.

8/8

17/02/2016

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

16-04071
