A/61/PV.85

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-first session

85

th plenary meeting
Friday, 26 January 2007, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Al-Khalifa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bahrain)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Statement by the President
The President: At this first meeting of the
General Assembly in 2007, I would like to wish all
members a very happy new year. I hope that we can
begin this year by working even more closely together
in a spirit of cooperation, mutual trust and collective
responsibility.

contributions due from it for the preceding two
full years.”
May I therefore take it that the General Assembly
takes note of the information contained in document
A/61/709?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 44 (continued)
Culture of peace

Agenda item 122 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/61/709)
The President: I should like, in keeping with
established practice, to invite the attention of the
General Assembly to document A/61/709, which
contains a letter from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the General Assembly in which he
informs the Assembly that 16 Member States are in
arrears in the payment of their financial contributions
to the United Nations within the terms of Article 19 of
the Charter.
I should like to remind delegations that, under
Article 19 of the Charter,
“A Member of the United Nations which is in
arrears in the payment of its financial
contributions to the Organization shall have no
vote in the General Assembly if the amount of its
arrears equals or exceeds the amount of the

Draft resolution (A/61/L.53)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held the debate on agenda item 44 at its 47th
and 48th plenary meetings on 3 November 2006.
Members will also recall that the Assembly previously
adopted two resolutions — resolutions 61/45 and
61/221 — on 4 and 20 December 2006, respectively.
The Assembly now has before it a draft resolution
issued as document A/61/L.53.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
United States of America to introduce draft resolution
A/61/L.53.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): I am
pleased to announce that, since the original submission
of the draft resolution, Benin, Bolivia, Brazil,
Colombia, the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Ghana,
Grenada, Honduras, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Liberia,
Madagascar, Maldives, Mauritius, Monaco, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Paraguay, the Republic of Korea, Saint

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

07-22169 (E)

*0722169*

A/61/PV.85

Kitts and Nevis, San Marino, Senegal, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Timor-Leste and Togo have also joined
as sponsors.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of 103
sponsors. As we prepare for Monday’s observance of
the International Day of Commemoration in memory of
the victims of the Holocaust, it is crucial that the
General Assembly declare unambiguously and
forcefully its condemnation, without any reservation,
of any denial of the Holocaust. The draft resolution we
are introducing builds on the strong foundation of
resolution 60/7 of 2005 in making clear that all people
and all States have a vital stake in a world free of
genocide.
The terrible events of the Holocaust are deeply
disturbing and will always remain so. It was one of the
most tragic moral catastrophes in the history of
humankind. We remember it — indeed, we must
remember it — to ensure that such events are never
repeated. Those who would deny the Holocaust — and,
sadly, there are some who do — reveal not only
ignorance but their moral failure as well.
Finally, the draft resolution urges all Member
States unreservedly to reject any denial of the
Holocaust as a historical event, either in full or in part,
or any activities to that end. By so doing, the Assembly
places its moral authority and its political will squarely
behind the very first words of our Charter, “to save
succeeding generations”.
The United Nations was founded in the
immediate aftermath of the Second World War and of
the Holocaust. It is particularly fitting to remember this
legacy.
On behalf of the sponsors, I offer draft resolution
A/61/L.53 for adoption. We hope that all Member
States will join in consensus so that the United Nations
may speak as one on this vital issue.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/61/L.53. Before giving the floor to
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, who
wishes to speak in explanation of position before
action is taken on the draft resolution, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote or position are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Gharibi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish to
place on the record my delegation’s deep concern over,

2

and rejection of, the attempts made by certain members
to misuse the General Assembly’s procedure to raise an
issue that has never been on the agenda of its sixty-first
session and that has no relevance to the agenda item
under which the draft resolution at hand has been
submitted.
There is every reason to believe that today’s
attempt is both procedurally and substantively flawed.
Indeed, the intention behind this move can by no
means be regarded as a genuine one. The main
sponsor’s aim in presenting this draft resolution to the
Assembly lies in its mischievous intention to pursue its
narrow political interests through all means, including
the misuse of this body.
If the thrust of the draft resolution is to condemn
the crime of genocide, the Assembly, through a great
number of resolutions, has already addressed that grave
concern. Like many other countries, we have
condemned genocide against any race or ethnic or
religious group, as a crime against humanity. We
reiterate that unambiguous position in this meeting
today. In our view, there is no justification for genocide
of any kind. Nor can there be any justification for the
attempts made by some, particularly by the Israeli
regime, to exploit past crimes as a pretext to commit
new genocides and crimes. Moreover, many abhorrent
cases of genocide that have regrettably occurred
throughout history necessitate a thorough and
comprehensive examination by the international
community in order to prevent the recurrence of such
crimes in the future.
Imposing a restrictive approach on such an
examination will certainly not serve this purpose. Only
by studying objectively what happened in the past can
we ensure that such crimes will never be repeated.
Undoubtedly, addressing historical events of horrific
enormity with a view to avoiding their recurrence
requires a commensurate degree of research, scrutiny
and rigour. The seriousness and sincerity of that
endeavour will indeed be undermined by rendering
political judgements on such events and closing the
door to any inquiry on their characteristics, scope and
extent.
The basic principles of democracy, including the
right to freedom of expression and belief, should pave
the way for exploring different aspects of historical
events without any arbitrary restrictions. Moreover,
genocide and the immense suffering associated with

07-22169

A/61/PV.85

that horrific crime should not be manipulated for
political purposes.
Regrettably, the Israeli regime has routinely
attempted to exploit the sufferings of the Jewish people
in the past as a cover for the crimes it has perpetrated
over the past six decades against Palestinians in the
occupied territories, including massacre, targeted
assassination, ethnic cleansing and State terrorism. The
international community should take strong action
against the atrocious crimes of that regime and not
allow it to manipulate humanitarian sentiments to
pursue its illegitimate goals.
We are of the view that the main aims behind
submitting this draft resolution are anything but a true
concern for genocide or the suffering it brings about.
Had that been the case, the main sponsors of the draft
resolution would necessarily have referred to other
cases of genocide perpetrated in various parts of the
world in the past and at present, especially the crimes
perpetrated in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Palestine,
Rwanda and the Balkans, all of which have inflicted
enormous suffering and pain on mankind.
In view of the aforementioned, we fully
dissociate ourselves from this entire hypocritical
political exercise.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of position before action is taken on the
draft resolution. The Assembly will now take action on
draft resolution A/61/L.53, entitled “Holocaust denial”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution A/61/L.53?
Draft resolution A/61/L.53
(resolution 61/255).

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor to
delegations wishing to speak in explanation of position
on the resolution just adopted, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): The delegation of Egypt
joined the consensus on this resolution, stressing once
again our strong belief that the Holocaust deserves to
be remembered as one of the dark points in the history
of humanity. We thank the sponsors, particularly those
from among the European countries, for keeping this
memory alive and for working towards correcting those
mistakes.

07-22169

The adoption of this resolution today, under
agenda item 44, “Culture of peace”, can only serve as
another sobering reminder that the recurrence of such
heinous crimes of genocide can be prevented only
through intensifying the efforts of the international
community to enhance and vitalize the cultures of
peace, tolerance, coexistence, recognition and
prevention of the suffering of others, regardless of their
religion, ethnicity or beliefs.
The United Nations has a particular responsibility
in that regard: to enhance the dialogue among
civilizations, cultures and religions and to do whatever
it takes to prevent the recurrence of such crimes in any
part of the world, basing itself on equality of suffering
and on the rule of law.
The painful memories of the Holocaust and the
wrath it brought into the world should also serve as a
poignant reminder of the necessity of combating
racism, intolerance and xenophobia in all their forms.
The history of the Holocaust should serve as a lesson:
that appeasing intolerant ideologies and policies will
cost humanity dearly. The international community
should therefore not remain complacent in combating
the increasing tide of Islamophobia in many parts of
the world.
Mrs. Asmady (Indonesia): My delegation joined
the consensus on the adoption of this resolution for the
following reasons. The Holocaust is undoubtedly one
of the most terrible crimes against humanity ever
committed. It reminds us of the dangers inherent in all
forms of prejudice and discrimination. For more than
50 years, the world has struggled with that reality and
its implications for the relations between and among
peoples. It is one of the reasons for the popular
political sentiment that swept the world in the post-war
period: “Never again!” There can be no forgetting its
lessons.
Having said that, I wish to stress that the
Holocaust is hardly the only human tragedy to offer us
those or similar lessons. Modern history is full of
similar tragedies, being replete with human conflicts in
which man’s inhumanity to man is amply demonstrated
and in which countless people are eliminated,
sometimes in the most horrendous ways.
My delegation is of the view that the highest
tribute we can pay to the victims of the Holocaust and
other horrendous acts, such as ethnic cleansing and
other historic mass murders, is to acknowledge those

3

A/61/PV.85

horrors by reaffirming our resolve to work collectively
to prevent such crimes against humanity from ever
happening again and to stop them in their tracks
whenever and wherever they threaten to erupt.

Hanoun and Gaza on 16 November 2006, which
shocked the conscience of the General Assembly and
of the Human Rights Council. Those facts are part of a
holocaust in stages.

However, in acting upon the resolution, which
condemns without any reservation any denial of the
Holocaust, we cannot help but be reminded of the
question of a standard of morality in the exercise of the
freedom of expression, which is related to other issues
but continues to pose similar challenges to our
common humanity. Among those challenges is the
controversy over the cartoons of the Prophet
Mohammed, which has created tensions and divisions
among peoples in many parts of the world.

Furthermore, the horrors of the past should be the
best reason to demand greater respect for international
law, international humanitarian law and human rights.
Because of the invasion of Iraq, carried out in the name
of democracy by the United States of America outside
the framework of the Organization, hundreds of
thousands of innocent Iraqis are also victims of a
holocaust, because they have been systematically
attacked and disrespected.

We must accept that it is imperative to develop
societies free from hatred and bigotry — societies that
accept pluralism and nurture peace and respect for
diverse cultural and religious values. It is our strong
view that freedom of expression should be observed
within that parameter. Open and frank dialogue is the
best avenue for promoting that value and mutual
understanding of and respect for differences, including
in terms of cultural and religious values.
Mr. Palavicini-Guédez (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela joined the consensus
on the adoption of resolution 61/255, in keeping with
our constitution and with historical Bolivarian
principles. Likewise, we supported resolution 60/7 and
its explanatory memorandum (A/60/194, annex I),
which stated, in its paragraph 2, that the Holocaust was
“a systematic and barbarous attempt to annihilate an
entire people, in a manner and magnitude that have no
parallel in human history”.

Our delegation reiterates its position that the
education programmes proposed in resolution 60/7 and
in the resolution that we have adopted today should
have a broad orientation requiring a sound balance so
that holocausts will cease and the United Nations will
develop a comprehensive awareness of prevention and
of the crime against humanity that is genocide.
All of us, without any distinction as to race,
religion or political ideology, must comply with and
ensure respect for the norms of international law
defending the right to life, thus demanding respect for
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
The General Assembly has just adopted draft
resolution A/61/L.53, on Holocaust denial. By this
action today, the Assembly reaffirms its condemnation
of the Holocaust as a crime against humanity. This is a
strong reminder to all that the international community
is united in opposing all crimes against humanity.

Under that definition, millions of human beings
were the victims of the Holocaust during the Second
World War. That is also why we had to support this
resolution. The deaths at Hiroshima and Nagasaki were
a Holocaust as well, which is why we must remember
them.

For the dignity of all humanity, we must
strengthen our resolve to prevent such atrocities,
whenever and wherever they might occur. We can learn
from the words of Edmund Burke, who said: “All that
is needed for the triumph of evil is that good men do
nothing”.

Moreover, that definition should cause us to
reflect on the holocaust perpetrated, little by little,
against the Palestinian people. The General Assembly
has repeatedly acknowledged the abuses and excesses
that, in the name of self-defence, have made the
victims of the Holocaust the perpetrators of a new
holocaust against the Palestinians. We must also
remember the slaughter of Palestinian civilians in Beit

I now give the floor to delegations wishing to
make statements on this item.

4

Mr. Gillerman (Israel): Thank you, Madam
President, for your words just now.
My delegation wishes to thank, first and
foremost, all the sponsors of this resolution on
Holocaust denial, as well as all the members in this

07-22169

A/61/PV.85

Hall who supported the resolution and what it stands
for.

resolution on Holocaust remembrance last year and are
supporting this one on Holocaust denial.

The adoption by consensus of resolution 60/7, on
Holocaust remembrance, more than a year ago was a
historic milestone for the General Assembly — indeed,
for the United Nations — and an important step in
bolstering the founding principles of this world body.

This coming Monday, knowing that the nations of
the world will not sit idly by and condone Holocaust
denial, we will observe the second annual International
Day of Commemoration in memory of the victims of
the Holocaust. This day is an opportunity for all of us,
for this Assembly, for all Member States, and for the
people of the world to recommit ourselves to human
rights and the prevention of genocide. Protecting the
memory of the Holocaust is an act of ensuring the
future of mankind.

But even more, the resolution on Holocaust
remembrance reflected the understanding of this
Assembly that the lessons of the Holocaust are
universal and that speaking out and educating about the
Nazis’ brutal and systematic murder of the Jewish
people must focus world attention on the horror of
genocide and compel all nations and people of good
will to recommit their efforts to preventing such
atrocities.
Regrettably, as we have seen since then, those
lessons are being rejected and flouted in certain parts
of the world. While the nations of the world gather
here today to voice in unison their collective
commitment to condemning Holocaust denial, without
reservation and in any and all forms, a member of this
Assembly continues to deny that eternal truth. While
the nations of the world gather here to affirm the
historicity of the Holocaust with the intent of never
again allowing genocide, a member of this Assembly is
acquiring the capabilities to carry out its own. The
President of Iran is in fact saying: “There really was no
Holocaust, but just in case, we shall finish the job”. His
pathetic mouthpiece, who publicly disassociated his
country from the international community just now, has
amplified that call in the most cynical and hypocritical
way. The resolution adopted unanimously by the
international community today answers that horrible
statement in the most emphatic way.
It is against that backdrop that the resolution on
Holocaust denial was conceived. The international
community carries the profound responsibility of
ensuring that the Holocaust and its lessons are never
forgotten. The Holocaust serves as a warning to all
people of the profound dangers of hatred, bigotry and
racism.
Joining this resolution is a reaffirmation that the
Holocaust is not up for question or debate. The lessons
of the Holocaust carry such universal weight that they
cannot be carried solely by the Jewish people. That is
precisely why the nations of the world supported the

07-22169

Today’s resolution reminds those who viciously
deny the Holocaust that they cannot escape the truth of
reality. Let the next 72 hours, between today’s adoption
of the resolution on Holocaust denial and Monday’s
observance of Holocaust remembrance day, be a time
of reflection and commitment for all us to affirm our
collective duty of remembering the Holocaust and to
act now to prevent the next one.
Indeed, at this time, the words of Winston
Churchill, proclaimed more than two years before the
start of the Second World War on 12 November 1936,
are more poignant than ever:
“The era of procrastination, of half measures, of
soothing and baffling expedients, of delays, is
coming to a close. In its place, we are entering a
period of consequences.”
Allow me on this solemn occasion to speak to the
Holocaust survivors and families of the victims around
the world, and especially in Israel, and let me say to
them: “This is for you. I dedicate this historic
resolution to you, giving you back your personal
history which evil minds have tried to erase and rob
you of. As I speak here now, the sun is setting over
Israel, heralding in the holy day of the Sabbath. As you
say your prayers today, you can feel that the whole
world is praying with you, telling you that you are not
alone. And it is from this Hall, on the eve of that holy
day, that I say to each and every one of you: ‘Shabbat
Shalom’”.
Mr. Matussek (Germany): Before I speak on
behalf of the European Union, let me first emphasize
that I am aware that the unprecedented crime of the
Holocaust was committed by Germans and in the name
of Germany, and that from that stems our very special
responsibility. In 1945, after the liberation of the camps

5

A/61/PV.85

and the defeat of Germany, it would have been
presumptuous for us to hope that a country that had
turned Europe into a place of war and genocide would
soon be accepted as a close partner within a European
Union.
I have the honour to speak on this solemn
occasion on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; the European Free Trade
Association
countries
Iceland,
Norway
and
Liechtenstein, members of the European Economic
Area; as well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova
align themselves with this declaration.
The European Union, like the United Nations
itself, was born out of the catastrophe of war and
genocide. Our peoples at that time were moved by the
firm resolve to never let that happen again.
The Holocaust took place in Europe, but its
significance reaches beyond Europe. It was
unprecedented within human history. Therefore, every
year on 27 January, the General Assembly and many
United Nations Member States commemorate the
liberation of the Nazi death camps. They honour the
memory of the victims of the Holocaust — millions of
Jews in the first place, but also other groups like the
Sinti and Roma people, persons with disabilities and
persons who were persecuted because of their sexual
orientation.
In 2005, the General Assembly created the
International Day of Commemoration in memory of the
victims of the Holocaust. The decision was taken by
consensus and is proof of the resolve expressed then by
each United Nations Member State not to let the
Holocaust fall into oblivion or be ignored. The
commemoration of the victims of the Holocaust must
be a defining part of our common heritage and a
measure of each State’s commitment to a world free of
genocide. We must all understand the responsibility
imposed on us by the victims of the Holocaust.
Especially today, when ever fewer survivors can pass
on their personal experience of the Holocaust, it is vital
to find new ways of keeping alive the memory of those
terrible crimes for future generations.
By commemorating the Holocaust, we reaffirm
our responsibility to combat anti-Semitism, racism and

6

any form of political, ethnic or religious intolerance.
Anti-Semitism was the central historical context of the
Holocaust. Racism, intolerance and hatred may again
generate atrocities and genocidal crimes. It is the duty
of every member of today’s global community to
prevent that, but the first and foremost prerequisite for
taking up that duty is the readiness to face the truth. It
is the resolve neither to evade the truth nor to distort
historical facts. Such distortions are a shameful failure
of the responsibility we all share to ensure a world free
from such atrocities.
Therefore, in 2005, the European Union
supported the resolution by which January 27 was
designated as the annual International Day of
Commemoration in memory of the victims of the
Holocaust. It also fully endorses today’s resolution
condemning any attempt to deny the Holocaust and to
distort the historical truth. Every Member of these
United Nations should do likewise.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Second World War ended over 60 years
ago, but the memory of the monstrous crimes of
Nazism lives on. If we are to eliminate any possibility
of a future recurrence, we simply have no right to
forget the tragedy of the Holocaust. No one can remain
indifferent to anti-Semitism, xenophobia and racial or
religious intolerance.
Today, we see the Holocaust not only as a tragedy
of the Jewish people, but also as a tragedy of humanity.
That is no exaggeration, since the intent of the Nazis
was to follow up the fate of the Jews with a similar fate
for other peoples, the Slavs not last among them.
The adopted resolution calls on all United
Nations Member States to condemn not only the very
fact of denying the Holocaust as a historic event, but
also all actions aiming at that goal. That calls on us to
address the issue from a broader perspective, taking
into account ongoing processes in some parts of the
world. We cannot but include among such activities
attempts to revise the history of the Second World War
and the role and honoured accomplishments of those
who combated Nazism and liberated Europe from it. Is
not forgetting their heroism a way to whitewash the
fascism that unleashed the Holocaust?
Any State devoted to the ideals of democracy and
humanism should view as unacceptable any attempt to
glorify the accomplices of fascism, be they former
members of Waffen-SS units or other collaborators

07-22169

A/61/PV.85

who killed hundreds of thousands of civilians,
prisoners of war and prisoners of death camps. Such
attempts may even include declarations in some
countries of the day of liberation from fascism as a day
of mourning, plans to destroy monuments to those who
fought Nazism, or building monuments to those who
fought on the side of fascism. Those who advocate
such a revision of the Second World War should be
reminded that it is not by accident that the General
Assembly designated 27 January as the International
Day of Commemoration in memory of the victims of
the Holocaust. It was on that date in 1945 that the Red
Army liberated Auschwitz, one of the largest death
camps.
The memory of the heroism of the Soviet soldiers
and of the many millions of victims in our country will
never allow us to tolerate those who, guided by
opportunistic political interests, try to distort the
significance of the great victory over fascism. In our
country, we honour as sacred — and always will — the
memory of the victims of Nazism, including 6 million
Jews, 3 million of whom were citizens of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics. That is why Russia supports
the adoption of this important document by the General
Assembly and has joined as a co-sponsor.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): The
United States strongly supports today’s resolution,
which condemns without reservation any denial of the
Holocaust. This Assembly should be proud of adopting
today’s resolution by consensus. It is shameful that one
country decided to reject that consensus.
Tomorrow will be the sixty-second anniversary of
the liberation of Auschwitz, a Nazi death camp where
over 1 million people were murdered. To this day,
Auschwitz serves as a powerful symbol of what can
happen when tyranny and oppression go unchecked. As
we mourn those who lost their lives, we must, as
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon noted, reassert our
commitment to human rights, which was desecrated at
Auschwitz and by genocides and atrocities since.
The United States introduced and sponsored this
important resolution not as a rhetorical exercise, but
because of the implications of Holocaust denial in the
world today. Some experts on the topic have noted that
every genocide is followed by denial. Despite the
undeniable truth about the Holocaust, we are now
witnessing so-called scholars, even world leaders,

07-22169

attempting to revise history, masking a more dangerous
agenda.
The resolution is not about countering free speech
or intellectual thought; it is about avoiding future
disasters. One observer put it simply and powerfully
when he stated that “ the black hole of forgetting is the
negative force that results in future genocides” .
A little over a month ago, people around the
world marked International Human Rights Week and
renewed the solemn pledge of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, which was drafted in the
wake of the atrocities of the Second World War.
We take note that this body adopted by consensus
in 2005 a resolution unequivocally rejecting the denial
of the Holocaust as an historical event. We call upon
all Member States to follow through on that and
today’s resolution to include measures in their
educational systems that underscore the importance of
never denying the Holocaust. As Kofi Annan remarked
to us at the end of his tenure,
“some of the rhetoric used in connection with the
issue implies a refusal to concede the very
legitimacy of Israel’s existence, let alone the
validity of its security concerns… Today, Israelis
are often confronted with words and actions that
seem to confirm their fear that the goal of their
adversaries is to extinguish their existence as a
State and as a people” (S/PV.5584, p.4).
Indeed, the words and actions of some, in direct
violation of the Charter, underscore why this resolution
is so important. Just last month, the Iranian regime
sponsored a conference questioning the historical fact
of the atrocities of the Holocaust. Iranian President
Ahmadinejad has also called for the State of Israel to
be wiped off the map. That same regime is under
Security Council sanctions right now to prevent it from
developing nuclear weapons in direct violation of its
obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. The confluence of those three
forces cannot be viewed abstractly or in isolation from
each other. They create a cauldron of conflict that
cannot be ignored.
Some will cloak their hatred and hidden agenda
by invoking the right to free speech and academic
freedom. There is a categorical difference between free
speech and speech which wilfully and maliciously
ignores recognized historical facts in order to advance
an ulterior agenda. Conferences such as those

7

A/61/PV.85

sponsored by Iran are designed solely to polarize and
to incite hatred. If successful, they can then use that
hatred as a catalyst to justify genocide.

Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica supports the statement made by the
representative of Egypt.

It is also specious to diminish the Holocaust by
making false comparisons, such as we heard earlier this
morning from some delegations. As Kofi Annan
powerfully noted, “What was done to Jews and others
by the Nazis remains an undeniable tragedy, unique in
human history” (S/PV.5584, p. 4).

We supported resolution 61/255 on behalf of the
Costa Rican citizens who survived the Holocaust —
whose arms still bear the numbers tattooed on them in
the death camps of Europe — and in memory of the
families who were massacred in the Holocaust, as well
as on behalf of Costa Rican citizens of all religions,
ethnicities, sexual orientations and non-totalitarian
ideologies. We hope that with this resolution we are
making a contribution to humankind’s struggle to
ensure that there will be no more holocausts.

The United States stands firmly opposed to any
attempts to deny the Holocaust and to calls by anyone
for the destruction of Israel. This resolution reinforces
that message, and we encourage all Member States to
take concrete steps to make that message heard. To
deny the events of the Holocaust is tantamount to the
approval of genocide in all its forms. Today, we stand
together, saying to the world that we will not allow that
to happen.

8

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
44.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

07-22169
