S/2018/462

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 May 2018
Original: English

Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the request contained in the
statement by the President of the Security Council of 25 November 2015
(S/PRST/2015/23). It also responds to the Council’s request, in its resolution 2286
(2016), for reporting on the protection of medical care in armed conflict.
2.
In my previous report (S/2017/414), I underlined that the most effective way to
protect civilians is to prevent the outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence of
armed conflict. This remains my overarching priority. In this regard, dialogue and
inclusive peace processes that address the parties’ grievances and lead to sustainable
solutions, coupled with a long-term holistic approach that addresses the root causes
and prevents the escalation or recurrence of conflict, promotes human rights and the
rule of law and strengthens governance and institutions, are essential.
3.
In my report on peacebuilding and sustaining peace, issued in January 2018
(A/72/707-S/2018/43), I sought to forge a common vision, systems and capacities
across the United Nations to support Member States in sustaining peace and building
resilient and prosperous nations in line with their commitment to leave no one behind.
I look forward to working with Member States to take forward its recommendations.
At the same time, work continues within the United Nations to develop a prevention
platform that will allow the system to maximize its existing tools and resources in
support of a broad prevention agenda and greater accountability for violations.
4.
Where we cannot prevent or resolve conflict, we must strengthen the protection
of civilians. In doing so, we also contribute to the foundations for future peace. In my
previous report, I identified three protection priorities: enhance respect for
international humanitarian and human rights law and promote good practice by parties
to conflict; protect the humanitarian and medical mission and accord priority to the
protection of civilians in United Nations peace operations; and prevent forced
displacement and pursue durable solutions for refugees and internally displaced
persons. In the present report, I review progress made in relation to those priorities,
with a focus on enhancing respect for international law and promoting good practice.
5.
Section II below contains a review of the global state of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict during the period from 1 January to 31 December 2017. It
reveals a state of unrelenting horror and suffering affecting millions of women,
children and men across all conflicts. Civilians are routinely killed or maimed, and

18-06625 (E)

160518

*1806625*

S/2018/462

civilian objects damaged or destroyed, in targeted or indiscriminate attacks that
frequently involve the widespread use of explosive weapons. Civilians are forced
from their homes to meet a perilous fate, while countless others are missing.
Humanitarian and medical personnel are frequently targeted and killed or prevented
from responding to those in need. Meanwhile, conflict-driven food insecurity and the
potential for famine leave millions of lives in the balance. All this, and the decimation
of entire towns and cities and the once-vibrant communities and societies that were
their lifeblood, undermine the prospects for peace and stability and the restoration of
hope and opportunity for the future.
6.
The state of the protection of civilians is bleak, and the need for action to address
it is urgent. As discussed in section III below, as conflict becomes increasingly
urbanized, with the potential to affect tens of millions of people, ensuring the effective
implementation of international humanitarian and human rights l aw is of paramount
importance. The targeting of or failure to protect civilians cannot go unchallenged.
The Security Council and Member States can ill afford to abdicate their
responsibilities in the face of widespread violations and allow political differ ences to
prevent or undermine concerted action to address and prevent violations. The stakes
for civilians — and for international peace and security — are simply too high.
7.
Against that backdrop, there are glimmers of hope. First, there is growing
recognition among Member States of the instrumental role that respect for
international humanitarian and human rights law plays in their efforts to end and
prevent the spillover and recurrence of armed conflict, and to counter terrorism and
prevent violent extremism. Second, there are practical steps that have been, and could
again be, taken by parties to conflict and Member States to respect and ensure respect
for the law and enhance the protection of civilians.
8.
Drawing on these, in section IV below I recommend, first, that Member States
develop national policy frameworks that establish clear institutional authorities and
responsibilities for the protection of civilians; and second, that they support and
facilitate expanded efforts to engage non-State armed groups to enter into action plans
and develop codes of conduct, operational policy and other tools to ensure effective
protection and accountability. Such actions would constitute an important advance
towards effective implementation of the law and protection of civilians. At the same
time, I recognize the continuing need for heightened advocacy and a concerted effort
to ensure accountability for serious violations.

II. State of the protection of civilians
A.

Widespread civilian deaths and injuries and impact on
civilian objects
9.
Civilian populations continue to bear the brunt of armed conflicts across the
globe. Throughout 2017, tens of thousands of civilian women, children and men were
killed or suffered appalling injuries as victims of deliberate or indiscriminate attacks
by parties to conflicts affecting, inter alia, Afghanistan, the Central African Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Libya, Mali, Nigeria, Somalia, South
Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Ukraine and Yemen.
10. In 2017, the United Nations recorded the death or injury of more than 26,000
civilians in attacks in just six of those situations: 10,000 in Afghanistan, more than
8,000 in Iraq, some 2,600 in Somalia and approximately the same number in Yemen.
In the Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, attacks
killed more than 1,100 and almost 2,000 civilians, respectively. The vast numbers of
civilian deaths and injuries, combined with the testimony of victims and witnesses

2/18

18-06625

S/2018/462

and other reports, raise profound concerns as to the extent to which parties are taking
constant care to spare civilians from the effects of hostilities, as required by
international humanitarian law. Their obligation to do so, and the need for them to do
so, cannot be emphasized enough.
11. The impact of conflict on civilians and civilian objects was particularly acute
when fighting took place in densely populated areas and involved the use of explosive
weapons with wide-area effects. In the Syrian Arab Republic, for example, attacks
involving air- and ground-launched explosive weapons reportedly killed and injured
significant numbers of civilians in Aleppo, Dayr al-Zawr, Homs, Idlib, Raqqah and
Rif Dimashq and destroyed essential infrastructure, schools and hospitals. In Ira q,
according to data verified by the United Nations, at least 4,200 civilians were killed
and injured by shelling, air strikes and improvised explosive device attacks during
operations to retake areas of Ninawa Governorate and Mosul city between October
2016 and July 2017. Other sources estimate that the number of civilian casualties was
considerably higher. The fighting also led to the extensive destruction of homes and
essential infrastructure.
12. The use of improvised explosive devices by non-State armed groups in
Afghanistan, Libya, Mali, Nigeria, Somalia and the Syrian Arab Republic has also
caused significant numbers of civilian casualties. I n Afghanistan, for example,
624 civilians were killed and 1,232 injured by improvised explosive devices in 2017 .
The reported use of cluster munitions in 2017 in the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen
was of grave concern. I am also appalled by further reports of the use of chemical
weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic, which seriously challenge the global and long standing prohibition of such weapons, and the killing and injuring of even more
innocent civilians. Such reports must be properly investigated. Where use is
determined, Member States must find an appropriate way to identify those responsible
and hold them to account.
13. As already reported (see S/2018/250), in 2017, sexual violence continued to be
employed as a tactic of war, terrorism, torture and repression, including the targeting
of victims on the basis of their actual or perceived ethnic, religious, political or clan
affiliation. In many cases, such violence resulted in forcible displacement and
dispersal of the targeted community, with corrosive effects on social cohesion. That
alarming trend is common to a range of otherwise diverse conflicts, including in the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Mali,
Myanmar, Nigeria, Somalia and South Sudan. In those cases, to varying degrees, the
strategic nature of sexual violence was reflected in the selective targeting of victims
from specific ethnic, religious or political groups, mirroring the fault lines of the
wider conflict or crisis and, in some cases, in the explicit nationalist or extremist
ideologies espoused by the perpetrators. In such cases, conflict-related sexual
violence has served as an expression of ethnic hatred or has been employed as part of
“ethnic cleansing”, often accompanied by insults based on the victim’s identity and
presumed allegiance.
14. Children continued to be disproportionately affected by armed conflict in 2017,
and a further increase of cases of grave violations against children were verified.
Armed violence often stripped away layers of protection afforded by families and
society and led to a reduction of traditional safe spaces. Boys and girls were recruited
and used in support roles or as combatants, including across borders, and surges in
recruitment often coincided with increased levels of killing and maiming. Attacks on
schools and hospitals as well as denials of humanitarian access impeded children’s
ability to obtain education, health care and vital humanitarian aid. Children were also
subject to abduction, a tool often used to forcibly recruit children as well as for the
purpose of rape and other forms of sexual violence against children. Enabling children
affected by war to regain their childhood through the provision of community -based
18-06625

3/18

S/2018/462

psychosocial, educational and vocational reintegration programmes has been an
important factor in overcoming stigmatization, avoiding re-recruitment and breaking
the cycles of violence. However, too many children were unable to benefit from such
support owing to a lack of funding. Ensuring predictable and flexible funding for
reintegration processes through strengthened collaboration between child protection
actors and funding partners is therefore essential.
15. Concern mounted over attacks carried out on places of worship in a number of
conflicts in 2017, including in Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Libya and Yemen. In Afghanistan, the United Nations documented 38 such attacks,
resulting in 202 civilian deaths and 297 injuries — three times the number of the
attacks carried out in 2016. Some attacks, including on two mosques in Kabul in
August and October, appeared to deliberately target women. Conflict also continued
to take its toll on journalists in 2017, with killings, injuries and threats reported in,
inter alia, Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Libya, Somalia,
the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen. Such incidents have a serious impact on
independent reporting, which is essential for exposing human suffering, restraining
belligerents and building pressure for political solutions and accountability.

B.

Forced displacement
16. Forced displacement was a defining feature of conflict in 2017, swelling the
ranks of the approximately 65 million people displaced by conflict and violence at
the end of 2016, the vast majority of them within their own countries. By November
2017, there were a total of 6.1 million internally displaced persons in the Syrian Arab
Republic, including 1.8 million newly displaced that year alone. Three million people
in Yemen have been forced from their homes and, like those displaced in the Syrian
Arab Republic and elsewhere, face significant protection and assistance needs. In
Ukraine, an estimated 1.6 million people are internally displaced, with many unable
to access essential services.
17. The resurgence of violence in the Central African Republic in 2017 caused
further internal displacement affecting almost 700,000 people, while more than
500,000 out of a population of 4.7 million have fled abroad. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, more than 2 million people were internally displaced by
violence in 2017, doubling the overall number of the internally displaced to
4.5 million. As in other conflict-affected countries, displacement in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is protracted, straining the capacities of the internally
displaced and the communities that host them and leaving the displaced at risk of
prolonged harm. In the Sudan, while displacement declined in Darfur and other areas
in 2017, internally displaced persons faced continued violence, including killing and
rape. In Somalia, forced evictions increased in 2017, affecting some 200,000
internally displaced, out of a displaced population of 2.1 million.
18. Some 1.9 million South Sudanese were displaced internally, some of them
multiple times, as at the end of 2017. The militarization of camps and settlements for
the internally displaced in South Sudan, as well as in the Central Afric an Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq and Nigeria, underlined the need to
maintain the civilian and humanitarian character of camps and settlements. An
additional 2.4 million South Sudanese have sought refuge across borders, with
Uganda hosting more than 1 million of them, in addition to refugees from Burundi
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
19. Uganda, Turkey, Pakistan, Lebanon and other major refugee -hosting countries
continue to demonstrate considerable support for refugees. The future global compact
on refugees must strengthen the international response to large movements of

4/18

18-06625

S/2018/462

refugees, including by easing the burden on host countries, meeting the needs of
refugees and host communities and securing durable solutions. Similarly, t he
twentieth anniversary in 2018 of the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement
must mark the consolidation of efforts by Member States, the United Nations and
other relevant actors to strengthen the response to internal displacement. This
includes better understanding of urban displacement and strengthening the response
to protracted internal displacement.

C.

Constraints on humanitarian access
20. In 2017, widespread and persistent constraints on humanitarian access
jeopardized humanitarian operations and the ability of affected populations to meet
their basic needs in several conflicts. Besides active hostilities and logistical
challenges, the most severe constraints were bureaucratic impediments and attacks
against humanitarian personnel.
21. Bureaucratic impediments were reported in several conflict -affected areas,
including Chad, Iraq, Mali, Myanmar, Nigeria, South Sudan, the Sudan, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Ukraine, Yemen and the Occupied Palestinian Territory. In the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, humanitarian access to the Gaza Strip continued to be
restricted on security grounds, contributing to the deterioration in the humanitarian
situation and compromising access to essential services and health care. The rate of
the timely approval of permit applications for Palestinians to leave Gaza by way of
Israel, including for humanitarian reasons, dropped to 54 per cent, the lowest in a
decade. In non-Government-controlled areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of
eastern Ukraine, the imposition by the de facto authorities of additional registration
requirements for humanitarian programming and activities compounded an already
cumbersome process.
22. Counter-terrorism measures, including lengthy administrative processes and
legislation criminalizing certain activities necessary for the conduct of humanitarian
operations, continued to have an impact on humanitarian action. Member States
should meet their security objectives while safeguarding principled humanitarian
action by ensuring that counter-terrorism measures are designed and implemented in
accordance with international law. One important example of this is the European
Union directive on combating terrorism of March 2017, which exempts from its scope
humanitarian activities provided by impartial humanitarian organizations recognized
by international law. 1
23. Particular concerns exist over the use of starvation of the civilian population as
a method of warfare, which is prohibited by international humanitarian law. Siege and
siege-like situations are having a devastating impact on civilian populations. At the
end of 2017 in the Syrian Arab Republic, for example, some 420,000 people were
living in nine besieged areas while an additional 2.9 million were in hard -to-reach
areas. Only 820,000 of those people received some assistance during the year.
24. In Yemen, the provision of assistance to those in need, nearly 7 million of whom
were at risk of famine, was extremely challenging in 2017. While restrictions imposed
by the coalition to restore legitimacy in Yemen, led by Saudi Arabia, were gradually
lifted as from the end of November, some remained until the end of the year,
preventing the movement of humanitarian personnel and the entry of commercial
vessels carrying humanitarian assets into Hudaydah port.
25. Such methods compound food insecurity and hunger. Global hunger is on the
rise after declining for more than two decades, with conflict cited as the main reason

__________________
1

18-06625

See directive (EU) 2017/541, para. 38.
5/18

S/2018/462

for that reversal. Ten out of the 13 major food crises in 2016 were conflict -driven. 2
Compliance with international humanitarian and human rights law is essential in
protecting civilians affected by conflicts against hunger.

D.

Attacks against humanitarian workers and assets
26. Violence against, or the detention or abduction of, humanitarian workers, often
involving national staff, continued to impede humanitarian operations in Afghanistan,
the Central African Republic, Chad, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Libya,
Mali, Somalia, South Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, 389 security incidents were reported in just the second half
of 2017, limiting access to humanitarian assistance for more than 1 million people. In
South Sudan, 30 humanitarian workers were killed in 2017. In Somalia,
116 humanitarian workers were subjected to violence, with 16 killed and 31 abducted.
In Mali, security incidents involving humanitarian workers almost doubled, from
68 in 2016 to 135 in 2017. There were also reports of the looting of humanitarian
assets in those and other situations.

E.

Attacks against and other interference with the medical mission
27. The reporting period saw further attacks against medical workers, patients and
medical facilities, equipment and transport, and interference with the provision of
impartial medical care. Incidents included direct attacks against medical workers and
facilities; the removal of medical supplies from humanitarian convoys and
warehouses; the use of medical facilities for military purposes; and the threat of legal
or other sanctions for providing medical care to sick or wounded combatants from
opposition forces. In 2017, the World Health Organization (WHO) recorded
322 attacks across conflict-affected countries including Afghanistan, the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Libya, Mali, Nigeria,
Somalia, South Sudan, the Sudan and the Syrian Arab Republic. Those attacks
resulted in 242 deaths and 229 injuries among medical personnel and patients.
28. In the Central African Republic, 18 medical facilities were attacked in 2017,
with seven medical personnel killed. There were also reports of non -State armed
groups occupying medical facilities and preventing ambulances from tr ansporting the
sick and wounded. A similar pattern was evident in Libya, with 16 attacks on medical
facilities and interference with ambulances, as well as assaults on, and the abduction
of, medical personnel. In the Syrian Arab Republic, 112 attacks again st medical
facilities and workers were verified by the United Nations, while 645,000 medical
items were removed from inter-agency cross-line convoys during the year. In
Afghanistan, in addition to attacks being carried o ut against medical workers,
147 medical facilities were forcibly closed following threats from armed groups. The
duration of closures varied from several hours to several months, affecting access to
health care for tens of thousands of people. WHO estimates that in 2017, more than
730,000 Afghans, with women constituting 65 per cent of that number, were unable
to access needed health-care services.
29. I welcome the efforts of Member States to implement resolution 2286 (2016)
concerning the protection of the wounded and sick, medical personnel and
humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties, and their means of
transport and equipment, as well as hospitals and other medical facilities, and my
predecessor’s recommendations. Co-chaired by Canada and Switzerland, the informal

__________________
2

6/18

See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and World Food Programme,
Monitoring Food Security in Countries with Conflict Situations , issue No. 3 (January 2018).
18-06625

S/2018/462

group of friends of resolution 2286 (2016) seeks to mobilize leadership for protecting
the medical mission and promotes the issue in the General Assembly an d the Human
Rights Council. In October 2017, 12 Member States, including France, signed the
French-led declaration on the protection of humanitarian and medical personnel in
conflict. Actors in the United Nations system continue to support these efforts. W HO,
for example, is rolling out a surveillance system for the collection of data regarding
attacks on health care.
30. At the national level, efforts to promote cooperation and the exchange of
information among stakeholders and to adopt and implement preca utionary measures
continued. National Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies and the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) have worked with Governments to adopt laws
that protect health care and ensure respect for the emblems of the International R ed
Cross and Red Crescent Movement. Such developments are welcome, although more
could be done to ensure compliance with the law and accountability for its violation;
to strengthen the collection of data; to facilitate exchanges on good practices in
implementing resolution 2286 (2016), including in capitals and regional forums; and
to ensure that the protection of medical care is included in the capacity -building of
partner forces and in military doctrine and training.

F.

The missing
31. Alarming numbers of persons remain missing in armed conflicts. Parties are not
taking action to prevent persons from going missing, to increase the chances of
accounting for those who do, or to uphold the right of families to know the fate and
whereabouts of missing relatives. ICRC has launched a four-year project, from 2017,
to develop professional standards and practices in relation to the missing and their
families. Parties to conflict and Member States must ensu re the implementation of the
law as it applies to missing persons.

G.

Accountability for violations
32. Fundamental to ensuring respect for international law is ensuring accountability
for violations. The reporting period saw positive developments in national-level
investigations and prosecutions, including through the exercise of universal
jurisdiction. Specialized war crimes units in a number of European and other States
investigated or prosecuted 126 individuals suspected of having committed
international crimes, resulting in 13 convictions. 3 Hybrid courts also have a
potentially important role to play in holding the perpetrators of serious violations to
account. I welcome the progress made in 2017 towards the operationalization of the
Special Criminal Court in the Central African Republic. Such developments
notwithstanding, the need remains for prompt and concerted action to enhance
accountability at the national level.
33. Where national action is lacking, international investigative and judicial
mechanisms can ensure accountability. The conviction in 2017 by the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia of Ratko Mladic for genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity, more than 20 years after their perpetration, is a reminder of
the long reach of international justice and of the Tribunal’s critical role in its
development. From its establishment in 1993 to the end of its operations in 2017, the
Tribunal sentenced 90 individuals for genocide, war crimes and crimes against

__________________
3

18-06625

See Trial International, Make Way for Justice #4: Momentum towards Accountability: Universal
Jurisdiction Annual Review 2018 (2018).
7/18

S/2018/462

humanity and inspired national prosecutions. The cause of criminal justice is a long term undertaking and deserves our full support.

H.

United Nations peace operations and protection of civilians
34. United Nations peace operations are important tools for protecting civilians in
some of the situations referred to above. Operating in increasingly challenging
circumstances, the protection of civilians has become one of the most important tasks
for many peacekeeping operations. Activities include supporting the implement ation
of local peace agreements in the Central African Republic; providing physical
protection to thousands of civilians in South Sudan; and rapid deployments to places
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo where civilians could potentially come
under the threat of physical violence. Regular reporting on civilian casualties by
United Nations peace operations in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya and Somalia supports
targeted advocacy aimed at changing the behaviour of parties to conflict.
35. United Nations peacekeeping missions face new environments and contexts,
including complex and asymmetrical threats and political violence, that challenge
traditional approaches to protection. Missions continue to innovate, and we are
supporting them by revising our peacekeeping policy on the protection of civilians
and developing a policy on the prevention of and responses to conflict -related sexual
violence. Efforts to improve performance include new directives and training for
military and police forces on child protection and the protection of civilians and an
operational manual for child protection officers in peace operations.
36. The importance of the protection mandate is reflected in a renewed focus on the
accountability of senior leadership for its implementation and my commitment to
investigate reports of underperformance by peacekeepers. It is also reflected in the
independent reviews of all peacekeeping missions that are intended to ensure that they
are fit for purpose. In addition, protecting civilians is closely rel ated to the recent
report entitled “Improving security of United Nations peacekeepers: we need to
change the way we are doing business”, which contains important recommendations
to improve performance.
37. Strengthening the work of peacekeepers also requir es the commitment of
Member States to find consensus around the language and implications of
peacekeeping tasks, including clarity regarding the expectations of peacekeepers and
recognition of those situations that may be outside their capacity to respond. It also
requires the commitment of financial contributors to ensure that missions are properly
resourced, and of troop contributors to provide contingents that are up to this
challenging task. Finally, protection in peacekeeping requires the commitment of host
States and parties to conflict to fulfil their legal responsibility to protect civilians and
allow peacekeepers to implement their mandate.

III. Revisiting protection priority I — enhance respect for
international law and promote good practice by parties
to conflict
38. As noted in my previous report, the appalling suffering inflicted upon civilians
would be significantly reduced if belligerents respected applicable international
humanitarian and human rights law, and if third States took the mea sures necessary
to ensure respect for the law, as required by international humanitarian law. As
conflicts are increasingly being fought in densely populated towns and cities, with
the potential to negatively affect the lives of tens of millions of people in the future,
8/18

18-06625

S/2018/462

enhancing respect for the law and promoting good practices have perhaps never been
more urgent than they are today.

A.

Protecting civilians and civilian objects in urban warfare
39. More than 50 million people are currently affected by conflict in urban areas.
That number will likely increase as urbanization continues and parties to conflict, in
particular non-State armed groups, take advantage of the urban environment to alter
the balance of power between themselves and conventional armed forces and
complicate State efforts to protect civilians.
40. Respecting the law and protecting civilians in such situations is, and will
continue to be, an essential and significant challenge for parties to conflict. This is
due to the high density of civilian populations; the possibility of the sudden and
unexpected presence of civilians among combatants; the commingling of combatants
and military objectives with civilians and civilian objects, which may at times be
deliberate; the vulnerability to damage and the interdependence of basic service
infrastructure, such as water and electricity systems, that is essential for the well being of civilians; and the likelihood of large outflows of civilians in need of
immediate protection and assistance, including access to specialized trauma and other
medical care.
Use of explosive weapons in populated areas
41. Of particular concern is the widespread use in urban areas of air-dropped bombs,
artillery, mortars, rockets, improvised explosive devices and other explosive
weapons, and the consequences for civilians. It is reported that in 2017, out of a total
of 42,972 people killed or injured by explosive weapons, 31,904, or three out of every
four victims, were civilians — a 38 per cent increase compared with 2016. When
explosive weapons were used in populated areas, 92 per cent of the casualties were
civilians. The Syrian Arab Republic, Iraq and Afghanistan saw the highest numbers
of civilian casualties, with air-launched explosive weapons the leading cause,
followed by improvised explosive devices and ground -launched weapons. 4
42. Those statistics are alarming and justify urgent international action to address
this problem. It is all the more pressing when one considers the well -documented and
devastating reverberating or long-term effects of the use of explosive weapons in
populated areas — effects that are largely foreseeable and must be taken into account
in the planning and conduct of military operations. As seen in recent years in, inter
alia, Afghanistan, Iraq, the Syrian Arab Republic, Ukraine, Yemen and the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, effects of hostilities on civilian objects include the extensive
destruction of homes, hospitals, schools, workplaces and essential infrastructure, with
reverberating effects on water and electricity systems that increase the risk and spread
of disease and food insecurity. Civilians are displaced and may lack access to
lifesaving and other assistance and remain exposed to further violence. Residential
and other urban areas are contaminated with lethal explosive remnants of war and
improvised explosive devices, the identification and removal of which is painstaking
and costly and can prevent access to essential services and the return of displaced
persons. In the long term, progress towards the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals is lost, if not reversed, while reconstruction requirements and the
associated costs are overwhelming. I would again call on parties to conflict to avoid
the use of explosive weapons with wide-area effects in populated areas.

__________________
4

18-06625

See Action on Armed Violence, Explosive Violence Monitor 2017 (April 2018).
9/18

S/2018/462

43. I welcome the increasing interest in this problem among high contracting parties
to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons and on the part of the 19 States
that adopted the communiqué of the African regional meeting on the protection of
civilians from the use of explosive weapons in populated areas, held in Maputo in
November 2017. In the communiqué, it was acknowledged that there is a need for
national, regional and global action, including on avoiding t he use of explosive
weapons with wide-area effects in populated areas and the development of a political
declaration to address the problem. Multilateral efforts in that regard, including the
Austrian-led process to achieve a political declaration on the subject and the German
initiative to discuss the problem within the framework of the Convention on Certain
Conventional Weapons, warrant the constructive engagement of all Member States.
Progress on those efforts would provide important recognition of the p roblem and
commit Member States to specific steps to address it.
44. In 2017, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs published a
compilation of military policies and practices on explosive weapons in populated
areas. Drawing on the tactical directives developed by the former International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan and the indirect -fire policy of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the compilation demonstrates how
military forces have strengthened the protection of civilians by limiting the use of
explosive weapons in certain circumstances, and without compromising mission
effectiveness. Research shows that the tactical directives and other reforms of ISAF
did not undermine force protection or give non-State armed groups a significant
military advantage, 5 and that mission effectiveness increased. 6
45. Practices have also been adopted by some non-State armed groups to reduce the
impact of explosive weapons on civilians. These include advance warning, the
consideration of tactical alternatives to explosive weapons, and the use of observers
to ensure the accurate targeting of military objectives. 7

B.

The fundamental legal obligation and common interest to respect
and protect civilians
46. Respect for, and the protection of, civilians and civilian objects in the conduct
of hostilities is, first and foremost, a legal obligation of all parties to conflict for which
they must be held to account. Some military forces have recognized that ensuring
respect for the law and protecting civilians are important components of mission
effectiveness. This was a key lesson that was learned by ISAF and AMISOM and that
led to the above-mentioned reforms 8 and is reflected in current military policy. 9 It is
also apparent in the practices of some non-State armed groups. 10

__________________

See C. Kolenda, R. Reid, M. Retzius and C. Rogers, The Strategic Costs of Civilian Harm:
Applying Lessons from Afghanistan to Current and Future Conflicts (Open Society Foundations,
June 2016).
6
See remarks of Larry Lewis to the All Party Parliamentary Group on Drones, 12 July 2017,
available at http://appgdrones.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/Prepared-comments-LarryLewis.pdf.
7
See Geneva Call, In Their Words (2017).
8
See Kolenda et al., The Strategic Costs of Civilian Harm, and Lewis.
9
See, for example, Department of the Army, Protection of Civilians (ATP 3-07.6) (2015); United
States Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Publication 3-0: Joint Operations (2017); Department of the
Army/United States Marine Corps, Urban Operations (ATP 3-06 MCTP 12-10B) (2017); and
European Union Military Committee, Avoiding and Minimizing Collateral Damage in European
Union-Led Military Operations (EEAS(2015) 772 REV 8) (2016), paras. 8–9.
10
See Geneva Call, In Their Words.
5

10/18

18-06625

S/2018/462

47. Ensuring respect for the law and the effective protection of civilians is directly
relevant to broader efforts by Member States to respond to terrorism and prevent
violent extremism. In that regard, the Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
calls upon Member States to ensure that the use of military action to counter the
expansion of violent extremist groups complies fully with international humanitarian
and human rights law. In General Assembly resolution 70/291, Member States also
stressed that when counter-terrorism efforts violate international law, including
international humanitarian and human rights law, they not only betray the values they
seek to uphold, but may also fuel violent extremism that can be conducive to
terrorism. In a recent study on violent extremism in Africa, it was noted that, while
the lack of education and poverty have an influence on radicalization, in the vast
majority of cases the final tipping point was an act of State violence and abuse of
power, including disregard for international law. 11
48. Ensuring respect for the law and protecting civilians are also fundamentally
important from the perspective of restoring peace and preventing the spread and
recurrence of conflict. Significant numbers of civilian casualties, coupled with the
devastation of entire cities and towns and the ensuing displacement t hat we see today,
result in a complex myriad of profoundly negative humanitarian, development, social,
political and other consequences. These serve only to perpetuate conflict and, in so
doing, undermine the prospects for future peace and stability in the countries, and
potentially the regions, concerned.

C.

Developing good policy and practice at the national and
regional levels
49. I am encouraged by the efforts of a range of actors at the national and regional
levels to engage and support Member States and their military forces, as well as
non-State armed groups, in strengthening protection and respect for the law and
developing good practices.
50. For example, in October 2017, the Government of Afghanistan adopted a
national policy on the prevention and mitigation of civilian casualties that had been
developed with the support of the United Nations and the Centre for Civilians in
Conflict. The Government’s commitment to the mitigation of civilian harm is reported
to have led to fewer civilian deaths and injuries from national military and police
operations in 2017.
51. Similar engagement by the Centre for Civilians in Conflict and other
organizations has taken place with regard to the development by the Government of
Nigeria of a national policy on civilian harm mitigation and the establishment of a
civilian casualty mitigation team by Civil-Military Cooperation of the Armed Forces
of Ukraine. Reference should also be made to the established practice of engaging
parties to conflict that are listed in my reports on children and armed conflict to
develop and implement action plans aimed at ending the recruitment and use of
children by armed groups. To date, 28 listed parties have signed 29 action plans
pertaining to the prevention of the six violations against children, namely, killing and
maiming of children, recruitment and use of children as soldiers, sexual violence
against children, abduction of children, attacks against schools and hospitals, and
denial of access.
52. Demonstrating the important role of national lawmakers and policymakers in
strengthening the protection of civilians, the Congress of the United States of America
established important protection-related requirements in the National Defense

__________________
11

18-06625

See United Nations Development Programme, Journey to Extremism in Africa (2017), p. 73.
11/18

S/2018/462

Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2017, responding in part to recommendations from
InterAction and other United States-based non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
Those requirements included a report detailing the plans of the Department of
Defense to enhance security assistance programmes with mea sures to prevent and
mitigate harm to civilians, and a requirement for an annual Department of Defense
report on civilian casualties resulting from United States military operations,
including the date, location and type of the operation in which they were harmed. The
Department must also describe its process for investigating civilian deaths and the
steps it has taken to mitigate civilian harm, and must take into account credible reports
of civilian casualties from NGOs and other public sources when prepar ing the report.
This is one example of a practical step towards greater transparency and enhancing
the protection of civilians.
53. At the regional level, the United Nations is supporting the development of a
compliance framework to prevent and address possible violations of international law
by the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. It includes measures relating to
the selection and screening of units and personnel; a United Nations -Joint Force
planning cell to support the planning and conduct of operations and the inclusion of
precautionary measures to prevent civilian harm; the implementation of after -action
reviews of incidents involving civilian casualties; and the establishment of
monitoring, reporting and accountability mechanisms.
54. As regards non-State armed groups, to date 17 such groups have signed action
plans with the United Nations to end the recruitment and use of child soldiers. In
addition, Geneva Call’s “deeds of commitment”, through which such groups pledge
to respect and be held publicly accountable for the implementation of specific
humanitarian norms relating, for example, to the prohibition of the use of
anti-personnel mines and of sexual violence, have yielded concrete results. These
include the destruction of large stockpiles of anti-personnel mines and the release of
child soldiers. In 2017, Geneva Call trained 1,300 members of 29 armed groups on
international humanitarian law. Later in 2018, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and Geneva Call will convene an expert meeting on the use by
non-State actors of explosive weapons in populated areas as part of ongoing efforts
to encourage such groups to avoid causing harm to civilians.

IV. Advancing protection priority I — recommended actions
55. My previous report contained several recommendations for enhancing respect
for international law and promoting good practices by parties to conflict. Building on
those, I would recommend to Member States the additional, concrete actions set out
below to further advance protection priority I.
Action 1: Develop national policy frameworks on the protection of civilians
56. To ensure the effective implementation of international humanitarian and human
rights law, Member States should develop a national policy fra mework that builds
upon good practice and establishes clear institutional authorities and responsibilities
for the protection of civilians and civilian objects in the conduct of hostilities. This is
particularly urgent, not least because of the increasing incidence of urban conflict and
the propensity of some military forces conducting urban operations to rely on aerial
assets and partner forces while limiting the deployment of ground forces. That can
limit access to reliable intelligence, the accuracy of target selection, the estimation of
collateral damage and the implementation of post-attack responses to civilian harm.
Such circumstances demand that the parties concerned take additional steps to spare
civilians and civilian objects from the effects of ho stilities. With that in mind, and as

12/18

18-06625

S/2018/462

detailed in the annex, a national protection policy framework should include the
minimum elements described below.
57. First, a proactive approach to civilian harm mitigation and response should be
included. This would emphasize accountable leadership for protecting civilians and
the creation and maintenance of an organizational culture that prioritizes civilian
harm mitigation. It would also provide for the establishment of specific capabilities
to track, analyse, respond to and learn from allegations of civilian harm, as well as
joint civilian and military planning for the protection of civilians, including in the
context of coalition operations.
58. Given the high degree of civilian harm and other, broader negative
consequences of the use of explosive weapons with wide-area effects in towns, cities
and other populated areas, as well as the potential for such use to violate the
prohibition of indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks, the policy framework
should also include a clear presumption against such use. This approach should be
further developed in a specific operational policy that would include tactical
alternatives to such use, and specific steps to be taken to avoid civilian harm in
circumstances where such use might be unavoidable.
59. Second, the policy framework should seek to strengthen the protection of
civilians by partner forces. Security assistance to partner forces whose actions violate
international humanitarian law can give rise to potential legal and reputational risks
for the State providing such assistance. Such actions also risk entrenching existing
political and other grievances that may lie at the root of the conflict and undermine
efforts to broker sustained peace. Preventing such risks means promoting the
protection of civilians with partner forces and ensuring their compliance with the law.
To that end, the policy framework should define the scope and means of engagement
with partners, establish clear lines of communication, ensure regular d ialogue
between parties on all matters of humanitarian concern and establish the conditions
under which assistance would be withheld.
60. Third, the policy framework should provide the basis for the development and
adoption of legislation that conditions the export of arms on respect for international
humanitarian and human rights law and requires pre-export assessments of the risk of
unlawful use and end-use monitoring. Several Member States have already adopted
strong controls with respect to their arms exports. At the end of 2017, 92 Member
States had become parties to the Arms Trade Treaty. I would urge other States to
follow suit.
61. Fourth, given the increasing incidence of urban conflict, the policy framework
should provide the basis for the establishment of specific urban warfare training
schools and greater resort to scenario-based training. This would allow military forces
to be better prepared to protect civilians in urban settings, by facilitating greater
reflection on the specificities and vulnerabilities of the urban environment and ways
and means of protecting civilians in such situations.
Action 2: Enhance compliance by non-State armed groups
62. Enhancing respect for the law also requires changing the behaviour and
improving the practices of non-State armed groups. Training and the development of
codes of conduct, unilateral declarations and special agreements, as envisaged under
international humanitarian law, through which groups expressly commit to comply
with their obligations or undertake commitments that may go beyond what are
required by the law, can play a key role and should be encouraged. These could
usefully include specific civilian harm mitigation measures as outlined above.

18-06625

13/18

S/2018/462

63. Such tools send a clear signal to the groups’ members, can lead to the
establishment of appropriate internal disciplinary measures and also provide an
important basis for follow-up interventions. However, it is critically important that
such tools and the commitments and principles therein be incorporate d into
instructions and communicated to the groups’ members. Enhancing respect for the
law on the part of non-State armed groups through dialogue and the development of
such tools necessarily requires sustained engagement by humanitarian and other
relevant actors.
64. It is recommended that actions 1 and 2 be part of a broad and coordinated effort
to engage and support Member States and their military forces, as well as non -State
armed groups, at the national and regional levels in developing the necessary policy
and other tools.
Action 3: Promote compliance through advocacy and accountability
65. The development of policy frameworks and other measures to implement and
ensure respect for international law would constitute an important advance towards
more effective protection of civilians. At the same time, the need for global -level
advocacy remains essential for further strengthening of the protection of civilians.
66. Central to such advocacy is the need for a concerted effort to overcome a
perceived lack of empathy and outrage among the public at large concerning the plight
of civilians affected by conflict in other countries. In 2017, building on the original
“Not a Target” campaign of Médecins sans frontières, World Humanitarian Day
marked the start of a global effort to raise awareness of the human cost of armed
conflict and demand that world leaders act, including by ensuring greater respect for
international humanitarian and human rights law. Further steps include improving our
data collection, and its disaggregation by sex and age, to facilitate evidence-based
analysis of trends in civilian harm and improved public reporting.
67. More attention is also urgently required with respect to ensuring accountability
for serious violations of international humanitarian and human rights law, not least
because the vast number of allegations of such violations continue to massively
outweigh their actual investigation and prosecution. In line with their international
obligations, I reiterate my call upon Member States to undertake credible and
effective investigations into allegations of serious violations and hold perpetrators to
account, with the support of the United Nations, as necessary. In the absence of either
the willingness or the ability to do so, a number of Member States have resorted to
universal jurisdiction to prosecute international crimes. Other Member States may
wish to consider this possibility to contribute to the fight against impunity.
68. To help overcome problems relating to national capacity and resources, I would
also urge greater consideration of the use of hybrid courts and the provision of
international assistance to national courts. In this regard, I would echo the call from
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union and from the Security Council
urging the African Union Commission and the Transitional Government of National
Unity of South Sudan to take the steps necessary to establish the Hybrid Court for
South Sudan.
69. Where national action is lacking, greater recourse should be made to
international mechanisms. In this regard, I would urge States that have not yet done
so to become parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, and all
Member States to cooperate fully with the Court.
70. I would also urge greater willingness on the part of Member States in the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council to set aside
political differences and take concerted action to ensure accountability for
14/18

18-06625

S/2018/462

international crimes. This includes establishing and supporting commissions of
inquiry and other such mechanisms or, in the case of the Security Council, the referral
of situations to the International Criminal Court where national authorities fail to act.
I note that several Member States, including some permanent members of the Security
Council, have called for an end to the use of the veto in situations involving the
perpetration of war crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide.
71. Greater consideration could also be given to the utility of targeted sanctions
imposed by the Security Council as a response to violations, and how such sanctions
might be strengthened.

V. Conclusion
72. The present report paints a very bleak picture of the current state of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. It is a picture of immeasurable human and
societal decimation — an inevitable consequence of the resort to arms without
sufficient willingness on the part of all concerned to fully respect and ensure respect
for the rules of international humanitarian and human rights law. The report also
offers some hope. In particular, the development of national policy frameworks that
establish clear institutional authorities and responsibilities for the protection of
civilians would significantly strengthen respect for the law, including by partner
forces. The same can be said for the promotion of and support for similar initiatives
with non-State armed groups. But these alone will not be sufficient.
73. The year 2019 will mark 20 years since the protection of civilians was placed
on the agenda of the Security Council during a Canadian presidency. In 1999, it was
the brutality in Sierra Leone, the ethnic cleansing in the Balkans and the genocide and
displacement in the Great Lakes region that drove Canada to bri ng the issue of the
protection of civilians before the Council. As the then-Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Canada, Lloyd Axworthy, said at the time: “Promoting the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is no sideshow to the Council’s mandate for ensuring international
peace and security; it is central to it. The ultimate aim of the Council ’s work is to
safeguard the security of the world’s people, not just the States in which they live.”
74. Today, while some of the contexts and parties have changed, a s shown clearly
in the present report, the suffering of civilians and the need for respect for the law
remain constant. So too does the centrality of protection to the Security Council ’s
mandate for ensuring international peace and security. The twentieth anniversary of
the protection-of-civilians agenda, therefore, provides an opportune moment to take
stock: to review the gains of the past 20 years; to identify areas that require further
attention and progress, now and in the years ahead; and to chart a fu ture course of
action by the Security Council, Member States and other actors to further strengthen
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. That includes greater consideration of
the role of the protection of civilians in the broader context of cris is prevention,
which, for the sake of the millions currently exposed to, and at risk of, violence and
displacement around the world, remains an overarching priority.

18-06625

15/18

S/2018/462

Annex
Action 1: Develop national policy frameworks on the protection
of civilians
Drawing on existing good practice and policy, a national protection policy
framework should include the minimum elements described below.
1.

A proactive approach to civilian harm mitigation and response
Leadership, culture and training
The policy framework should emphasize the critical importan ce of leadership
for protecting civilians from harm. This includes the need for leaders (both civilian
and military) at all levels to understand and communicate to their subordinates their
legal obligation to protect civilians and civilian objects and its importance to mission
effectiveness; and to ensure the existence within their organizations of a culture that
prioritizes civilian harm mitigation. It also includes ensuring leader accountability for
fulfilling these responsibilities. To support the existe nce of such a climate, the
framework should establish focused, iterative and graduated training modules on the
protection of civilians and civilian harm mitigation throughout the professional
military education system, as well as unit-specific training at the operational level.
Civilian casualty tracking, reporting and response
The policy framework should also establish specific capabilities, standards and
methodology to track, analyse and respond to allegations of civilian harm, such as
along the lines of the Civilian Casualty Tracking Cell of the International Security
Assistance Force. Such capabilities should be used to enable assessments that identify
the causal factors that contribute to civilian casualties and inform the necessary
adjustments to ongoing and future operations. Provision should be made for the use
of reliable data from third parties (such as local and national officials, United Nations
actors and civil society) and for regular, public reporting on the number of allegations,
response actions and their outcomes, including in the context of coalition operations.
The policy framework should also outline the process for post -incident
response, including the investigation and prosecution of serious violations, the
transparent communication of findings and the provision of post-harm assistance to
victims and their families.
Joint planning and engagement with partners
The policy framework should strengthen joint civilian and military planning for
the protection of civilians in specific operations and ensure regular dialogue with
humanitarian actors on protection concerns. Guidance should also be provided on how
to safely and responsibly engage with local communities and civil society on
protection concerns. In addition, the framework sho uld provide for engaging other
Member States, as well as regional or international partners, to share good practices,
including in relation to tactics, techniques and procedures, training and the provision
of security assistance.
A presumption against the use of explosive weapons in populated areas
The policy framework should include a clear presumption against the use of
explosive weapons with wide-area effects in populated areas, which should be based
on a clear understanding of the area effects of various types of explosive weapons and
the resultant risk posed to civilians in the short and long terms. Such an understanding
should take into account technical data relating to the expected performance of the

16/18

18-06625

S/2018/462

weapons in a conflict setting; an analysis of the practical procedures through which
the weapons are applied to targets in operational use (such as the practices of
“registration of fires” and “bracketing”); and an understanding that urban terrain and
infrastructure have an impact on the employment and effectiveness of weapons.
This presumption should be further developed in a specific operational policy
that provides for tactical alternatives to the use of explosive weapons with wide -area
effects in populated areas, and for specific steps to be take n to mitigate civilian harm
in circumstances in which such use is unavoidable. These should draw on existing
operational policies and practices, including the need for higher command authority
for such use to reflect the increased risk to the civilian popu lation and enable access
to additional intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance resources; and the
implementation of collateral damage estimation and battle damage assessments.
Existing weaknesses, such as in collateral damage estimation, would also n eed to be
addressed. 1
2.

A commitment to strengthen the protection of civilians by partner forces
The policy framework should include a commitment to strengthen the protection
of civilians by partner forces. Such a commitment would clearly define the scope and
means of engagement with partners, establish clear lines of communication and
ensure that there is regular dialogue between parties on all matters of humanitarian
concern. There should be continuous assessment of partner conduct through the prism
of international humanitarian and human rights law as appropriate, and the
implementation of measures that help to better protect civilians, as well as training
and instruction on the application of the law and good practices for civilian harm
mitigation. The provision of other forms of military training, as well as funding, the
transfer of arms and other military support, should be contingent upon partner forces ’
commitment and performance in protecting civilians and ensuring respect for
international law.

3.

Conditioning arms exports on respect for international law
Whether in the context of security assistance or the export of arms in general,
the policy framework should provide the basis for the adoption of legislation that
requires pre-export assessments of the risk of unlawful use. Such assessments should
be based on the aggregated risk of unlawful use given prior conduct as well as
capacity and competence. This requires access to the information necessary to
evaluate whether there is such a risk. Should an assessment reveal a substantial risk
that the weapons being exported could be used to commit or facilitate a serious
violation of international humanitarian or human rights law, then the export should
not be authorized. Furthermore, provision should be made for arms exports to be
accompanied by customized technical assistance focused on appropriate lawful use
and management of the specific items.
In the event of allegations of serious violations, tripwires should be established
for the reassessment of certain arms export authorizations and the identification of
options for preventing the use of certain weapons systems. This can also include
remedial training to address concerns and restore assistance.

__________________
1

18-06625

L. Lewis and R. Goodman, “Civilian casualties: we need better estimates — not just better
numbers”, Just Security (22 March 2018), available from https://www.justsecurity.org/54181/
civilian-casualties-estimates-not-numbers/.
17/18

S/2018/462

4.

Developing military competence in protecting civilians during urban warfare
Given the increasing incidence of urban conflict, the policy framework should
provide the basis for the development of military competence in protecting civilians
during urban combat. This should include the establishment of specific urban warfare
training schools and greater resort to scenario-based training. That would allow
military forces to be better prepared to protect civilians in urban settings by
facilitating greater reflection on the specificities and vulnerabilities of the urban
environment and ways and means for protecting civilians in such situations, such as
tactical alternatives to the use of explosive weapons, the anticipation of and response
to population displacement, and the provision of front-line trauma care for sick and
wounded civilians as well as combatants. That in turn would usefully inform future
operations, training, doctrine and further policy development. Access to such
resources should be available to other military forces.

18/18

18-06625
