A /68/PV.85

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

85th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 13 May 2014, noon
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

The meeting was called to order at 12.15 p.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: The Assembly now has before
it a report of the Fifth Committee on sub-item (b) of
agenda item 116, entitled “Appointment of members of
the Committee on Contributions” (A/68/558/Add.2). In
order for the Assembly to consider the report of the Fifth
Committee under the sub-item, it will be necessary to
reopen the Assembly’s consideration of that sub-item.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly
to reopen consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item
116 and to proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 116 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(b) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Contributions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/558/Add.2)
The President: In paragraph 3 of the report, the Fifth
Committee recommends that the General Assembly
appoint Mr. Fu Daopeng of China and Mr. Kunal Khatri
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland as members of the Committee on Contributions

for a term of office beginning on 13 May 2014 and
ending on 31 December 2014.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
appoint Mr. Fu Daopeng of China and Mr. Kunal Khatri
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland as members of the Committee on Contributions
for a term of office beginning on 13 May 2014 and
ending on 31 December 2014?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 116?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 118 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/68/L.45)
The President: The Assembly will now resume
its consideration of agenda item 118, Follow-up to the
outcome of the Millennium Summit, to take action
on a draft resolution entitled “Scope and modalities
of the comprehensive review and assessment of the
progress achieved in the prevention and control of
non-communicable diseases”, issued as document
A/68/L.45.
Members will recall that the Assembly held a
debate on agenda item 118 jointly with agenda item
14 and agenda item 125 at its 54th plenary meeting on
20 November 2013.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

14-33143 (E)

*1433143*

A/68/PV.85

We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/68/L.45. I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): In connection
with draft resolution A/68/L.45, entitled “Scope and
modalities of the comprehensive review and assessment
of the progress achieved in the prevention and control
of non-communicable diseases”, I wish to put on record
the following statement of financial implications on
behalf of the Secretary-General in accordance with rule
153 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraphs 1 and 10 of draft
resolution A/68/L.45, the Assembly would decide
to convene a high-level meeting to undertake the
comprehensive review and assessment on 10 and
11 July 2014, consisting of an opening plenary meeting,
on 10 July 2014, from 10 a.m. to 11 a.m., followed
by plenary meetings from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from
3 p.m. to 6 p.m., and two consecutive round tables on
11 July 2014, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m.
to 5 p.m., followed by a closing plenary meeting, from
5 p.m. to 6 p.m.; request the President of the General
Assembly, no later than June 2014 and in consultation
with representatives of non-governmental organizations
in consultative status with the Economic and Social
Council, civil society organizations, the private
sector and academia, to hold an informal interactive
hearing with non-governmental organizations, civil
society organizations, the private sector and academia
to provide input to the comprehensive review and
assessment.
Pursuant to the request contained in paragraph 1
of the draft resolution, it is envisaged that the plenary
meetings and the round tables at the high-level
meeting will comprise a total of four meetings, with
interpretation in all six languages, and that no parallel
meetings will take place. On that basis, interpretation
services for the four meetings will be provided using
the meeting entitlement of the General Assembly. Those
meetings will not constitute additions to the meetings
work-load of the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management.
With regard to the request contained in paragraph
10 of the draft resolution, the informal interactive
hearing will use the meeting entitlement of the General
Assembly on the understanding that there will be no
parallel meetings of the General Assembly. The date

2/3

13/05/2014

of the informal interactive hearing will have to be
determined in consultation with the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management.
Therefore, the informal interactive hearing would not
constitute an addition to the meeting workload of the
Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/68/L.45, no additional requirements
would arise under the programme budget for biennium
2014-2015.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/68/L.45, entitled “Scope
and modalities of the comprehensive review and
assessment of the progress achieved in the prevention
and control of non-communicable diseases”. May I take
it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to adopt it?
Draft resolution A/68/L.45 was adopted (resolution
68/271).
The President: I give the floor to the observer of
the European Union.
Mr. Poulsen (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. We would like to extend our thanks and
deep appreciation to Ambassador Frankinet, Permanent
Representative of Belgium, and Ambassador Rattray,
Permanent Representative of Jamaica, for their tireless
efforts in facilitating the discussions on resolution
68/271 and their outstanding work in conducting the
consultations openly and transparently.
First, the EU and its member States unambiguously
reaffirm their commitment to the implementation of the
2011 Political Declaration of the High-level Meeting of
the General Assembly on the Prevention and Control
of Non-communicable Diseases (resolution 66/2). We
stress the importance we attach to the prevention and
control, including monitoring, of non-communicable
diseases (NCDs), which constitute one of the major
challenges of the disease burden of both developing
and developed countries in the twenty-first century. We
look forward to being an active and constructive partner
in taking the NCD agenda further, including during the
upcoming comprehensive review and assessment in
July.
Engaging with relevant non-State actors, including
non-governmental
organizations,
civil
society
organizations, academic institutions and business, is

14-33143

13/05/2014

expected to encourage and promote the contributions
of partners to addressing the NCD burden. Therefore,
in discussing this modalities resolution, we reiterated
the importance of ensuring the full participation of
relevant non-State actors in the review and of providing
transparency in the way they would be allowed to
participate in the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly.
We firmly believe that maintaining a strong and
open dialogue with genuine and relevant non-State
actors is important to the success of the highlevel review of NCDs. That is why we consistently
defended, throughout the consultations on the draft
resolution — as we have in other instances — that the
process of admitting non-governmental organizations,
civil society organizations, academic institutions
and business to participate in the round tables should
be completely transparent and allow for the full
involvement of the General Assembly. Therefore, our
interpretation of paragraph 7 of the resolution is that
within the General Assembly, Member States will be
able to examine and challenge possible objections made
by other States to the presence of non-governmental
organizations, civil society organizations, academic
institutions and the private sector in an open and
transparent fashion.
The EU and its member States remain strongly
committed to ensuring an improved, more open and
transparent process for the participation of those actors
in relevant United Nations meetings. We will continue
to actively engage in debates on non-communicable
diseases and look forward to a successful and fully
inclusive review in July.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Brazil.
Mr. Favero (Brazil): I congratulate the facilitators,
Ambassadors Bénédicte Frankinet of Belgium and
Courtenay Rattray of Jamaica, for their successful
efforts in bringing to a conclusion resolution 68/271,
entitled “Scope and modalities of the comprehensive
review and assessment of the progress achieved in the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases”.
I also thank the delegation of Trinidad and Tobago for
its coordination on behalf of the Group of 77 and China,
and all members for their constructive contributions.

A/68/PV.85

Considering the time spent on the issue and its
relevance to consensus, it is important to recall that the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly will apply
to the review process on non-communicable diseases.
On that particular issue, I wish to put on record in the
minutes of the meeting the following clarification from
the Head of the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management, in a communication to the
facilitators.
“I am writing in response to your request made
in your capacity as co-facilitators with reference
to the text of the draft resolution, entitled ‘Scope
and modalities of the comprehensive review
and assessment of the progress achieved in the
prevention and control of non-communicable
diseases’, that was shared with the Secretariat of
the General Assembly on 30 April 2014.
“In paragraph 1 of the draft text, the Assembly
would decide to convene a high-level meeting
on 10 and 11 July 2014, consisting of plenary
meetings and panel discussions. I should like to
confirm that the aforementioned meetings are
meetings of the General Assembly, and therefore
the rules of procedure of the Assembly will apply.
Consequently, the established practice of the
Assembly would also be adhered to in relation to
the conduct of the meeting, as is the case for all
meetings of the General Assembly.”
Brazil is committed to the fight against
non-communicable diseases and as Member States
prepare to negotiate the draft outcome document of
the high-level meeting, I assure the Assembly of my
delegation’s constructive engagement.
The President: Permit me to express my sincere
thanks and appreciation to the facilitators — the
Permanent Representative of Belgium and the Permanent
Representative of Jamaica — who so ably and patiently
conducted the discussions and complex negotiations in
the informal consultations, and to all Member States
for their valuable contributions to the successful
completion of resolution 68/271.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 118.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

14-331433/3
