S/PV.7818

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7818th meeting

Tuesday, 22 November 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ndiaye/Mr. Seck/Mr. Ciss. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Senegal)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Coleman
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Water, peace and security
Letter dated 14 November 2016 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/969)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-39680 (E)
*1639680*

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Water, peace and security
Letter dated 14 November 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Senegal
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2016/969)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representatives of Argentina, Australia,
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, Botswana, Brazil,
Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus,
Djibouti, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Guatemala,
Haiti, Hungary, India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Maldives,
Mexico, Morocco, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Palau, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Uganda and Viet Nam
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Danilo
Türk, Chair of the Global High-Level Panel on Water
and Peace; Ms. Christine Beerli, Vice-President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross; and
Mr. Sundeep Waslekar, President of Strategic Foresight
Group.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Joanne
Adamson, Deputy Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations, to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
2/78

22/11/2016

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/969, which contains a letter dated
14 November 2016 from the Permanent Representative
of Senegal to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and give him the floor.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I
thank the Senegalese presidency and His Excellency
Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Senegal for having organized this debate at a crucial
moment.
By 2050, at least one in four human beings will live
in a country where the lack of fresh water is chronic
or recurrent. Climate change will only aggravate these
difficulties, especially in basins shared by several
countries. It is particularly important to coordinate
water management for the more than 260 international
watercourses and transboundary aquifers, which are at
least as numerous.
(spoke in English)
Access to water can exacerbate communal
tensions. Competition for scarce water resources in
Darfur and Afghanistan has contributed to tensions. In
Peru, the extractive industries’ impact on water is the
most common driver of protests and violence against
companies by local communities.
Armed conflicts can themselves affect access
to clean water, for example through the deliberate
destruction of water facilities, attacks against power
plants that provide water supplies, and the collapse of
water treatment and sewage systems. These impacts
are often compounded by the breakdown in water
governance and delivery networks that typically
occurs during conflicts. Air strikes against water and
electrical facilities in Syria, and the contamination of
groundwater resources in Gaza, are further examples
of the negative impact of armed conflict on water. We
have also seen warring parties seek to control dams
and dikes. Controlling strategic dams on the Tigris
and Euphrates rivers has been at the centre of military
operations carried out in Syria and Iraq by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant.
Despite these serious challenges, we must also
recognize the potential for cooperation around shared
water resources. Three-quarters of United Nations
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Member States share rivers or lake basins with
their neighbours. Shared water has historically, and
sometimes rather improbably, brought adversaries
together and served as a crucial confidence-building
measure in both inter-State and intra-State conflicts.
In the second half of the twentieth century, more
than 200 water treaties were successfully negotiated.
International river agreements have enhanced security
and stability in river basins. The 1960 Indus Waters
Treaty between India and Pakistan has famously
survived at least two wars and numerous clashes and
diplomatic crises. In the Nile Basin, last year’s signing
of a declaration of principles by the Governments of
Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan, followed more recently
by various formal and informal dialogues, has been
a vital confidence-building measure. And in the
Senegal River basin, riparian States — including Mali,
Mauritania and Senegal — have had a long history of
benefit-sharing, providing a cornerstone for regional
stability and peace.
The United Nations has actively promoted the
potential of water for cooperation. The work of
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia on hydro-diplomacy is
one notable example. The Centre uses its good offices,
convening power, analytical capacity and partnerships
with regional organizations to promote dialogue and
build trust. The United Nations Economic Commission
for Europe’s Convention on the Protection and Use of
Transboundary Watercourses and International Lakes
strengthens transboundary water cooperation and
sound water management. It is now open for accession
to all United Nations Member States, offering the
opportunity to create a global framework for dealing
with transboundary water issues.
More generally, the United Nations actively
promotes mediation and dialogue as effective tools
for preventing and resolving disputes over water and
natural resources. The United Nations Department of
Political Affairs and the United Nations Environment
Programme have published a useful guide containing
practical strategies and best practices in this area.
Across all these efforts it is also important to
recognize the central role played by women in local
water management. Decisions over water allocation can
have a significant impact on their well-being and safety,
and that of their children and families. For this reason,
women often and rightly advocate for water issues to be

S/PV.7818

directly addressed within peace agreements, as we saw,
for example, with the Darfur peace process.
(spoke in French)
To mobilize concerted diplomatic action, the
President of the World Bank Group and I convened
the Global High-Level Panel on Water. This initiative
promotes the global and cooperative development and
management of water resources, to which Senegal’s
contribution has been crucial. I encourage Council
members to find ways to support the implementation of
the Group’s recently adopted action plan.
(spoke in English)
Water challenges affect us all. Let us use this
Security Council meeting to highlight the value of
water as a reason for cooperation, not conflict. And let
us commit to investing in water security as a means to
ensure long-term international peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Türk.
Mr. Türk (spoke in French): Today, the Security
Council is meeting, for the first time in its history, to
debate the issues of water, peace and security. It is a
great honour to be able to address the Council as Chair
of the Global High-Level Panel on Water and Peace.
It is very important that this discussion be being led
by you, Sir, and by Senegal, a country that has developed
an effective model of active and peaceful cooperation
with its neighbouring countries, particularly in the
field of transboundary cooperation on water. I pay
tribute to Senegal and to Mr. Léopold Senghor, its
late President, who several decades ago persuaded the
Heads of State of Guinea, Mali and Mauritania to found
the Senegal River Basin Development Organization.
Today, Senegalese President Macky Sall and his
counterparts from those three neighbouring countries
have capitalized on this legacy.
This experience is also a source of inspiration at
the global level. It contributed to the establishment of
the Global High-Level Panel on Water and Peace, which
I have the honour to chair. The Panel was established
in November 2015 at the initiative of 15 States
Members of the United Nations, including my country,
Slovenia, and will present its report in September
next year. The Panel’s objective is to propose concrete
recommendations that could be implemented. The aim

16-396803/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

of our efforts is not only to understand the problem, but
also to assist in the search for solutions. The guiding
idea of our
​​ work is the prevention of armed conflict.
(spoke in English)
Recent United Nations reports have repeatedly
emphasized the importance of the prevention of armed
conflicts and preventive diplomacy more generally.
Transboundary water cooperation is a prime example of
a potentially powerful tool for long-term prevention, as
explained a few minutes ago by the Secretary-General.
Countries with developed mechanisms of water
cooperation seldom resort to war. Moreover, water
cooperation has a significant stabilizing effect on those
areas within States that are benefiting from cooperative
water management installations. Other briefers today
will discuss the experience and potential of water
cooperation for stability and peace in some detail. On
my part, I wish to emphasize four fundamental points.
First, while the transboundary mechanisms of water
cooperation are well known and historically tested, they
are still relatively few in number. Out of the 263 shared
river basins, involving 145 States in the world, only 84
have joint water management bodies. Some of those
institutions are not very effective. Clearly, political
support for additional international cooperation in this
domain is needed, and much of that political support
can be generated by the United Nations, in particular by
the General Assembly and the Security Council. Such
support would be particularly timely now with regard
to new initiatives such as the Congo River Basin Blue
Fund, which is gaining momentum at present.
Secondly, political support for transboundary water
cooperation arrangements has to be complemented by
financial incentives. This, too, is an important political
priority. The international financial institutions and
private investors have an important role to play. The
idea of setting up a special blue fund at the global level
will be explained in a short while by the President of
the Strategic Foresight Group, Mr. Sundeep Waslekar.
I believe that idea has to be given particular attention.
Thirdly, in its preventive mode the United Nations
has to be attentive to intersectoral cooperation
relating to water use aimed at reducing tensions and
the potential for violent conflicts. Quite naturally,
sovereign States exercise their sovereign powers in
that regard. Therefore, international cooperation has
to be in full accordance with the sovereign rights of
States. However, it is important to understand that
4/78

22/11/2016

good practices exist and that they should be encouraged
globally. They include voluntary codes of practice on
water management involving a variety of stakeholders.
Such codes of practice should be encouraged and, as
appropriate, assisted. The Global High-Level Panel
on Water and Peace is studying the existing practices
and will be prepared to share its findings with the
appropriate United Nations bodies.
Fourthly, the United Nations system has been
dealing with various water issues for a long time now.
The coordination of those activities is organized through
the UN-Water mechanism, which brings together all the
relevant United Nations organs, funds and agencies.
However, that activity has been mostly concentrated
on technical, environmental and legal questions, and
only indirectly addresses the fundamental political and
security aspects. Now the time has come to address the
political and security aspects of water cooperation more
directly, in the Security Council and in the General
Assembly. I would like to emphasize that the Security
Council can play a critically important role — as a
decision-maker with the proven ability to innovate and
as a catalyst that brings an important political message
to the other parts of the United Nations system.
Those are some of the basic considerations. In
addition, there are specific aspects of the links between
water, peace and security that affect the daily work of
the Security Council. Allow me, therefore, to briefly
refer to some of those aspects.
Expert studies on contemporary armed conflicts
suggest that water is seldom the single cause of armed
conflict. However, water issues are often among
the important contributing factors. Moreover, water
usually becomes a military and strategic tool during an
armed conflict, a weapon of war that most often affects
civilian populations. It is in that context that some of
the most serious concerns arise.
Historically, the Security Council has accumulated
vast experience in addressing the dangers affecting
civilian populations in situations of armed conflict.
Ever since resolution 1265 (1999) was adopted, the
protection of civilians has been one of the main themes
in the Council’s decision-making. The Council has since
been engaged in deciding on “appropriate measures”
in response to situations where civilians are targeted
or where humanitarian assistance is being deliberately
obstructed. While the results of those efforts have so
far been mixed, the direction is clearly correct. The
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Security Council deserves all support in its efforts to
protect civilians.
The question today is how to increase the
effectiveness of those efforts, including in matters
concerning water supply to civilian populations in
armed conflicts. Clearly, humanitarian organizations
with long experience of working in conditions of armed
conflict, in particular the International Committee of
the Red Cross, deserve every support. In particular,
they have to be supported in their cooperation with
local actors in protecting water resources and water
installations. Their long-term presence in affected
areas and their familiarity with both water situations
and local actors in water management are indeed key
assets that have to be recognized and, as appropriate,
protected.
However, the efforts of local and international
humanitarian organizations and specialists to ensure
the functioning of water infrastructure during
armed conflicts may not always suffice. They may
require additional means, including diplomatic
and — yes — military means. Obviously, that opens up
a set of difficult questions, in particular in situations
of urban armed conflicts. Difficult, but not necessarily
impossible. Defence of water for the civilian populations
by the affected populations themselves is a legitimate
form of self-defence and can be legitimately assisted by
military means.

S/PV.7818

of humanitarian law needs to be stopped. New norms are
not urgently necessary, although improvements in legal
architecture are always welcome. The more immediate
need is to strengthen the effectiveness of existing
norms on the protection of civilians and to find ways
of ensuring compliance. In that regard again, the policy
guidance and specific actions taken or authorized by
the Security Council will be of great importance.
Let me now turn to another aspect of the linkage
between water, peace and security. Water sources
and water installations are among the major areas
of concern for peace operations and in the context
of peacebuilding — both of which are fundamental
tasks of the United Nations. Obviously, the defence
of civilians, robust defence if necessary, has become
part of the doctrine of United Nations peacekeeping.
Defending civilians and the mandates of peace
operations strengthens the credibility and legitimacy of
the peacekeeping in the eyes of the people whom the
United Nations has to serve.

The principles of proportionality of the use of
military force and distinction between military and
non-military objects provide the legal framework for
such assistance. Although it might not be possible to
authorize each and every action, it should be within
the reach of the Security Council to convey a sense of
legitimacy to those military actions whose sole purpose
is the protection of water sources and installations that
are vital for civilian populations. Again, the principles
of proportionality of the use of military force and
distinction between military and non-military objects
would be an essential platform for such an assessment.

The recent report (see S/2015/446) of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations is very clear on
that. However, in paragraph 95 of its report, the Panel
also emphasized that Member States must provide
peace missions with adequate capabilities to implement
their mandates. This is a highly pertinent emphasis
worthy of the particular attention of Governments and
the United Nations. “Adequate capabilities” should
include water and electric-power specialists. Most
Member States with highly developed military systems
have skilled military specialists trained to deliver
vital services, including drilling, water distribution,
sanitation, power production and distribution. It would
make sense if Member States could, in the context of
their effort to strengthen the capacity of United Nations
peacekeeping, provide, as appropriate, the assistance
of their specialists for the evaluation, repair and
rehabilitation of water-supply systems so as to restore
or establish basic services for affected populations in
the early stages of deployment of peace operations.

The compelling nature of assistance to legitimate
defence of the affected civilian populations and of
effective protection of water resources and installations
is closely related to the entire future of international
humanitarian law. The increasingly internal and
increasingly chaotic armed conflicts of our era have
generated violations of humanitarian law that were
unimaginable in the past. The weakening of the authority

Furthermore, the current development of the
concept and practice of United Nations field missions
offers some promising possibilities. It is encouraging
that the Global Field Support Strategy places stronger
emphasis on environmental management, including
water, both at the level of field missions and globally.
It will be important to give water-related aspects
the priority status they deserve and that periodic

16-396805/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

evaluations of water-related-issues practice in the
context of peacebuilding take place regularly.
In addition, water infrastructure is a vital
part of any peacebuilding activity. Historically,
and in more recent United Nations practice, peace
agreements have included clauses on water use and
water cooperation. Cooperation in shared water
basins is a historically proven factor of post-conflict
stabilization and peacebuilding. It is therefore natural
for the Peacebuilding Commission to include water
management and water cooperation among its priorities
in its efforts to promote an integrated, strategic and
coherent approach to peacebuilding, as noted in relevant
General Assembly resolutions. I believe that water is
vital part of such an ideal concept of peacebuilding.
This year’s reviews of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture have already provided a good framework for
such prioritization, and I hope this effort will continue.
In conclusion, I have referred to some of the key
questions considered by the Global High-Level Panel
on Water and Peace and some of those frequently
considered by the Security Council. I am grateful for
the opportunity to be able to present these ideas and
thoughts to the Security Council today.
There are obviously other, more specific questions
related to the protection of water resources, prevention
of conflicts over water quality, development of
mechanisms of hydrodiplomacy and other questions
considered by our Panel. As I mentioned at the
beginning, in less than a year from now, we shall
prepare our report. It goes without saying that our Panel
will be ready to share its findings and proposals with
the Security Council as well as other relevant bodies
of the United Nations. I hope that the Security Council
will remain seized of the matter of connections between
water and peace and security in future.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Türk for his briefing. I now give the floor to
Ms. Christine Beerli.
Ms. Beerli (spoke in French): I thank the Senegalese
presidency for having inviting the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to participate in
today’s important debate and give its views based on its
experience on the ground.
(spoke in English)
None of us can live without water. We need water
to drink. We need water to grow food. We need water to
6/78

22/11/2016

cook. And we need water to stay clean. Water is a basic
human need and the most fundamental humanitarian
requirement. Water is a symbol of life in the poetry of
every nation. In the great musical culture of Senegal,
the stringed kora of the Griot is made from the same
gourd that people use to carry water. The Griot knows
that water is for the body what song is for the soul.
In the ICRC’s experience, the vital importance of
water often makes it a highly contested resource in armed
conflicts. Water points become strategic — whether
they are rural wells in arid lands or pumping stations
in sophisticated cities. In many wars, water systems are
also caught up in fighting, becoming damaged, degraded
or destroyed. Even when supply exists, accessing water
can become extremely dangerous — especially for
women and girls who have the responsibility in many
societies for water collection. Children can spend hours
queuing and collecting water when they should be
at school.
Water is directly linked to public health. Polluted
drinking water or insufficient water for washing causes
people to get ill, which puts additional strain on health
facilities and medical personnel already struggling to
cope with high demand and limited capacity. Water
supply is also clearly linked to forced displacement
and migration. When water supply fails, a civilian
population has no option but to move. People are forced
to leave their homes, leading to large movements
of populations.
The provision of a safe, sufficient, regular and clean
water supply is a humanitarian priority for the ICRC.
In over 80 countries, our water teams work daily to
provide water for populations affected by conflict and
violence. We work with local authorities, commercial
partners, local communities and national Red Cross and
Red Crescent societies to ensure our water programmes
are sustainable.
Last year, we covered the urgent water needs of
28 million people. The rise in protracted urban warfare
in the Middle East and increasing concentrations of
internally displaced persons in urban areas in the
Lake Chad Basin have caused an exponential increase
in the scale and technical complexity of our water
operations. Our water operations often see us working
across conflict lines, as we repair pumps and pipes
that are essential to all sides. Encouragingly, in several
conflicts, opponents will cooperate on water when they
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

will not cooperate on anything else, giving us the access
and supply chains we need to keep the water flowing.
Armed conflict has direct and indirect impacts
on people’s access to water and, over the many years
of a protracted conflict, both types of impact have a
degrading cumulative impact on water supply. The
direct impacts of armed conflict are immediately
obvious. Damaging attacks on electricity substations,
water-storage installations and piping can render them
unusable, cutting off tens of thousands of people in
a single strike. Skilled personnel may also be killed,
injured or displaced. Indirect impact is less obvious but
equally significant. The lack of skilled personnel and
shortage of critical supplies means no maintenance for
essential infrastructure, which soon deteriorates to the
point where water is unsafe or entire populations are
cut off.
In protracted armed conflict, this cumulative
impact on services is hard to reverse. We have seen this
phenomenon recently in Syria, Iraq, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Central African Republic,
where water services are severely reduced and we have
resorted to water trucking.
International humanitarian law is clear on the
humanitarian significance of water. It places various
obligations on parties to conflict to protect water
installations. International humanitarian law provides
special protection for objects indispensable for the
survival of the civilian population, like drinking-water
installations and irrigation works. Objects containing
dangerous forces, such as dams, are also protected from
attack. International humanitarian law also provides
important general protection against attacks on civilian
objects and attacks that affect civilian populations.
Parties to conflict must take precautions in attack
and refrain from attacks expected to cause excessive
incidental damage and also consider the reverberating
effects of their actions on civilian populations.
Despite these clear rules for the protection of
essential services like water, the ICRC continues to
see populations suffer the consequences of a lack of
respect for international humanitarian law. The risk of
reverberating effects from damaged water installations
is a reason why the ICRC urges parties to conflict
to avoid using explosive weapons with wide areas of
impact in densely populated areas. Even when aimed at
achieving military objectives, the use of such weapons
can incidentally damage vital infrastructure located

S/PV.7818

in the vicinity of the targets, severely disrupting the
provision of services on which civilians depend for
their survival. Parties to conflict have an obligation to
ensure that the basic needs of the civilian population
are met and that their dignity is protected. Water is
essential to a life with dignity, and parties to conflict,
Government donors and humanitarian organizations
must work together to support resilient urban services
during armed conflicts.
The ICRC welcomes the initiative of the delegation
of Senegal to discuss such an important topic here
today and we urge members of the Council to take
the following measures on water and armed conflict.
First, they must respect international humanitarian law
and take into account the interdependence of essential
services, such as water, health and electricity, and
the cumulative impact of protracted armed conflict
on essential water supplies for civilian populations.
Secondly, they must recognize that dialogue on water
needs between warring parties is critical, and they must
help to facilitate it. Thirdly, they must prioritize and
support effective partnerships between local authorities,
service providers and humanitarian organizations to
ensure resilient water services. Finally, the Council
must ensure that the Council remains seized on the issue.
(spoke in French)
We thank the President for giving the ICRC the
opportunity to speak to the Council today on such an
important topic and for providing each one of us with
water while we are here.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Beerli
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Waslekar.
Mr. Waslekar: I want to compliment the
Government of Senegal and Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye for
convening this debate on water and peace and security,
which I understand to be happening for the first time in
the history of the Security Council.
I would like to take the opportunity to address
three questions. First, why should the Security Council
address the linkage between water and peace and
security? Secondly, what can the Security Council do to
create a positive relationship between water and peace?
Thirdly, what can the United Nations system and the
international community do?

16-396807/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

Regarding the first question, the Secretary-General
pointed out in his briefing how water can be a source
of crisis. He also pointed out how water can be a source
of cooperation. One of the greatest challenges of our
time is how to transform water from a potential source
of crisis into a potential instrument of cooperation. If
the political and intellectual capital of the world can be
applied to that question, then I am sure that we will able
to find an answer.
What are we talking about? Currently there about
2 billion people living in shared river basins in the
developing world, so the future of 2 billion people
is what this meeting hopes to address. Often we feel
that water is a local or provisional issue that can be
managed or addressed through good governance at
the local level or good transboundary cooperation at
the regional level. We are increasingly finding out that
water is also a global security issue. In the past six
years, we have seen that when the mismanagement of
water is combined with the mismanagement of climate
change and the mismanagement of politics, which has
happened in some parts of the world, it has led to the
displacement of a large number of people. Refugees
have fled from one part of the world to another, which
has had severe political consequences in different parts
of the world.

22/11/2016

being associated — has undertaken a number of studies.
By assessing situations in 148 countries that share river
basins — more than 220 shared river basins total — we
have found that any two countries that are engaged in
active water cooperation with political support do not
go to war for any reason, whether related to water or
not. Thus, there is a direct correlation between water
cooperation and reduced risk of war, which we can see
through the water cooperation quotient. Therefore, it is
in the interest of the international community to further
examine and explore that relationship.
We have also found that there is a continuum of the
management of water relations. Water managers can
manage day-to-day relations in river basins. However,
when it comes to introducing large infrastructure
projects and addressing the question of large public
goods and priorities between water and other public
goods, such as large investments and security, then the
involvement of managers of political systems and the
managers of security establishments is very necessary.
At the routine level, water managers can manage water
relations. At a more complex level, the involvement of
national, regional and global security establishments
and the mainstream political leaders is absolutely
necessary.

Whatever we do regarding the management of
water in combination with the management of the social
contract and political relationships in any one region
can have implications on other regions of the world.
That is what we have seen, particularly in the past three
years. If we look ahead and take into account the rate
at which humankind is depleting water resources, there
is a risk that the innate amount of fresh water could
decrease by 25 to 30 per cent in the next 20 years.
That could lead to a decline in the production of whole
grains. That means that by 2030 or 2035, some countries
that are self-sufficient today would have to enter the
international whole grains market as importers. If there
were an additional demand of 100 to 200 million tons
of whole grains, then we would certainly find that the
price of whole grains would skyrocket across the world.
Even though those importing countries would be only
in some parts of the world, their impact would be felt
by poor people across the world. Therefore, we must
recognize the global nature of the relationship between
water and peace and security.

Therefore, water is not just a subject relevant to
Sustainable Development Goal 6. It can also be positively
used as a tool to achieve Sustainable Development Goal
16, which is geared towards peaceful and inclusive
coexistence. Therefore, water is a subject that is very
much owned by the Security Council. I would urge the
members of the Security Council to consider something
unconventional and unprecedented. Considering that
the impact of the management of water is not always
confined to one region — there is always a risk that it can
have implications across the world — and considering
that there is a positive relationship between water
cooperation and comprehensive peace and security and
considering that water can make a useful contribution
Sustainable Development Goal 16, I urge the members
of the Security Council to apply their minds to see if they
can come up with an unconventional, unprecedented
way to proclaim water as a strategic asset of humanity.
The members of the Council are the best judges as to
how the Council might best achieve that. They know the
rules and procedures of the Security Council, whereas
I am an outsider.

Regarding the second question, the Strategic
Foresight Group — with which I have the privilege of

I was touched by the briefing by Ms. Christine
Beerli of the International Committee of the Red Cross

8/78

16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

(ICRC). The work that ICRC staff are doing in some
conflict zones is amazing and highly commendable, but
we need to support them and we need to support similar
organizations. How can we do that? Earlier this year,
the Security Council adopted resolution 2286 (2016), on
protecting medical installations and personnel. Would
the Security Council consider adopting a follow-up
draft resolution inspired by resolution 2286 (2016),
in the same spirit, to protect water installations and
the personnel guarding them? I urge the Council to
consider that proposal.
I would also like to go further and ask Security
Council members, in particular the permanent members,
once in a while to consider negotiating a ceasefire in
protracted conflicts in order to repair and restore water
systems. Such a ceasefire could last a week, or at least
three or four days. Let me explain my logic for that
request. Many members of the United Nations system,
particularly some of the permanent members of the
Security Council, are investing huge resources and
wasting their talent and scientific minds to find water
on Mars, the moon of Jupiter or some other part of the
universe so that human civilization can continue to
exist. If we can invest human, intellectual and political
capital to find water on another planet, why can we not
find some way and some means to negotiate a ceasefire
just for a few days from time to time to protect the
water resources and water installations on this planet?
I strongly urge the members of the Security Council to
consider that proposal as well.
It is also important to explore how we can better
protect water resources. The Secretary-General and
Ms. Beerli mentioned how water resources are being
increasingly targeted. The Department of Political
Affairs has a Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force. Perhaps the mandate of the Task Force can be
specifically expanded or sharpened to include the
protection of water resources from terrorist actions.
The Department of Political Affairs will be a better
judge as to how that could be done.
Finally, there is also a role for the international
community — beyond and inspired by the Security
Council — to incentivize water cooperation. We must
not only look at the protection of water infrastructure,
but also at how we can bolster preventive diplomacy and
take preventive measures to promote water cooperation.
In that regard, the role of financial incentives is very
important. The Secretary-General and the President
of the World Bank launched a very important panel

S/PV.7818

on water as a sustainable development goal. My friend
Danilo Türk is sharing a panel on water and peace and
security. The objectives of those two panels can be
linked through a very innovative measure. The world
should consider creating a blue fund exclusively to
take care of interests, insurance and other related costs
of collaborative water infrastructure — not within
countries but rather infrastructure through cooperation
between the countries. If we can do that, and if we
allocate only $1 billion annually — which can be easily
carved out from the Green Climate Fund’s $100 billion
annual budget — then that $1 billion annual investment
can create $30 billion of collaborative infrastructure
worldwide. The mathematics of that idea can be
explained later.
The question, therefore, is that we have to look at
water as an instrument of cooperation. We have to bear
in mind that it is a potential source of crisis, but we
have to find a way to convert it from potential source
of crisis to potential instrument of cooperation. In
order to do that, we have to look ahead. We have to
be unconventional. We have to look at things we have
not thought of. I would urge the Council to consider all
options to help shape our future. It is a philosophical
matter of how we look at time. We often think that first
there is a past, then there is a present and then there is
a future. In reality, first there is a future. What today
is the future will become the present tomorrow, and
what is present today will become past tomorrow. In
truth, first there is a future, then there is a present and
then there is a past. If we looked at the flow of time in
that direction, we would take it upon ourselves to share
the future and, instead of looking at the past, we would
look at the future. We would look at prevention. We
would look at the next generation and, once we start
looking at the future in a creative way, I am sure that the
talent, political will and capacity worldwide will help
find solutions to our problems. The Security Council
and your presidency, Mr. President, can provide some
guidance and inspiration.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Waslekar for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Senegal abroad.
At the outset, I would like to express how pleased
we are to have the Secretary-General participate in this
high-level Security Council debate on a topic that is of
particular interest to him. Allow me to also reiterate,

16-396809/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

on behalf of Senegalese President Macky Sall, the
warm congratulations of Senegal for the excellent work
carried out during his two mandates at the helm of the
United Nations, and for his significant contributions
to building peace and security and promoting and
protecting the interests of the international community,
and particularly those of Africa, in the areas of
development and human rights.
I also thank and congratulate the briefers today
for their relevant and structured briefings. They have
presented a comprehensive overview of the stakes and
challenges linked to the issue of water. I am referring
to the Secretary-General; Mr. Danilo Türk, Chair
of the Global High-Level Panel on Water and Peace;
Ms. Christine Beerli, Vice-President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross; and Mr. Sundeep Waslekar,
President of Strategic Foresight Group.
For the first time in its 71-year history, the Council,
in a formal meeting this morning, is broaching the
issue of water and its relationship to peace and security.
Certainly, the issue has featured in the background
of certain Council decisions, particularly presidential
statement S/PRST/2011/15, of 20 July 2011, and
presidential statement S/PRST/2013/15, of 2 October
2013. The former deals with the consequences of
climate change and, in the latter, the Council urges all
parties to conflicts to abstain from attacking civilian
installations, such as water supply stations, and to avoid
establishing military positions in inhabited areas.
We also can recall that seven months ago almost
to the day, President Sall presided over the very first
Council debate on water and peace and security, under
the Arria Formula. That commitment at the highest
level reflects the importance that Senegal attaches to
the problem. Indeed, it also explains why the SecretaryGeneral and the President of the World Bank appointed
the President of Senegal as a member of the High-level
Panel on Water on Water. It should be recalled that the
mandate of that Panel, which is made up of 12 Heads of
State and Government, seeks to spur global action with
a view to accelerating the effective implementation of
Goal 6 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
That goal seeks to guarantee access to water and
sanitation for all and ensure the sustainable management
of water resources. It is that ongoing commitment to the
issue that enabled my country, through its Minister for
Water and Sanitation, to hold the co-chairmanship of
the Global High-Level Panel on Water and Peace. Its
mission is to offer a global architecture to make water
10/78

22/11/2016

an instrument of peace and cooperation, rather than a
source of conflict.
It is clear that water is essential to life, if not life
itself. It is a daily part of an individual’s life at every
stage. As a fundamental element of geology, water is also
necessary in the areas of biology, the conomy, culture
and worship. It is for those reasons that the United
Nations has made it a human right and acknowledged
that access to water is essential for the enjoyment of all
other human rights. Regrettably, today climate change,
urbanization, demographic changes and unsustainable
economic practices, as well as the dizzying increase
in consumption, all contribute to a reduction in the
quantity and quality of water. Moreover, although
71 per cent of the Earth’s surface is water, less than
3 per cent of it is freshwater, of which 2.2 per cent is in
glaciers and groundwater reserves. As a result, a mere
1 per cent of the Earth’s water is left to meet the needs
of the 7.35 billion human beings and those of plants
and animals.
Above and beyond the scarcity of water, the
resource is unevenly distributed throughout the planet,
with nine countries sharing 60 per cent of the world’s
water reserves while 28 countries experience regular
water shortages, and 80 occasional shortages. A
total of 1.5 billion people do not have access to safe
drinking water. Predictions are even more alarming.
They warn that, by 2050, at least one in four people
could live in a country affected by chronic or recurrent
freshwater shortages.
The competition for access to water might seem
inevitable because, in addition to being a natural
resource, water could take on a geostrategic dimension,
which would make it a domestic security challenge for
a number of States. Nevertheless, the legitimate efforts
of our countries and communities to guarantee access
to such a vital resource can and must be deployed in
a sound, organized way in order to guard against
misunderstandings and even tensions, especially in the
case of water resources being shared among several
States. Recent history teaches us that such a hypothesis
is not a fictitious one.
In that regard, it is true that commendable efforts
have been made over time towards the peaceful and
concerted management of water resources, with the
signing, since the end of the Second World War, of
more than 200 bilateral and multilateral cooperation
instruments
covering
some
60
international
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

watercourses. In the same vein, it should be recognized
that shared waters have historically and sometimes,
improbably, brought States closer together and formed
the basis for closer ties and confidence-building.
As far as it is concerned, Senegal, whose history,
geography and name bear the indelible imprint of
its eponymous watercourse, has always striven to
promote what we refer to today as water diplomacy.
As the Secretary-General recalled just now, it was
that constant faith that formed the basis for the
establishment with its neighbours, almost 45 years
ago, in 1972, of the Senegal River Basin Development
Organization (OMVS) — made up of Guinea, Mali,
Mauritania and Senegal — and, in 1978, the Gambia
River Basin Development Organization, whose
members are the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau and
Senegal. The OMVS is now cited as a successful model
of cooperation in the area of collective water resources
management. Its originality lies in the fact that its
facilities and infrastructures belong to its four member
States, investments are made by all of them and the
benefits are mutually shared.
Cooperation is the path of salvation. But it must
be acknowledged that there remains much to be done
in that area. In the same vein, it is worrisome to note
that, to date, 158 ​​of the 263 international watercourses
remain without a cooperation framework. Moreover,
according to many experts, unequal access to water
could be the main cause of future conflicts. By way of
illustration, the 2015 World Water Development Report
states that
“[i]nter-State and regional conflicts may
also emerge due to water scarcity and poor
management structures.”
A decade earlier, former Secretary-General Kofi Annan
argued that
“fierce competition for fresh water could well
become a source of conflict and war in the future”.
But he tempered that by stating,
“that same competition could be a catalyst
for cooperation”.
In the same vein, the question of water is sometimes
linked, for political reasons, to territorial, social and
economic disputes. Even if water is not the stated
reason for a war, nonetheless, in many conflicts its
control is an important issue that could fuel conflict.

S/PV.7818

In other situations, water is used simply as a weapon of
warfare or to put pressure on vulnerable populations.
In a spirit of solidarity, the international community
must combat the phenomenon that highlights how the
issue of water pervades conflicts and its unfortunate
humanitarian consequences — just underscored so
eloquently by our briefers. It is also incumbent upon
us to step up our efforts to secure sources and supply
chains and to guarantee water quality, which, in the
context of global threats, must be kept out of the reach
of the many criminal gangs and terrorist groups.
The Security Council must choose between
potential future conflicts and a future of peace. In that
regard, one thing only deserves to guide our action. If
nothing is done, water could lead to future clashes in the
way that fossil fuels and land are at the origin of today’s
conflicts. The notion of preventive diplomacy therefore
reflects all of the fullness and nobility of its meaning.
To sail in another direction would be to row against the
current, if not to swim in troubled waters, given the
various factors whose combined effects accentuate the
scarcity of the resource and the unbridled race for its
control. That means that the Council should pay more
attention to the issue in order to prevent the occurrence
or the exacerbation of tensions between States sharing
water resources, in particular, cross-border water
resources. In that regard, it is well established that
the risk of tensions has increased between countries
upstream and downstream of the same river basin, with
situations that, in some cases, could lead to regional
instability. That is the whole point of Senegal’s proposal
to create a group of friends of the water-security
initiative here in New York, which I invite delegations
to join.
In conclusion, Senegal would like to thank the
Security Council and the many Member States for their
interest in its initiative on water, peace and security,
and hopes for a proactive stance on the issue, which
is the only attitude capable of negating the disturbing
predictions. More than 69 countries are participating in
today’s open debate, which shows the importance that
the international community attaches to the problem. In
particular, my country dares to hope for a clear message
from the Security Council that it will contribute to
making water flow only in the direction of fostering
the development, peace and harmony of peoples. In
doing so, the most precious resource will ultimately
cease to be the object of misunderstandings, concerns
and bloodshed.

16-3968011/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s important meeting and for the
comprehensive concept note (S/2016/969, annex). Our
discussions today are an important follow-up to the
Arria Formula meeting held in April, presided over
by His Excellency President Macky Sall, in which
Malaysia was pleased to participate.
We have followed Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s
comprehensive views on today’s topic with much
interest. Similarly, I wish to convey my appreciation to
the briefers, namely, Mr. Türk of the Global High-level
Panel on Water and Peace, Ms. Beerli of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and Mr. Waslekar of the
Strategic Foresight Group for their respective expert
views and briefings.
The competencies of the General Assembly and
the processes that it has established with regard to
multilateral approaches to sustainable development
and the environment, including the management of
transboundary waters and water resources, require no
further elaboration. However, it cannot be denied that
there exists a legitimate linkage between the issues of
water, peace and security that falls arguably within the
purview of the Council. Therefore, for the purposes
of today’s discussions, I will focus my remarks only
on the issue of water as a resource and the potential
conflicts that could arise from competition over water
as a scarce resource.
Against that backdrop, my delegation is of the
view that these discussions demonstrate the Council’s
ability to assume a preventive posture by considering
issues that could be drivers of conflict. It is hoped,
therefore, that the discussion today will be frank
with a forward-looking exchange on how the United
Nations, and the international community as a whole,
could address potential threats to international peace
and security related to competition and conflict over
natural resources, specifically in this case over water
and water resources.
The question of water insecurity cannot be limited
merely to issues of access. Water insecurity should be
seen as a potential threat multiplier that can aggravate
or be aggravated by existing tensions and conflicts
12/78

22/11/2016

rooted in political, social and economic factors. In
that connection, various possible causes of conflicts
related to water, including rapid population growth,
industrialization, agriculture and urbanization, were
highlighted earlier. The list should not preclude the
impact of military occupation.
A particular situation that stands out in that regard
is the dire situation of Palestinians in the occupied
Palestinian territory, specifically their right to water and
their access to water resources. Since 1967, Palestinians
have lost access to the water of the Jordan River; 90 per
cent of Palestinian water resources have been under
Israeli control since 1967. Furthermore, the apartheid
wall not only cuts off Palestinian access to their own
land, but also cuts off access to many important aquifers
and wellsprings. The exploitation resulting from the
annexations of Palestinian water resources is illegal
under international law. It is therefore doubly illegal for
the expropriated water to be used and channelled to the
illegal settlers.
In addition, the decision to prevent Gaza from
rebuilding its water and sanitation infrastructure,
following the 2009 and 2014 attacks, is abhorrent and
unacceptable. We call for an immediate end to the
systematic and cynical exploitation of Palestinian water
resources, which has caused much anger, frustration
and despair among the Palestinians. Such unsustainable
situations could trigger not only a political insecurity
crisis, but potentially even a health crisis in an already
volatile region that can ill afford further threats to
peace and security.
Across the globe, my delegation is encouraged by
the pursuit of collective efforts on transboundary water
cooperation in the context of regional cooperation.
Initiatives such as the Senegal River Basin Development
Organization in Africa, the establishment of the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy in
Central Asia and the Blue Peace initiative in the Middle
East, which seek to harness water as an instrument of
peace as opposed to a cause of conflict, are inspiring.
I am pleased to share the fact that in my own
region, South-East Asia, the 10 member States of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
pursue such a collaborative approach under the
framework of the ASEAN Working Group on Water
Resources Management. Since 2005, the Working
Group has spearheaded the implementation of the
ASEAN strategic plan of action on water resources
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

management. In essence, that format provides a platform
for enhancing cooperation, promoting networking
and engaging in collaborative actions aimed at the
practical implementation of integrated water resources
management in the region.
At the global level, we commend and support
the ongoing effort and work of the Global HighLevel Panel on Water and Peace, led by Mr. Türk, to
strengthen the global architecture aimed at preventing
and resolving water-related conflicts and tensions. We
look forward to the release of the Panel’s final report
and recommendations as future contributions to the
ongoing debate on water, peace and security.
In conclusion, I wish to highlight three additional
points. We acknowledge the potentially destabilizing
effects that could arise from poorly managed conflicts
and tensions related to water and water resources. It
is therefore vital that the capacity and capability of
preventive diplomacy mechanisms and institutions,
including those deployed by the United Nations and
by regional organizations, continue to be supported.
It is vitally important to understand and address the
negative impact of armed conflicts on water resources
and the related infrastructure, especially in those areas
currently ongoing conflicts, where we have seen the
callous contamination of water and the destruction of
water-related infrastructure resources employed as a
military strategy or tactic, which is in flagrant violation
of applicable international humanitarian law norms
and standards.
In the post-conflict recovery phase, the provision
of safe water should rank among the highest priorities.
Water, sanitation and the associated delivery
infrastructures are critical to economic development
and the recovery of livelihoods in the aftermath of
conflict. In that regard, the formation of partnerships,
capacity-building and the transfer of technologies
are key to ensuring sustainable water management
in peacebuilding efforts. At the same time, collective
efforts aimed at achieving water-related targets
under Sustainable Development Goal 6 would help in
addressing potential conflicts driven by competition
over increasingly scarce water resources. It is also
vital that our collective efforts be further intensified in
addressing the issues.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Mr. President, for being here today among us and
for your thoughts on the topic that we are addressing

S/PV.7818

here today. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General,
as well as Ms. Beerli, Mr. Türk and Mr. Waslekar, for
their in-depth and provocative briefings.
Uruguay is taking part in this debate, bearing
in mind the very appropriate treatment of the topic
of water in the setting of the General Assembly. It
is worth noting that General Assembly resolution
64/292 explicitly recognizes the human right to water
and sanitation, essential for the full enjoyment of life
and all human rights. General Assembly resolutions
68/157 and 70/169, have dealt with that resource, as did
Millennium Development Goal 7 in its target 7.C, which
called for reducing by half “the proportion of persons
without sustainable access to safe drinking water and
basic sanitation”, and now Sustainable Development
Goal 6, entitled “Ensure availability and sustainable
management of water and sanitation for all”.
In reality, the current armed confrontations
originate in complex and multiple political, economic
and social threats. Although we recognize that the
struggle for natural resources constitutes one of the
primary aggravating factors in armed conflicts, it
cannot be considered to be the sole cause. The need to
preserve water supply systems and sanitation services
in conflict zones is vital, because, to some extent, that
reduces the effect of the plague of war on the civilian
population. Uruguay would like to express its absolute
repugnance at the use of water as a weapon of war,
without exceptions, and it defends the human right to
water, indispensable for the life, health and dignity
of persons, and therefore Uruguay has enshrined it in
its Constitution.
We are concerned that, well into the twenty-first
century, more than 700 million people lack suitable
access to potable drinking water. That requires
profound reflection and action. For that reason, Uruguay
welcomes the fact that, in the context of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, the international
community has undertaken the commitment under Goal
6 to ensure the availability of water and its sustainable
management and sanitation for all. Uruguay firmly
believes in cooperation and policies focused on human
rights as the effective means for fighting scourges such
as water scarcity, poverty and climate change.
At the regional level, Uruguay, Brazil, Paraguay
and Argentina have signed an agreement on the
Guaraní aquifer, one of the largest underwater
reservoirs in the world. The agreement enshrines the

16-3968013/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

principles of sovereignty, environmental responsibility
and the use of resources in a manner based on rational
and sustainable criteria. Cooperation among States is
vital in order to achieve more efficient management
of water resources and to detect possible elements
of friction. By way of example, Uruguay has made
significant efforts in order to increase its cooperation
in that area. In that regard, following the ruling of the
International Court of Justice, Uruguay and Argentina
have managed to establish an integrated mechanism for
the environmental monitoring of water in the Uruguay
River basin, which will strengthen the sustainable
development capacities of both countries.
In the case of Haiti, where cholera poses a serious
threat to health, the improvement of water systems is
a priority. In that regard, Uruguay has contributed to
Haiti not just through the presence of its troops as part
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
but also through the provision of water-treatment units
aimed at improving living conditions for the civilian
population.
Only through long-term solutions related to
capacity-building, investment in infrastructure and the
sustainable management of water resources through
international cooperation can the challenges of making
water accessible to all be overcome. Access to water is
a human right, but given its vital importance, it is also
part of the world’s natural heritage, creating tangible and
intangible assets and generating civilization and peace.
To fight over water would be a lamentable contradiction.

22/11/2016

important tasks of the international community. That
long-term objective is yet to be achieved. It is also
noteworthy that, in light of the scarcity of fresh water
and its uneven distribution across the globe, competition
for water can lead to conflicts. Even in the twenty-first
century, our technological and scientific advances
have not yet completely satisfied humankind’s thirst,
meaning that the potential for conflict remains.
The Security Council has rarely dealt with water
issues, as it has focused mainly on the role of other
natural resources, such as gold, diamonds and timber,
in fuelling armed conflicts in some countries of Africa.
On the other hand, for instance in the Sudan, water
scarcity is considered one of the drivers of the conflict
in Darfur.
Throughout human history, warring armies have
not shied away from employing asymmetrical warfare
tactics such as poisoning water wells, redirecting
water flows to flood an enemy and so on. Even today,
we remember well the threats of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant to blow up the Mosul Dam,
which would cause a real humanitarian disaster. That
most recent example clearly demonstrates the need to
carefully consider the issue of the protection of critical
infrastructure through the promotion of international
cooperation on preventing terrorist attacks against it. In
that respect, I would like to thank all of the participants
in yesterday’s Arria Formula meeting on this subject
for a constructive discussion.

Water, being a source of life and development, has
become a major strategic challenge. Under the constant
and growing pressure resulting from human activities,
population growth, accidents and climate change, water
resources require us to be more active in adopting
strategic approaches to the promotion of best solutions
and to strengthen our international commitments.

For the Security Council, which bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the issue of water should become
an essential element of its overall work in the area of
conflict prevention. Quite recently, Council members
had a fruitful discussion on that topic at the Arria
Formula meeting this past April, initiated by the
Senegalese delegation. Many United Nations Member
States shared the position that the effective inter-State
management of water resources could prevent the
eruption of conflicts around the world. Ideas and
proposals expressed at that meeting provide a solid
basis for today’s consideration.

Striking an optimal balance between the practical
economic needs of society, its sustainable development
and the protection of water resources and the provision
of a consistent foundation for a human-friendly
environment in the future has become one of the most

I would like to recall and commend the Senegalese
efforts aimed at promoting peace and stability in the
West African region through the strengthening of
transboundary cooperation in sharing the water of the
Gambia River.

Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this important debate. We also appreciate the
very useful introductions made by the briefers. Ukraine
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered later this
morning by the observer of the European Union. In my
national capacity, I would like to add the following.

14/78

16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

The European continent is also working on
expanding inter-State cooperation on water. For
example, Ukraine, together with 13 other countries
and the European Union, is actively working on the
sustainable and equitable water management of the
Danube River through the International Commission
for the Protection of the Danube River. That
organization has grown into one of the largest and most
active international bodies of river-basin management
expertise in the world.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
highlight the important role of such instruments as the
1992 Economic Commission for Europe Convention on
the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses
and International Lakes, adopted in Helsinki, and the
1997 United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses,
adopted in New York.
I also wish to note the activities of the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy
for Central Asia in promoting regional cooperation on
water resources management, which is a core factor for
strengthening stability in that region.
In my country, the Water Code of Ukraine is the
main regulatory act that governs legal relations in
the area of the protection and rational use of water
recourses. It is based on the principle of basin waterresources management. Nowadays, Ukraine continues
to implement the basin-management principle in
practice, in particular by continuing its consistent work
on establishing basin authorities, which are structures
that, at the local level, directly implement the policy of
integrated water resources management in the interests
of local communities and economy.
I would like to use this opportunity to draw attention
to the resolution on protection of the environment in
areas affected by armed conflict that was adopted
by the United Nations Environment Assembly at its
second session, held in May in Nairobi. That document
reflects the international community’s unanimous
support for the protection of the environment in times
of armed conflicts and reaffirms the need to respect the
relevant international obligations under international
humanitarian law.
Ukraine has learned a lot about the importance of
this issue from our own recent experience of external
aggression in the Donbas. We therefore believe that
greater awareness and the practical implementation

S/PV.7818

of the provisions of the resolution, as well as of
relevant international law, will foster protection of the
environment in relation to armed conflicts and reduce
conflict-related environmental impacts, ensuring the
successful delivery of the environmental dimensions of
the Sustainable Development Goals.
In our statement, we have touched upon only
a limited number of aspects of the water issue. At
the same time, strengthening our efforts in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding in post-conflict societies
requires a more focused approach to the protection of
water supplies in various regions of the world. We hope
that today’s deliberations will result in useful ideas on
how to address this subject in an effective and resultsoriented manner.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Foreign Minister Ndiaye for presiding over
the Security Council’s open debate on water, peace and
security. My thanks also go to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing. China listened carefully to the
briefings by Mr. Türk, Chair of the Global High-Level
Panel on Water and Peace; Ms. Beerli, Vice-President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross; and
Mr. Waslekar, President of Strategic Foresight Group.
Water is indispensable to human survival and
to sustainable economic and social development.
In recent years, climate change and environmental
degradation have led to frequent natural disasters. In
some countries there is a severe shortage of drinking
water. The problem of water scarcity is increasingly
acute and prominent. That is not only a development
issue, it also has a bearing on peace and security. The
international community should approach the issue by
making efforts in three areas.
First, it must strengthen the preservation,
development and management of water resources in
order to remove the root causes of conflicts driven
by water scarcity. All countries should prioritize
the safeguarding of peace and security, strengthen
cooperation with others, improve scientific development
of water resources and allocate water resources
reasonably and conserve and efficiently use them.
They should comprehensively upgrade their watersecurity-related capabilities so that the sharing of water
resources can actually enhance mutually beneficial
cooperation. In that way, we can also avoid friction and
conflicts caused by water scarcity.

16-3968015/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

Secondly, we must engage in in-depth international
cooperation on water resources. The international
community should, via cooperation platforms such as
the World Water Forum, conscientiously implement
international consensus on water and sustainable
development. Support should be given to the Global
High-Level Panel on Water and Peace and the United
Nations and World Bank High-Level Panel on Water
and other, similar mechanisms in their efforts to
actively promote international cooperation in that area.
The international community should provide further
assistance to African countries, including by helping
regional organizations such as the Senegal River Basin
Development Organization and the Gambia River Basin
Development Organization to comprehensively proceed
with the preservation, development and utilization
of transboundary water resources. African countries
should be assisted in enhancing the development
of water conservation infrastructure to benefit the
African people. Fundamentally speaking, ensuring
that everyone has access to safe water is an important
safeguard for peace and security. The relevant United
Nations bodies should strengthen their coordination
and fully carry out their respective responsibilities
and duties.
Thirdly, dialogue and cooperation must be
strengthened in order to appropriately address issues
related to transboundary water resources. Transboundary
water resources affect the common well-being of
countries on the lower and upper reaches of river basins.
Parties should start by safeguarding regional peace
and stability and regional common development and
should be committed to strengthening coordination and
communication so as to promote mutually beneficial
cooperation. The relevant United Nations bodies and
regional and subregional organizations should, at the
request of the countries concerned, play a positive
and active role in transboundary water resources
cooperation by facilitating dialogue, cooperation and
concerted actions among countries so as to contribute
to the well-being of people living in river basins.
China places great emphasis on helping African
countries and peoples to resolve water shortage
problems. Within the framework of the Forum on
China-Africa Cooperation, we have implemented
dozens of well-drilling projects in Africa to supply
water, including 100 clean energy projects, so as to
help African countries to enhance their capacitybuilding in meteorological infrastructure and improve
16/78

22/11/2016

the preservation and management of their forests.
China has also engaged in technical dialogue with
other relevant countries to strengthen the exchange
of experiences and help those countries develop plans
regarding the use of water resources, flood control and
disaster reduction, while helping them to upgrade their
abilities to manage and develop water resources.
China stands ready to work together with the rest of
the international community to promote the sustainable
development and utilization of water resources and to
promote peace and security in a bid to realize peace,
stability, development and the prosperity of humankind.
Ms. Coleman (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. Minister, for your leadership in focusing the
attention of the Security Council on the important
linkages between water and international peace and
security. I also thank our briefers for so eloquently
framing the issues this morning.
As we have heard, conflict over water is increasingly
a serious global issue. In discussing water, peace and
security today, I would like to focus my remarks on two
points: first, the example of the Lake Chad basin as an
area struggling with water and security and, secondly,
the role that the international community can play
in helping to prevent water disputes from becoming
armed conflicts.
The Lake Chad basin, which spans the border
region of Chad, the Niger, Nigeria and Cameroon, is
an example of what happens when water scarcities
contribute to conflict. Overuse, poor management
practices and expanding desertification have caused
the lake to recede by approximately 90 per cent. The
disappearance of that critical resource, which is the
basis of survival for millions of people, has led to
territorial disputes and helped nurture the rise of Boko
Haram. Boko Haram uses the dying lake as a recruiting
base, easily exploiting the tens of thousands of displaced
people who are searching for a means of livelihood.
Boko Haram deploys brutal tactics of abduction, sexual
slavery, killing and looting to terrorize the population,
and the resulting armed conflict has left over 9 million
people in need of humanitarian assistance.
However, there is a glimmer of hope in that otherwise
dark reality. The Lake Chad Basin Commission was
established by Governments of the region and civil
society to try to peacefully resolve disputes over the
lake. The Commission also formed the Multinational
Joint Task Force (MNJTF) to fight Boko Haram — a
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

powerful testament to the role regional cooperation can
play in combating issues that result from water scarcity.
It is urgent that the international community bolster its
support to the MNJTF to assist in its efforts to counter
Boko Haram. In particular, the main challenge for
the MNJTF is a severe lack of funding, and therefore
we all must recommit to contributing to the Force.
Greater international support would be a strong sign
of solidarity with the people of the four countries that
are bearing the brunt of a terrorist threat that mocks the
value of human life. Support to local Governments to
help build capacity for rehabilitation and reconstruction
would also go a long way in helping to ensure lasting
peace and stability.
Conflict over water is not exclusive to the Lake Chad
basin, of course. In Syria, poor drought management
resulted in the loss of livelihood for thousands of
farmers, leading to mass migration to urban areas
and fanning the flames of what was already a deeprooted discontent with respect to Government policies.
In Iraq, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has
manipulated strategic dams on the Tigris and Euphrates
Rivers as a key component of its strategy.
I doubt that there is a single country represented
in this Chamber that is immune to water challenges. I
know that the United States is not. With 50 states that
share 21 large rivers and more than 20,000 watersheds,
we have had to learn to cooperate. For more than 100
years, the United States has had close relationships
on water management with both our neighbours,
and all three countries have benefited. For example,
our 2012 bilateral agreement with Mexico permits
Mexico to store water in the United States for drought
protection, but it also allows United States entities to
invest in water conservation projects in Mexico and
then share in the water that is saved. That model has
proved to be successful in strengthening water security
for both countries and in encouraging investments in
water conservation and sound resource management.
Drawing from that partnership and others, I would
like to share some thoughts on best practices we have
learned in helping to keep water disputes from erupting
into conflict.
First, the international community should support
regional resolution of water disputes by building the
capacity of States and stakeholders. Countries require
the ability to negotiate, resolve disputes and implement
agreements relating to their water resources. That
includes the technical skills needed to understand

S/PV.7818

emerging challenges and opportunities, as well as the
means to address them. One model of capacity-building
is the programme funded by the United States Agency
for International Development in the Kadamjay region
of Kyrgyztan, which provided technical assistance and
resources to better manage water inefficiencies. The
programme enabled the construction of a permanent
diversion dam, which benefited nearly 2,000 farmers
and residents.
Secondly, institutions and processes can help lock-in
progress. The establishment of regional organizations,
bilateral agreements and information-sharing platforms
can all play a role in institutionalizing and maintaining
cooperation. The United States has been working with
several other donors to develop the Shared Waters
Partnership, which supports cooperative efforts on
transboundary waters in regions where water is or
may become a source of conflict. The programme is a
resource to any country looking for support to resolve
water issues.
Finally, sound data and impartial analysis
are essential to developing a common view of the
challenges and opportunities that face us, and they help
provide a foundation for decision-making. A project in
the Okavango River basin, which is shared by Angola,
Namibia and Botswana, effectively used data to give
early warning of locations at risk of resource conflict,
thereby allowing the parties involved to proactively
resolve potential issues before they could develop.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate our support for
developing creative, win-win solutions to transboundary
water challenges. I thank you, Mr. President, for calling
our attention to this very important issue.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
start by saying that, having listened to what you,
Mr. President, had to convey to and share with the
Council on the experience of Senegal and the exemplary
role that you have been playing in the management of
water resources in that region, I can understand why
the topic is important, not only for Senegal, but for
the world. I would therefore very much like to thank
you for convening this meeting and for your choice
for our debate this morning. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-Moon; and to
welcome Mr. Danilo Türk, Chair of the Global HighLevel Panel on Water and Peace; Ms. Christine Beerli,
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross; and Mr. Sundeep Waslekar, President of

16-3968017/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

Strategic Foresight Group, and thank them for the very
important and insightful remarks they shared with us
this morning.
Contemporary life is characterized by the scarcity
of clear, clean and safe drinking water in increasing
parts of the world. Nearly 1.7 billion people in the
developing world do not have access to water, while
in some countries and regions people take water for
granted, wasting it or turning it into an extremely
lucrative business. Water has become an essential part
of the international political agenda, a global challenge
and a critical issue confronting our societies. Water and
access to it are a core issue of climate change, health
and nutrition crises and environmental degradation,
and they are also at the origin of serious social and
political conflicts.
The recognition by the General Assembly that
water and sanitation constitute fundamental human
rights was a decisive step forward in changing the
paradigm on how the issue of water is perceived.
The establishment of the Global High-Level Panel
on Water and Peace — aimed at proposing a global
architecture to transform water from a source of
potential crisis to an instrument of cooperation and
peace — fully translates the contemporary concern for
and awareness of the issue, while the management of
water courses and river basins became a central piece
of international cooperation.
The management of rivers of Senegal and the Gambia
is an outstanding example of regional cooperation in
the management of water assets by bordering countries
through transcending national interests. However,
such good practice has not always been the rule, and
competition for water for irrigation and grazing and the
lack of access to drinking water are increasing sources
of conflict in some countries and regions.
The Lake Chad basin has become one of the most
dramatic cases where the linkage between water, peace
and security is at centre stage. Due to poor cooperation
among its adjoining countries, the basin faces
enormous challenges that threaten its very existence
and the survival of millions of its inhabitants, as it
is no longer affords them enough water resources for
their livelihoods. Lake Chad benefits around 20 million
people living on its shores in four countries, supporting
the local economy, which is fundamentally based on
fishing, agriculture and cattle-raising. However, the
inhabitants see their source of livelihood impaired,
18/78

22/11/2016

with the lake on the brink of ecological disaster, having
become a tiny fraction of its former size. That situation
has led to security threats linked to growing poverty
and unemployment, youth radicalization and terrorism
and a huge humanitarian crisis against the backdrop of
high rates of population growth, extreme poverty and a
food and nutrition crisis.
The international community is called upon to act,
as a preventive measure, and to do something tangible
in helping to solve the environmental degradation of
a region that has historically been an economic and
cultural hub of African culture and civilization. To
manage the lake’s shrinking water resources and reverse
the trend towards its extinction, several initiatives at the
international and regional levels have been undertaken
as a demonstration of the deep concern of the people,
Governments and the international community
regarding the current state of affairs.
The Lake Chad Basin Commission, a regional
initiative, has developed the Lake Chad replenishment
project with the objective of regenerating the lake — an
ambitious project with the potential to radically change
the situation of the basin and the lives of its population.
The countries of the region and the international
community should assume a collective responsibility by
seriously considering extending tangible support to the
project. That would turn it into a top priority among the
important infrastructure projects being developed by
Africa’s key development partners, since the prevailing
situation has the potential to become yet another hotbed
of crisis and conflict, as well as a real threat to regional
and international peace and security.
I would like to take this opportunity to highlight
Angola’s experience with regard to water resources
and their use and management. The Government of
Angola has created a water resources institute that
is implementing a national programme for water
distribution and sanitation all over the country, as
well as the management of transboundary watersheds.
However, despite the rich water resources with
which Angola is endowed, providing water to every
community in the country remains a huge challenge
and one that calls for a continuing serious financial,
technical and educational effort in which international
investment is a key factor.
At the regional level, the Okavango River Basin
Water Commission was established by Angola, Botswana
and Namibia in order to promote and strengthen
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

the integrated, sustainable management, use and
development of the Cubango-Okavango basin. Respect
for best practices, aimed at protecting biodiversity and
improving the livelihoods of the basin’s communities
and human development in the States concerned, has
been a fundamental consideration for the programme.
The countries of the Water Commission are currently
implementing a strategic action programme that can be
seen as a good case of regional cooperation and one that
other speakers have already mentioned. Water is a key
factor in that kind of cooperation.
In conclusion, it is evident that water shortages,
shortsighted national interests and mismanagement
can cause tensions among populations and nations
in many regions of the world, leading to potential
sources of conflict. It is therefore key to promote
international cooperation on such a critical issue,
by raising international awareness, encouraging
developing countries to prioritize water and sanitation,
and integrating water management into global food
security, health and climate-change initiatives in order
to preserve peace and security in the world.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): At the outset,
I would like to welcome the analyses shared by the
Secretary-General and all our briefers this morning. I
also join others in paying tribute to you, Mr. President,
for your leadership in bringing this vital issue to the
Council. An important part of our responsibilities
as the Security Council in delivering Goal 16 of the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) is having a
broad enough definition of the threats to international
peace and security — not so as to encroach on the
responsibilities of other parts of the United Nations
system, but to join up with them. And on that, Senegal is
providing leadership and putting it into practice through
the Senegal River Basin Development Organization.
I commend the cooperation that Senegal has fostered
with Mali, Mauritania and Guinea on flood defences
and hydropower, in a welcome example of managing
transboundary water challenges through cooperation
rather than conflict.
Sadly, however, we are in need of more examples
of best practices. The statistics speak for themselves.
In less than 10 years’ time, unless we take action, up to
2.5 billion people, a third of today’s global population,
could be vulnerable to water insecurity. Unless we
take action, by 2030 — the year we are supposed to
achieve the global goals, including SDG 6, on water

S/PV.7818

and sanitation — the global demand for fresh water will
outstrip the supply by 40 per cent.
That is a problem not just for tomorrow but for
today. Every year, water insecurity costs the global
economy $500 billion. That is $500 billion lost to
inadequate water and sanitation, urban flood damage
and agricultural wastage through droughts and floods.
For the people affected by the issue today, it is about
much more than money. It is about life and death. Take
the villagers of Kiangwe, in Lamu county in Kenya.
Water scarcity there means that inhabitants spend
sleepless nights walking to dried-up wells in the hope
of securing just a few bottles of water. It means that
they are choosing to risk their lives by walking through
territory full of Al-Shabaab fighters. It means leaving
their children at home, alone, hungry and thirsty. And
from that village in Kenya, we can extrapolate to see
the risk that this issue poses to international peace
and security. A scarcity of water affects food and
energy production, damaging economic growth. It
increases local tensions, causing conflicts over access
to water within States and regions. And as demand
increases, it is possible that such conflicts will broaden
to include Member States themselves, or even lead
to the targeting of water infrastructure. I therefore
fully endorse the comments the briefers made about
respecting international humanitarian law and about
the importance of protecting water infrastructure. I
also like the idea that we heard earlier about waterrelated ceasefires in conflicts.
So what more can be done? The United Kingdom is
already active in helping to tackle this set of problems.
Over the next four years, we will be contributing
$43 million to improving the management of shared
waters in southern Africa. We will be doing so in
partnership with Germany’s Ministry of Economic
Cooperation and the Climate Resilient Infrastructure
Development Facility, a private-sector organization
that designs and finances water infrastructure. In an
increasingly water-scarce region, the programme will
help the countries of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) build water infrastructure such
as storage reservoirs and irrigation and water-supply
systems. It will enable countries to share data on water
levels with their neighbours and to issue timely flood
and drought warnings, and it will build the capacity
of institutions such as river basin organizations to
help them manage water resources in shared basins. In
doing so, it will help countries in the region use those

16-3968019/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

22/11/2016

resources to grow their economies and reduce poverty.
Most importantly, perhaps, we expect the programme
to help as many as 3 million of the poorest people in
the region, so that they can cope better with the effects
of climate variability and climate change, particularly
floods and drought.

cases serve to highlight the fact that water-related
infrastructure can be subject to attacks by parties to
a conflict. Examples of that include the attacks on a
water-treatment plant in Aleppo and the attacks on a
desalination plant and wastewater treatment plants
in Gaza .

We will not be doing this alone. Through this project,
we hope to raise nearly $500 million from the private
sector, including companies with a high dependency
on water, as well as from national Governments and
development banks, so that together we can plan and
construct water infrastructure for communities within
SADC member States. Ultimately, tackling water
insecurity at a global level will need joint efforts and
investments that require regional cooperation. Today’s
Security Council meeting is an important step towards
that collective, cooperative effort. We should not
underestimate the scale of the challenge ahead. The
global investment deficit for water governance and
infrastructure alone is $198 billion a year. Together,
however, we can make a difference if we invest in the
information, institutions and infrastructure required to
deliver water security. And when combined with the
right political interventions, including by the Security
Council, together we can reduce the impact of water
problems at the local, national and regional levels.

On a different note, the protection of water in conflict
situations poses a challenge. In the face of conflict,
we must ensure access to water for those affected in
order to prevent humanitarian crises. I would like to
recall here that under international humanitarian law,
in particular article 54 of the 1977 Additional Protocol
I to the 1949 Geneva Conventions and article 14 of the
Additional Protocol II to the same conventions, it is
prohibited to attack, destroy, remove or render useless
objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian
population, including drinking-water installations and
supplies. The Security Council should remain vigilant
about potential humanitarian threats posed by the lack
of access to water in conflict situations.

Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate, and
I also thank the briefers for their insightful statements.
The topic of today’s meeting has great significance
to Japan, a country where water has played a vital
role throughout its history. On a positive note, sound
and peaceful water resource management, including
the development of watercourse networks from the
seventeenth to the nineteenth centuries, helped to
form a basis for the peaceful development of modern
Japanese society.
The sound development and use of water resources
are crucial to achieving peace and prosperity. However,
the importance of water has often invited disputes
among States. There are 276 international water basins
around the world, and, historically, disputes on the
usage or distribution of the shared water resource have
destabilized the relations among States, sometimes
leading to violence. A 2013 report in the UNESCO
quarterly journal A World of Science noted that there
were 44 examples of acute disputes involving violence
over water between 1948 and 2008, including over the
Jordan, Indus and Nile Rivers. Moreover, more recent
20/78

In the 2013 UNESCO report it is striking to see
that of all of the water-related events between nations,
1,705 events were cooperative ones, while 759 were
conflict-related, with 44 acute disputes involving
violence. As the Secretary-General and the President
of the Council noted today, when managed properly,
water resources can be a unifying force rather than a
cause of conflict. As such, it is only natural that the
Security Council should pay attention to this topic.
Japan believes that improving water access, developing
water management and governance capabilities and
establishing international rules for water usage will
help stabilize societies and de-escalate underlying
tensions between States. I would like to share some of
Japan’s efforts on that front.
Improved access to water can help alleviate
insecurity among people. In relation to the briefing
by Mr. Türk, Chair of the Global High-Level Panel
on Water and Peace, Japan, as a troop-contributing
country to the United Nations Mission in the Republic
of South Sudan, has built roads to improve access to
water resources and has also directly provided water to
the people of Juba in South Sudan. As one of the main
providers of water to the local population, the presence
of the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) in South Sudan is undoubtedly significant. In
that regard, Japan wishes to work closely with the ICRC
to improve access to water in that country.
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

In the Sudan, Japan has supported post-conflict
reconstruction and recovery efforts through a
multisectoral approach focused on water provision
and capacity-building in agriculture, health and rural
governance. By enabling people to share in the peace
dividend, the population now has greater confidence in
the reconstruction efforts, which thereby contributes to
social stability.
From the legal perspective, Japan has led discussions
on the International Law Commission (ILC) draft
articles on the Law of Transboundary Aquifers, which
provides a valuable platform for countries to establish
agreements for the proper management of their aquifer
systems. This year, Japan worked as the coordinator
of the draft resolution on the ILC draft articles, which
was adopted in the Sixth Committee of the General
Assembly this month.
Water is essential to every aspect of human life.
That is only natural, given that almost 70 per cent of
the human body is water. Humankind should be wise
enough to use water as a source of cooperation, not of
conflict. I believe that it is important for the Security
Council to pay attention to this topic, which might not
otherwise receive the attention it deserves. I therefore
wish to commend Senegal for taking the initiative to
raise this complex but important cross-cutting theme.
Japan will continue to support countries in improving
their water governance and access as a building block
for sustaining peace and security.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are happy to see you, Mr. Minister, once
again presiding over a meeting of the Security Council.
We are grateful to all of the briefers for their statements.
Water is essential for life. It is only when there is
stable access to that key resource that one can talk about
sustainable development in all three of its components.
In that regard, it is difficult to overstate the timely
nature of activities aimed at implementing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development with particular
regard to water issues.
Currently, Member States are working in the
General Assembly on a draft resolution initiated by the
Government of the Republic of Tajikistan. That draft
resolution is currently in the Second Committee of the
General Assembly. It is designed to be a catalyst for
the implementation of practical measures in the area of
water within the framework of the new United Nations

S/PV.7818

International Decade for Action, called “Water for
Sustainable Development”.
With regard to the topic of today’s Security
Council meeting, which links water resources issues
and ensuring peace and security, we think that
natural resources, in and of themselves, are neutral
in nature. Therefore, their presence or their scarcity
cannot, a priori, be regarded as an underlying reason
for conflicts and for creating a threat to peace and
security. The deterioration of the situation with regard
to access to water, which can be due to various factors,
can exacerbate existing disputes between States, and
not necessarily in the water sector, or it can be used
to exacerbate tensions between them. However, the
root cause of the conflict lies elsewhere, namely, in the
ineffective management of water resources, not in the
resources themselves.
In that context, we are concerned by the ongoing
attempts to directly incorporate a security component
into issues relating to water resources. Securitizing
the issue of water could lead to the shifting of the
focus of international efforts towards a subjective
search for “guilty parties’ and the subsequent probable
imposition of military intervention in the parts of
the world concerned, where what is really needed is
specific expert activity in order to work out solutions
for emerging issues. In that way, emphasizing the
geopolitical aspects of water cooperation, including
international security, can only complicate the quest
for the resolution of a difficult socioeconomic situation
and, as a result, hinder sustainable development as
a whole.
Our delegation has earlier repeatedly expressed
doubts about the advisability of involving the Security
Council in various issues relating to sustainable
development, as well as involving other non-core
United Nations agencies that do not have the
appropriate expertise and tools and cannot, therefore,
bring added value to discussions on the topic. Under
the Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council
has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Its work is aimed at
resolving specific conflict situations, first and foremost
through reconciliation among conflicting parties. It is
not clear what kind of practical measures the initiators
of today’s meeting, focusing on the theme of water
resources, are expecting from the Security Council.

16-3968021/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

Bringing issues relating to sustainable development
into the busy Security Council agenda can also lead
to imbalance in the activities of other major United
Nations bodies. We are convinced that adherence to
the clear division of labour within the United Nations
system is the key to the effective and transparent
functioning of the Organization as a whole. In addition,
attempting to view the management of water resources
from a general perspective, especially through the
prism of international security, makes it more difficult
to consider the national and regional particularities of
water cooperation. This, in the end, can undermine
existing agreements at various levels.
The key to resolving issues in the area of water
is to increase the general level of socioeconomic,
scientific and technical development of countries and
bringing their own potential to bear in this respect. The
international community must concentrate its efforts
on the economic, social and environmental aspects of
the issue and, if possible, provide countries in need
with the necessary financial and technical cooperation
and help them to build capacity in terms of their own
national specialists.
Of course, such assistance should take into
account the specific requirements of, and strategies
for, their own national development as well as regional
particularities. The lack of concrete action in this area
should not give rise to attempts to identify questionable
causes of problems, given that an appropriate resolution
to such problems is vital to reducing tensions between
countries experiencing water scarcity.
Implementing the 2030 Sustainable Agenda for
Development and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda on
financing for development provides us with additional
possibilities for further cooperation among States on the
basis of creating a balance among the three dimensions
of sustainable development.
We believe that in order to continue a substantive
discussion on water issues, it would be useful to consider
the lessons learned by the international community
from the recently concluded International Decade
for Action, “Water for Life” 2005-2015, of which
the Russian Federation was one of the initiators. We
deem it important to make use of and improve on such
experience and practice, as they would enhance our
efforts to promote sustainable water use. That is why
Russia supported the Tajikistan initiative to declare a
new decade on water issues.
22/78

22/11/2016

In this respect, the United Nations development
system can play an important role in helping
international efforts in this respect. We are in favour
of strengthening inter-agency cooperation under UNWater, which brings together all the structural entities
within the United Nations having to do with water
supply. We deem it important to develop and improve
the regional and international legal basis in the area of
regulating water resources. We note in this regard the
positive experience in implementing the Convention on
the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses
and International Lakes within the region regulated by
the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe.
As regards the issue of the management of transboundary
watercourses, we believe in principle that we must
arrive at mutually beneficial solutions, on the basis of
partnership and respect for national sovereignty.
We regret the fact that the delegation of Ukraine
once again tried to use this forum not for the purpose
of constructively contributing to discussing the issue
of international peace and security, but rather for
purposes of propaganda to provide political cover
for the criminal activities of Kyiv. The people of the
Russian Crimea are not likely to forget that in April
2014 Kyiv ordered the blocking of the locks of the
Northern Crimea canal, which at the time provided for
85 per cent of the freshwater needs of approximately
2 million people. Such activities undertaken by the
Ukrainian authorities undermine human rights and
a whole slew of international humanitarian norms, in
particular the right to fresh water and sanitation and
the right to food, as well as the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council on human rights, let alone article
25 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and
article 11 of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I wish to thank
you, Minister Ndiaye, and your delegation for having
convened this important and very interesting debate. I
also express my appreciation to the Secretary-General
and the other briefers.
The subject of today’s debate is somewhat
challenging for New Zealand: on the one hand, we are
surrounded by water and that water — seawater — is
fundamental to our security and to our economic wellbeing. On the other hand, with our nearest neighbour
more than 1,200 miles away, that water is uncontestably
subject to New Zealand jurisdiction, in accordance
with the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Sea. We are in the lucky situation of not having to share
freshwater resources with any other nation or manage
the challenges of a shared riverine boundary.
But we know that other members of this
Organization have much more difficult situations to
manage and that access to critical natural resources
can have profound implications for the survival and
prosperity of communities, and competition for these
has long been a potential source of conflict. Therefore,
while I agree with my Russian colleague that there is
nothing inherent in water that makes it a security issue,
we all know that no resource is more central to human
survival than fresh water and that where that resource is
scarce or access is restricted, the potential for conflict
is real.
As we heard from Mr. Danilo Türk, approximately
145 States and 40 per cent of the world’s population fall
within 263 international river basins. In some regions,
hundreds of millions of people rely on the outflow
of just a handful of at-risk water sources. Even in a
country like New Zealand, which has mostly clean and
relatively abundant fresh water, economic activities
and a growing population are putting pressure on
freshwater resources in terms of both managing access
and maintaining water quality.
Those regions of the world already struggling with
water shortages are expected to experience further
scarcity as they feel the combined effects of rapid
population growth, increased agricultural production
and climate change. Moreover, the potential for conflict
between countries over transboundary water resources
is well documented. Water crises can increase State
fragility and act as a threat multiplier.
I wish to highlight three areas where we believe
more could be done on this issue to support international
peace and security.
First, we need to acknowledge that the effective
management of water resources is not only essential
for resilience and sustainable development, but is also
an effective conflict-prevention tool. In many parts
of the world, considerable progress has been made
in the collaborative management of water resources,
enhancing security and prosperity. This is most
effective at the regional level.
There are many successful multiparty management
frameworks, stretching from the Mekong River in
South-East Asia to the Senegal River and the Lake Chad

S/PV.7818

Basin in West Africa. Effective regional cooperation to
mitigate conflict risk must be applauded. We need to
support such initiatives and foster them in areas where
frameworks are absent.
As the Secretary-General noted this morning,
the United Nations can play an important role. We
welcome, for example, the work of the Department of
Political Affairs, through the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia, in
fostering dialogue and cooperation on the management
of transboundary water resources in Central Asia.
Initiatives such as the Global High-Level Panel on
Water and Peace can also allow us to focus our efforts.
Secondly, in existing conflict situations we need
to recognize that competition for water resources
can affect the conduct and continuation of hostilities.
Disputes over water need to be fully integrated
into conflict analyses and conflict-prevention and
resolution strategies.
The denial of access to water can be used for political
leverage or as a weapon of war, as we have heard a number
of times this morning. We have seen the shocking and
deliberate use of such cynical tactics against civilians
in Syria, Yemen and elsewhere. Freshwater systems
form part of critical civilian infrastructure and, as such,
are protected under international humanitarian law. As
the representative of the International Committee of
the Red Cross made clear this morning, deliberately
denying civilians’ access to fresh water represents
a violation of international human rights law and in
conflict settings may even amount to war crimes.
Thirdly, and finally, we need to ensure that water
security is not considered solely as a transboundary
issue. As the Council heard during the open debate on
security challenges facing small island developing States
convened by New Zealand last year (see S/PV.7499),
security threats can take different forms for such States.
For many small island States in my own region, reliable
access to fresh water is an existential issue.
Almost half of the small island developing States in
the Pacific have no significant surface water resources.
Almost as many also lack groundwater reserves. This
leaves many communities reliant on unpredictable
rainfall patterns for fresh water, representing a threat to
the sustainable development and health and, ultimately,
the viability of many Pacific populations.

16-3968023/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

Climate change effects on the region are likely
to include more intense droughts and the potential
contamination of available groundwater resources.
Those impacts can exacerbate security risks. New
Zealand has been working with its Pacific partners to
address a range of water-related vulnerabilities across
the region, including rainwater-harvesting systems
in Kiribati and Vanuatu and strengthening national
water management and delivery systems. We are also
working towards improving supply and reliability of
water supplies for drought-prone islands in Tuvalu,
Tokelau, Cook Islands and the Marshall Islands.
In conclusion, ensuring water security for the
world’s population represents one of the most critical
challenges facing the global community. Ultimately,
that can only be achieved through effective regional
and international cooperation. Doing so will enhance
prosperity and security by fostering resilience and
trust. It can help prevent conflict and save lives.
I thank Senegal for its work in the area and the
briefers for their instructive contributions. We must
continue to lend our full support to such efforts.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the delegation of Senegal
for convening this important debate on water, peace
and security. I would also like to thank the briefers for
their important contributions.
Our planet suffers from the unequal geographic
distribution of potable water resources. As every study
and international report has stressed, the scarcity of
water will be the primary cause underlying many
challenges leading to conflicts among States. That is
reflected in numerous disputes covered in the Security
Council in which competition over the control water
resources has become a primary cause of conflicts.
Egypt suffers from water scarcity since it relies and
depends on a single source for its potable water, the river
Nile. Egypt is also situated in the arid region of North
Africa where rainfall is scarce. Egypt’s water scarcity
problem is compounded by overpopulation. The per
capita share of renewable water sources for Egypt is
600 cubic meters per year, which means that the people
of Egypt are below the real rarity threshold. Moreover,
adding to the problems of water scarcity, Egypt’s share
of water coming from the Nile has remained unchanged
at 55.5 billion cubic meters annually, which does not
meet its basic needs suppressing 102 billion cubic
meters per year. It is difficult to rely on underground
24/78

22/11/2016

water reserves as they are located at extremely profound
depths and represent a non-renewable source of potable
water. All those factors are compounded by the fact that
Egypt is a downstream country. The repercussions of
climate change has affected the Nile basin.
Egypt believes that water should be a catalyst
for cooperation, thereby achieving development in
water security. Accordingly, Egypt helped found
the Nile Basin Initiative in 1990. Today, Egypt is
implementing bilateral projects with the Nile Basin
Countries to benefit from those water resources without
encroaching upon the interests of any single country.
In keeping with the efforts that Egypt initiated in the
1960s, it began implementing the Egyptian initiative
for the development of the Nile Basin countries in
2012, including joint projects in water, agricultural,
commercial, economic and medical areas.
As well as bilateral and regional efforts aimed
at promoting cooperation and security among
neighbouring riparian States, Egypt believes in
the crucial role that the United Nations can play in
preventing conflicts fuelled by competition over water
resources or preventing any one party from adopting
unilateral measures that run counter to the principles of
common benefit and thereby threaten the water security
of those who share the same watercourse. That can be
achieved through the following measures.
First, it can be accomplished through abiding
by the principles of causing no harm and providing
prior notification among riparian States of the same
river, especially with regard to upstream States in
their relation to downstream States. In that vein, the
implementation of projects by upstream countries
on common watercourses that are not based on
comprehensive studies showing no consequent negative
impact on other riparian States, especially with regard
to the downstream countries, represents a flagrant
violation of those two principles.
Secondly, countries must respect their obligations
within the framework of international law, including
bilateral and multilateral agreements based on crossborder water resources. Countries must also abide
by their rights and duties in line with international
humanitarian law.
Thirdly, other international non-State parties,
in particular charitable institutions, banks and
construction companies, must respect international
norms for establishing water facilities on cross-border
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

watercourses. Such entities must stop financing or
construction if there is no prior approval of all riparian
States, in particular the downstream States, to prevent
causing any future disputes among those countries.
Fourthly, international expertise must be
exchanged and successful experiences shared in the
joint management of water resources, while at the
same time developing existing mechanisms to address
all challenges relating to the common benefit of water
resources. We should also adopt a comprehensive
approach for managing joint water resources that would
ensure the participation of all States in the management
process and the accrual of shared benefits. In that
regard, we recall the vital role played by the European
Agreement on Main Inland Waterways of International
Importance, which is an awareness-raising example for
countries throughout the world of Europe’s success in
the area.
Fifthly, the United Nations must assume a clearer
role in developing the cooperation mechanism among
riparian States with regard to tansboundary rivers, as
well as capacity-building, to maximize the benefits
derived from water and efforts to prevent conflicts
resulting from water issues among nations.
The theme of water as a source of achieving
international peace and security or as a threat to the
latter requires our sustained attention. We must address
the issue in a timely manner, or else the prophecy made
in 1991 by former Secretary-General Boutros BoutrosGhali — that future wars will be ignited by conflicts
over water resources — will become a reality. Although
the world is more aware today of the importance of
preventing conflicts, water could be the most pressing
entry point to activating prevention mechanisms.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by warmly thanking the Senegalese
presidency for organizing this essential debate on the
relationship between water, peace and security. I would
also like to thank Mr. Danilo Türk, Chair of the Global
High-Level Panel on Water and Peace; Ms. Christine
Beerli, Vice-President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross; and Mr. Sundeep Waslekar,
President of Strategic Foresight Group, for their very
edifying briefings.
Against the backdrop set out in the excellent
concept note (S/2016/969, annex) circulated by the
Senegalese presidency, I would like to make including
three messages. The first is that water should never be

S/PV.7818

a source of division, but rather a factor for cooperation
between States. That is an essential element. For that
purpose, we must use and promote the major conventions
on water use, namely, the Economic Commission
for Europe Convention on the Protection and Use of
Transboundary Watercourses and International Lakes,
agreed in Helsinki, and the Convention on the Law of the
Non-navigational Uses of International Watercourses,
agreed in New York. It is true that natural resources
are at stake in many conflicts. That has been the case
for at least 40 per cent of them over the past 60 years,
according to consistent estimates.
Climate change of course exacerbates the situation,
in particular because of its impact on land degradation
and desertification. But even in times of war, the sharing
of water resources can facilitate dialogue between the
warring parties — for example, the discussions between
Jordan and Israel and of the South African agreements
signed during the wars in the 1970s and 1980s.
In that context, in order to help States to make the
sharing of water resources a tool for cooperation, we
need an equitable multilateral framework endowed
with high-quality expertise. That is why France so
actively supports and promotes the two essential tools
of international law that we have at our disposal. The
first tool is the Economic Commission for Europe
Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary
Watercourses and International Lakes, known as
the Helsinki Convention, which has been open to all
States Members of the United Nations since 1 March.
The second tool is the Convention on the Law of the
Non-navigational Uses of International Watercourses,
known as the New York Convention.
The Helsinki Convention, we must underscore,
provides a dialogue and arbitration mechanism for cases
in which there are tensions between States situated
along the same river, lake or aquifer. It includes a
secretariat and a legal and technical support mechanism
for States parties, but also for non-State parties. Those
two Conventions are the primary instruments for the
implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 6, on
water and sanitation, and Sustainable Development Goal
16, on peace, justice and strong institutions, under the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. I therefore
welcome the involvement of the Global High-Level
Panel on Water and Peace in the promotion of the two
Conventions that I have mentioned. I also would like to
emphasize the fact that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Disaster Risk Reduction has an

16-3968025/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

important role to play in encouraging States to become
parties to the two Conventions on the management of
transboundary watercourses.
My second message is that the Security Council
has a key role to play in the essential issue of waterresource management. It must ensure that there is
protection of the infrastructure and other essential
services, in particular water, but also electricity,
during conflicts and post-crisis phases. Goods that are
indispensable to the survival of civilians are protected
under international humanitarian law. Human services
are part of that protection, as is the quality of many other
services, such as health services, as the representative
of the International Committee of the Red Cross
recalled a while ago.
The Security Council must therefore ensure
respect for humanitarian law. It must also ensure that
peacekeeping operations have a minimal environmental
impact. On the other hand, the Security Council has
to study and learn all of the lessons in the operational
recommendations on these issues that the High-Level
Panel on Water and Peace will formulate in 2017. We
look forward to those recommendations on the global
architecture for the prevention and resolution of waterrelated conflicts and on water use as an instrument for
cooperation and peace.
That leads me to my third and final message,
which is of a more general nature. It is high time to
reflect on the global water architecture. The current
global water governance is not up to the challenges
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Its
fragmentation weakens it. That is why France thinks
that it is necessary to facilitate dialogue on the issue
of water-resource management among Member States
and United Nations agencies. Several United Nations
agencies are working on that issue: UNESCO on
surface and groundwater resources, the United Nations
Environment Programme on resource quality issues,
and UNICEF and the World Health Organization on the
links between water resources and people’s access to
drinking water.
In that regard, France is in favour of establishing a
space for dialogue on water issues in their entirety to
cover access to water, but also water quality, pollution
and use, as well as the sustainable and integrated
management of resources, the protection and restoration
of aquatic environments, climate change and prevention
as a response to disasters.
26/78

22/11/2016

In short, those are comments that I wanted to make
on this essential issue of water, peace and security.
The underlying thread of my statement and the central
message of France is that concerted management of
water resources, in particular access to drinking water,
is not only a technical subject, it is also a vital issue when
it comes to development, human rights and security. It
is therefore a top priority for our Organization. The
Security Council, naturally alongside the General
Assembly, has every legitimate right to be seized of the
matter. I am thoroughly convinced that our discussion
today, thanks to you, Mr. President, and the Senegalese
presidency, is both very enlightening for all of us and
very promising for the future.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
thank His Excellency Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Senegalese Abroad, and the
delegation of Senegal for convening this open debate
on an issue that is so important for the future of
humankind. We would also like to commend Mr. Danilo
Türk, Ms. Christine Beerli and Mr. Sundeep Waslekar
for their briefings.
In analysing the water issue, UNESCO indicated
in its 2015 report that population growth, urbanization,
migration and industrialization, along with increases
in production and consumption, have generated everincreasing demands for freshwater resources. In
addition, about 1.2 billion people live in areas where
water is physically scarce. Approximately 748 million
people do not have access to an improved source of
drinking water. Two and a half billion persons do not
have access to basic sanitation facilities, and 1 billion
people relieve themselves in the open air. An estimated
1.8 billion people use a source of potable water that is
contaminated with faecal bacteria. The farming sector
accounts for approximately 70 per cent of all freshwater
extraction globally, and more than 90 per cent in most
of the world’s least developed countries. The United
Nations has also indicated that by 2030 the world is
projected to face a 40 per cent global water deficit under
the business-as-usual scenario. The consequences of
such tensions in an interconnected world will be local,
cross-border and global. In that respect, we must keep
in mind the issue of climate change, which has had
negative global impacts, and in the case of countries
in Africa its devastating effects have already been
seen, affecting health, subsistence, food, the water
supply and security in general. Such a complex reality
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

complicates the fragile political and security situation
in some States of the region, rendering all the more
difficult a solution through a comprehensive approach
to those conflicts.
As was indicated in the Arria Formula meeting
on the same theme in April, all of the aforementioned
elements have an significant impact on peace, security
and development. With that said, we are convinced
that we must broadly and democratically address those
elements in the General Assembly, which is the organ
mandated to address issues of sustainable development,
and water in particular.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
recognizes that socioeconomic development depends
on the sustainable management of natural resources,
including water, and establishes the commitment to
addressing shortages of water supply and water use
more efficiently. To that end, Sustainable Development
Goal 6 contains important elements and strategies
for achieving those goals. Progress towards the
achievement of these objectives will be considered
annually in the High-level Political Forum under the
auspices of the Economic and Social Council, taking
into account the indivisible, integatred and interrelated
nature of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
In that context, SDG 6 will be considered
more closely in 2018, which is why we must strive
in that framework to assess the achievements and
challenges to be overcome in order to achieve a fair
and equitable form of sustainable development in
which the three dimensions — social, economic, and
environmental — are reflected in a balanced manner.
Moreover, we must not forget that UNESCO has been
working continuously under its mandate to assure that
countries manage their water resources sustainably
through the International Hydrological Programme; the
Institute for Water Education, which is headquartered
in Delft, in the Netherlands; the more than 20 research
centres across the world; and the water-related UNESCO
chairs. UNESCO is also leading the drafting of The
United Nations World Water Development Report.
In conclusion, we wish to express that in keeping
with the times and with the solutions that the
planet requires, the search for integrated initiatives
contributes to the preservation of life and human rights
for present and future generations as a fundamental
value of the relationships and cooperation among
States in order to guarantee the establishment of a just,

S/PV.7818

equitable and prosperous world order in the context of
sustainable development.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank you, Sir, and Senegal for providing us
with the opportunity to discuss the linkages between
water, peace and security, in the light of the success of
the Security Council Arria Formula meeting in April.
I also thank the Secretary-General and the briefers for
their important statements.
Water management has become the management of
risk related to the insecurity of water and exacerbated
by climate change. The most recent report on global
risks developed by the Economic World Forum cites the
crises associated with water as among the most pressing
global risks, given their societal impact. In the light of
such threats, it is increasingly important to turn to water
diplomacy, which must play a fundamental role and can
play a role in preventing conflict and settling disputes.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development includes
a Goal dedicated exclusively to water and sanitation,
which is a key step in the right direction. Similarly, the
United Nations recognition of the human right to water
and sanitation is a subject that has been driven forward
for years by Germany and Spain.
Many countries continue to lack the appropriate
institutions to manage water. It is specifically the
incapability of Governments to supply enough potable
water to meet the needs of their populations that often
serves as the source of conflict. Spain has thousands
of years of experience in the management and good
governance of water. Our experience has developed
around chronic shortages in which we had to learn how
to balance demand for water in all its uses with the
protection of the environment, in terms of both our own
river basins and those we share with our neighbours
Portugal and France.
In addition to water, Spain also has experience
that it shares with its partners, both bilaterally and in
regional cooperation, such as our cooperation in the
Iberoamerican Conference of Water Directors and
the Joint Spain-Algeria Water Strategy in the Western
Mediterranean Basin. Similarly, through the Water
and Sanitation Cooperation Fund for Latin America,
Spain is contributing to the efforts of the international
community to put the 2030 Agenda into practice.
We in the Security Council have often seen how
armed conflict can lead to abuses of international
humanitarian law and violations of human rights with

16-3968027/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

22/11/2016

respect to the obligation to protect civilian structures,
especially the right to access to water. Deliberate
attacks on potable water facilities, obstructing access
to repair workers and shortages of fuel and materials
to undertake repairs not only are potential war but also
threaten the health of civilians, given the high risk of
disease in circumstances where water, and drinking
water in particular, is scarce. We must not forget that
the real victim of the use of water as a weapon of war or
in political or military negotiations between parties to
conflict is the civilian population itself.

The President (spoke in French): The representative
of Ukraine has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.

In such circumstances, the international
community must make a special effort, inter alia, to
ensure the conduct of independent investigations into
attacks on protected civilian structures; document their
impact on the civilian population, health-care systems
and the environment; guarantee the unrestricted,
continuous and safe access of humanitarian personnel
and their missions, especially with respect to such
valuable resources as water; and promote exchanges
of good practices in coordination committees and
successful practices in protecting water networks and
infrastructure in armed conflict.

The territory of the autonomous Republic of
Crimea as of today remains under occupation by the
Russian Federation. Under international law, it is the
occupying Power that bears full responsibility for the
consequences of its illegal actions. The statement made
by the Russian representative earlier in this Chamber is
a testament to the inability of the Russian occupation
authorities to address the essential needs of the local
population in any satisfactory manner. Instead of
owning up to its unlawful actions and attempting to
correct the wrongs it has committed, the Russian side
opted to use the issue of the water supply in Crimea as
a propaganda tool.

Over the past two years, Spain has championed the
importance of promoting the preventive function of the
Security Council. In that regard, in June 2015, together
with Malaysia, we organized an Arria Formula meeting
on climate change as a threat to security. In March of
this year, we co-presided with Angola an Arria Formula
meeting on food security, at which we clearly heard
the Director-General of the United Nations Food and
Agriculture Organization say “that there is no peace
without food security”. I would add that there is no food
security without appropriate water management. More
recently, last May, together with Egypt, we organized a
Security Council briefing focused on a holistic analysis
of the possible security implications in the Sahel of
desertification as the main effect of climate change
in the region. These issues — climate change, food
security and desertification — are intrinsically linked
to the challenge that water insecurity can pose for peace
and security.
I would therefore like to conclude by thanking
the Permanent Mission of Senegal and the country’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs for the wise choice of
this topic and by reiterating our hope that the Security
Council will in future continue to analyse these issues
within its sphere of competence.
28/78

Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I am sorry to take
the floor again. First of all, I would like to highly
recommend to my Russian colleagues to listen to the
original language that I use in my statements. I did not
mention Russia by name a single time. Likewise, in my
statement, I never referred to Crimea, but since Crimea
was mentioned by the representative of Russia, I would
like to put on the record the following points.

If the Russian Federation is sincerely concerned
about the issue it raised, it can start by ending the
diversion of scarce water resources in Crimea to feed
the needs of the growing military infrastructure and
military personnel on the peninsula. The next logical
step would be to start the process of deoccupying
the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol, thereby contributing in a positive way to
addressing the issue of water availability in Crimea.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): As regards the situation in Crimea, I note that
it was not the peaceful citizens of Crimea who refused
the water from the Dniepr; it was a purposeful act
on the part of the Kyiv authorities, which turned the
humanitarian situation basically into a catastrophe. The
water blockade did not stop there; it was followed by
blockades of energy and food.
As regards the situation in the Donbas, in the most
recent report of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, it is stated very clearly
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

that, as a result of military activities, the infrastructure
is suffering, including through interrupted access to
water. The report appeals to all sides, including the
armed force of Ukraine, in all circumstances to ensure
respect for the provisions of international humanitarian
law and to avoid damaging objects indispensable to
the survival of the civilian population, including water
filtration facilities.
The President (spoke in French): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Security Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. We still have
50 speakers on the list. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly invited to circulate their texts in
writing and deliver a condensed version when speaking
in the Chamber. I would like to appeal to speakers to
deliver their statements at a reasonable speed so that
interpretation may be properly provided.
I now give the floor to representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Kamaldinov (Kazakhstan): We truly
commend the Senagalese presidency for drawing
attention to the issue of water insecurity, which poses
new threats to which the Security Council must begin
to pay urgent attention.
Scientific studies have indicated a fourfold increase
in violent confrontations over water during the past
decade. The risk of conflicts over water is growing
because of increased competition, inadequate or poor
management and, ultimately, the impacts of climate
change. Shortages, poor water quality or floods will
risk creating instability and State failure, increase
regional tensions, and divert countries from global
cooperation. Water on its own is unlikely to bring
down Governments. What is dangerous are shortages
that threaten food production and energy supply and
put additional stress on Governments struggling with
poverty and social tensions.
As water shortages become more acute beyond
the next 10 years, tensions arise over control and
distribution of water resources. Water supplies or
resources are used for political or military goals by
State and non-State actors. We also witness disputes in
which water resources are a major source of contention
and conflict in the context of economic and social
development. The urgency of this situation demands
timely information-sharing, early warning and the
prompt and appropriate use of existing available
mechanisms and entities, with key stakeholders to be

S/PV.7818

mobilized. Best practices and lessons learned would
help strengthen the approaches devised.
Kazakhstan faces a high degree of environmental
pollution, with some parts of the country still suffering
from shortages of water. The drying up of the Aral
Sea — 70 per cent of which has already been lost) — and
the Syr Darya riverbed negatively impacts ecosystems
in Central Asia. Both of these situations call for close
cooperation and coordination among the various
countries of the region.
We commend the work of the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia on water-related issues. The Centre efficiently
promotes dialogue and build trust within the region.
The United Nations Economic Commission for
Europe’s Convention on the Protection and Use of
Transboundary Watercourses and International Lakes
also works actively to create a global framework for
dealing with transboundary water issues and strengthen
transboundary water cooperation and sound water
management in the region and beyond.
Kazakhstan has initiated the creation of the
Central Asian Investment Fund to implement water
projects in order to co-finance the construction and
renovation of water facilities and infrastructure. We
have also proposed establishing a regional centre for
water security, as well as the joint development and
signing of a pact on water and environmental security
in Central Asia.
Water security is increasingly becoming one of
the defining factors for human progress and stability.
Kazakhstan, as a member of the Group of Friends of
Water, is committed to championing water security
for the benefit of all. This commitment will continue
during our term in the Security Council in 2017 and
2018 and beyond, and we will be active players in all
multilateral actions that promote water security, peace
and development.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I thank you, Sir, an Senegal
for convening this meeting. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Danilo Türk, Ms. Chrstine Beerli and
Mr. Sundeep Waslekar for their interventions.
The relationship between water, peace and security
should be considered with prudence and caution
by the Council. Like climate change, to which it is

16-3968029/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

intimately connected, water scarcity is primarily a
sustainable development challenge. While it may be
one element contributing to conflict and instability in
some particular circumstances, it does not necessarily
represent a threat to international peace and security.
General Assembly resolution 1803 (XVII) declared
that the right of peoples and nations to permanent
sovereignty over their natural resources must be
exercised in the interests of their national development
and of the well-being of the people of the State
concerned. Building on this legal right enjoyed by each
Member State, the Rio Declaration on Environment
and Development recognized that, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and the principles
of international law, States have the sovereign right
to exploit their own resources pursuant to their own
environmental and development policies. These
principles will have a key role to play in the universal
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), including SDG 6, on water and sanitation.
The logic of cooperation, not coercion, should
therefore guide efforts to ensure the just and efficient
use of limited water resources. Agencies and initiatives
such as United Nations-Water, the United Nations Food
and Agriculture Organization Land and Water Division,
the World Water Assessment Programme and the
International Hydrological Programme of UNESCO are
well placed to provide technical expertise to prevent and
resolve issues concerning water resource management.
The Peacebuilding Commission, its Support Office and
Fund can also contribute to designing and supporting
projects aimed at fostering peace and reconciliation
through the fair allocation and ownership of, as well as
access to, water resources at the national level.
Despite some misperceptions that transboundary
water basins tend to engender hostility rather than
collaborative solutions, water is mainly an untapped
resource of fruitful cooperation. Nurturing the
opportunities for cooperation in water management
among all stakeholders can help build mutual respect,
understanding and trust among countries, and maintain
public health, food security and social, environmental
and economic stability. It can also build sustainable
peace.
As my delegation highlighted during the Arria
Formula meeting on this subject in April, our regional
experience illustrates the potential of cooperation
concerning water resources. Brazil signed, in 1969,
30/78

22/11/2016

the Treaty of the River Plate Basin with four of its
neighboring countries. Among other provisions, the
Treaty established an Intergovernmental Coordinating
Committee to promote joint projects in one of the
world’s largest river basins. Two of these are the
Guarani aquifer and the waterway transport system
of the River Plate basin. A decade later, in 1979, a
landmark tripartite agreement among Brazil, Argentina
and Paraguay, regarding the hydroelectric power plants
of Itaipu and Corpus Christi, ended a long-standing
controversy and paved the way for deeper integration
and cooperation in our region.
Likewise, Brazil created, along with Bolivia,
Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Peru, Suriname
and Venezuela, the Amazon Cooperation Treaty
Organization, which has made great strides in
promoting cooperation and sustainable development in
the Amazon basin. These experiences and other regional
initiatives bear witness to the potential of coordinated
water management as an instrument to prevent and
resolve disputes, as well as a catalyst for prosperity.
Rather than treat access to water resources as a threat
to international, peace and security, our focus should
be on addressing serious violations of international
humanitarian law regarding water, particularly the issue
of attacks on water installations in armed conflicts. It is
of utmost importance that all parties to conflict abide
by their obligations not to attack, destroy, remove or
render useless drinking water supplies and irrigation
works, as expressly stipulated in Additional Protocols I
and II to the 1949 Geneva Conventions.
The securitization of sustainable development
issues is detrimental to the functioning of the Council
itself. This tendency detracts attention from the issues
on which the Council can and is mandated to make a
difference, namely, the protracted and more recent
conflicts that have resulted in the direst humanitarian
situation since the end of the Second World War.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Let me express our deep
appreciation for your leadership, Sir, in driving the
water, peace and security agenda, both in the Security
Council and in other forums. Building on the Arria
Formula meeting you hosted in April, today’s meeting
provides us with a very welcome opportunity to
consider the impact of water on peace and security.
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Water impacts every major strand of life, from
agriculture and energy to transportation and health
care. The world is experiencing a surge of water-related
crises, and the World Economic Forum rated water
crises as the top global risk for the next 10 years. A
rapidly growing global population and a changing
climate threaten to skew the dynamics of supply and
demand of the single-most important resource we have,
and in ways we have never faced before. Two-thirds of
the world’s population could be living in water-stressed
conditions by 2025.
Water scarcity affects security and strikes
disproportionately at the most vulnerable and the
poorest. It particularly affects security in fragile
settings where governance may be weak and
institutional capacity to deal with crises is low. We
witness this in places such as in the Sahel region and
around Lake Chad, where drought, land degradation
and desertification lead to resource scarcity and food
insecurity, generating conditions that risk leading to
competition, tension and conflict.
Against the increasing threat that a lack of access
to water can fuel conflict and threaten peace, Sweden
has made efforts to build experience in what we call
water diplomacy. The Stockholm International Water
Institute manages the Shared Waters Partnership,
which facilitates transboundary water management. We
are also host of the UNESCO International Centre for
Water Cooperation, which supports policy makers and
other practitioners in reducing conflict around water.
Our work on water diplomacy has shown that while
the threat of violence over water is real, water also
offers opportunities as a source of cooperation. There
are examples where water has even become a driver
of conflict resolution. Most of the world’s freshwater
resources come from rivers, lakes and aquifers that are
transboundary by nature. While that is a challenge,
research on transboundary water management
demonstrates the many cases where States tend to
collaborate rather than enter into violent disputes over
shared waters. I think your country, Mr. President,
provides a very good example of reaching out to one’s
neighbours to work constructively, as stated earlier by
the Secretary-General.
Cooperation over shared waters can have a farreaching positive impact and build trust far beyond the
issue of managing a shared resource. Institutionalizing
mechanisms for cooperation over shared water is a

S/PV.7818

long-term strategy for sustaining peace and a smart
investment in times of increasing pressures from
population growth, urbanization and climate change.
But to turn water into an opportunity for
cooperation, we need transparent and efficient
mechanism for information-sharing, participation
and dispute settlement. We need smarter and more
integrated water-management approaches. We need to
break down silos and put new incentives in place. We
need to be more creative in the use of technology. And
we need stronger partnerships.
Today’s debate is another reminder of the strong links
between security and development. The implementation
of Agenda 2030 is also crucial in preventing conflict.
The importance of water for sustainable development is
highlighted in several of our common goals, not least
in Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 6, on water,
and SDG 14, on oceans and seas. Sweden is a strong
proponent of the United Nations Conference to Support
the Implementation of SDG 14, which will take place
here in New York in June 2017, to be co-hosted by the
Governments of Fiji and Sweden.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I would like to convey my
delegation’s appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
taking the initiative during your presidency to organize
this open debate on water, peace and security. We
also thank your delegation for the useful concept note
(S/2016/969, annex). I would also like to acknowledge
the insightful remarks made earlier by the SecretaryGeneral and other briefers.
Water is a resource that is limited supply but for
which demand continues to grow. On the one hand,
global warming continues to threaten the supply of
fresh water, while, on the other, the steady increase
in the global population is continually escalating the
demand for water. It is therefore not difficult to see
where our next existential challenge will come from.
But meeting that challenge is not just about addressing
questions of supply and demand; more fundamentally,
it is a challenge of sharing the resource.
As water scarcity worsens with the world’s growing
population, there will be an increased need for sharing
the available source of fresh water. However, the
question of access to water is not just related to our
survival; it is intricately related to food security and

16-3968031/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

22/11/2016

to development. Asian and African States, in particular
sub-Saharan States, all are witnessing growth in
population, extreme vulnerability to climate change and
an ever-increasing hunger for development. Therefore,
the countries of those regions are likely to be the first
to face the challenge of sharing transboundary waters
in a pressing way. In the face of water scarcity, the
ability of countries to cooperate and peaceably share
available water resources will be critical to their peace,
security and development. What is alarming, however,
is that the regions most likely to be affected by acute
water scarcity are the ones facing political turmoil and
conflicts, some of which have remained unresolved
for decades.

On the second aspect, Member States’ ability to
cooperate depends upon a number of factors, which may
be technical, financial or political. There are several
international institutions that can address the technical
or financial needs for developing and sustaining
cooperation on water sharing among States. However,
the only international body that can enhance Member
States’ political ability to cooperate is the Security
Council. It is the responsibility of the Council to
resolve international conflicts and disputes, especially
long-standing, prolonged conflicts, in particular in
Asia and Africa. Unburdened by conflicts of the
past, new challenges can almost always be addressed
cooperatively.

Throughout history, access to water has either been
a source of conflict or of cooperation among people.
Today, too, water scarcity can lead to either of the two
paths. Essential for human survival — as, indeed, for
progress — countries will be prepared to fight for
access to adequate water. Only the will and ability of
States to develop mutual understanding on the sharing
of transboundary waters can prevent violence and
conflict. Therefore, if we at the United Nations wish
to maintain international peace and security, we must
strive to find ways to ensure two things: one, that
Member States remain willing to share water resources
peaceably and cooperatively; and, two, that Member
States’ willingness to resolve such issues are not
constrained by any lack of capacity.

Before I conclude, I want to caution and warn against
any use of water as an instrument of war. Pakistan
denounces any such practice, real or threatened, as
we believe it to be inconsistent with the precepts of
international humanitarian law. Access to water is a
fundamental right that must be protected at all times.

The first of those aspects is often more critical. The
international community must assume responsibility to
develop, nurture and protect normative frameworks at
the multilateral and bilateral levels to ensure that States
remain willing to resolve water issues cooperatively.
It must promote bilateral and regional agreements
on waterways and, once they are developed, ensure
that they are not undermined through unilateral or
coercive measures. The Indus Water Treaty of 1960 —
between Pakistan and India and with the World Bank
as guarantor — is an example and model of what can be
achieved through bilateral agreements. The SecretaryGeneral also cited it earlier as an example of positive
cooperation. But the Treaty is also an equally good
case study of what could go wrong if such agreements
are not honoured or if they are threatened by one of
the States parties to be abrogated altogether. The
international community must remain vigilant to any
sign of unwillingness to maintain cooperation and must
be willing act to avert any conflict.
32/78

Finally, our debate today must send a strong message
to the world that we are committed to maintaining
cooperation in the face of water scarcity; that we will
respect and protect our existing understandings and
build where they are yet to be reached; and that we will
not allow this challenge to put international peace and
security at risk.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): At
the outset, I would like to express my delegation’s
appreciation to you and your delegation, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting and for circulating the
concept note (S/2016/969, annex). I would also like
to express my gratitude to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, the Global High-Level Panel on Water and
Peace, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and the Strategic Foresight Group for their inputs at
this debate.
Water is a natural resource that not only has a
determining impact on the wealth and welfare of all
nations, but also holds major sway over their stability
in the twenty-first century. Approximately 1.7 billion
people currently lack fresh water and are below the
threshold of true scarcity established by the United
Nations. That number is expected to increase to
2.4 billion in 2025.
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

More than 260 rivers are shared in one way or
another by 148 countries, and therefore water-related
issues can affect regional peace in a very significant
way. It is particularly disturbing that there are no
cooperation frameworks for 158 of the 263 international
watercourses. Incremental competition between States
over transboundary water resources has led to regional
instability in many places, and that will continue and
become exacerbated in the future.
With unprecedented population growth, new
emerging economies and the effects of climate change,
pressures on our finite freshwater resources are
increasing. Meanwhile, the ability of some nations
to secure their water-related requirements is being
severely challenged, thus causing great and legitimate
concern that tensions around water hotspots will
intensify among water users. Yet water holds immense
potential for cooperation, which should be explored
and utilized. An increasingly strong and coordinated
response is therefore expected from the international
community in order to raise awareness and build
cooperation on the growing challenges for sovereign
States posed by water.
Water and water resources are increasingly
becoming a matter of national security, and therefore,
as the concept note (S/2016/969, annex) describes, a
potential driver for conflicts. Fierce competition for
fresh water may well become a source of conflict in the
future, in the same way that land and energy have led to
conflicts in the past — if the international community
fails to install efficient and effective water management
structures at the regional level. As stated in the 2015
World Water Development Report,
“[i]nter-state and regional conflicts may
also emerge due to water scarcity and poor
management structures.”
Water diplomacy is needed — a new approach
to managing complex water issues and networks,
innovative approaches to water managing that should
replace outdated zero-sum battles over water. That
new approach would serve to promote both shortand longer-term cooperation through shared benefits,
inclusive multi-stakeholder agreements and sustainable
transboundary institution-building.
To meet those challenges, the international
community needs to accentuate its political will
to promote transboundary water cooperation by
negotiating, designing, agreeing and implementing

S/PV.7818

custom-made and appropriate water-sharing plans and
access to water. We need to encourage countries that
are facing water-related issues to develop cooperation
frameworks to address their respective needs in
order to prevent water-related confrontations in the
future. Upon request by the States concerned, the
relevant bodies of the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations can also play a useful role
in those efforts, particularly in the areas of capacitybuilding, sharing experiences and setting models.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Morales López (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to thank Senegal for convening
this open debate on water, peace and security and for
the concept note (S/2016/969, annex ) shared with us.
We are also grateful for the briefings by Mr. Danilo
Türk, Ms. Christine Beerli and Mr. Sundeep Waslekar.
Less than 3 per cent of global water is fresh water.
Of that 3 per cent, more than 2.5 per cent is frozen
water in Antarctica, the Arctic and in glaciers, making
it practically unavailable. That is, humankind depends
on the remaining .5 per cent of fresh water for its needs
and for the world’s ecosystems.
As the concept note mentions, water resources are
not uniformly distributed throughout the world. Even
when we carefully consider the natural water supply
within countries with significant water resources,
it becomes evident that local distribution is also not
homogenous — in some areas water is abundant and in
others the resource is scarce.
We know that most of the .5 per cent of fresh water
is stored in underground aquifers. However, increasing
use for farming, industry and consumption reduces the
available global reserves. Agriculture — the primary
sector for ensuring food security, and therefore
sustainable development — is estimated to account for
75 per cent of global freshwater consumption. Industry
is responsible for 20 per cent, while only 5 per cent is
used for domestic purposes. In that context, cooperation
is critical to ensuring a sufficient supply of potable water
for all sectors, as a catalyst for sustainable development.
Colombia is rich in water resources due to its
geographic location, topography and great variety of
climate patterns. Grounded in that reality, our country
has recognized the importance not only of the need for
comprehensive management of the resource but also of

16-3968033/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

the prevention, recognition and management of waterrelated conflicts.
My country’s efforts are reflected in the national
policy for integrated water resources management and in
its national water plan, which includes six objectives: to
conserve the ecosystems and hydrological processes on
which the country’s water supply depends; to identify,
quantify and optimize water demand in the country; to
improve the quality and minimize the pollution of water
resources; to develop comprehensive management on
the risks associated with the supply and availability
of water; to create the conditions for institutional
capacity-building in the comprehensive management of
water resources; and, finally, to consolidate and bolster
governance for its comprehensive management.
Key to those objectives is a strategy for managing
conflicts that emerge regarding the use, access and
affordability of water. In that regard, our national water
plan prioritizes a programme for the management
of water-related conflicts that seeks to reinforce the
governance strategy set out in the national policy.
In addition, Colombia wishes to emphasize that the
Congress of the Republic is considering draft legislation
that seeks to make the right to water a constitutional
human right. As of today, six of the eight debates
required for legislative approval have been held. It is
clear that the work being done internally is in keeping
with the Sustainable Development Goals and reflects
Colombia’s commitment to them, particularly Goal 6:
“Ensure availability and sustainable management of
water and sanitation for all”.
For Colombia, it is essential that the issue of
water on the international agenda be considered in the
context of cooperation and dialogue among countries,
which will benefit all countries, their populations and
ecosystems. That perspective allows us to foresee
the emergence of conflicts arising from the supply,
conservation, use or exploitation of water. However,
given the current proliferation of international waterrelated initiatives, Colombia emphasizes the importance
of taking into account the need for comprehensive
and pragmatic approaches within the United Nations
system to address existing water-related issues and
avoid duplicating efforts.
While the issue of water is not within the purview
of the Security Council, the United Nations and
regional bodies play a key role through which it can
participate as a catalyst of international cooperation
34/78

22/11/2016

through technical and scientific exchanges that
promote sustainable water use. States, for their part,
are called upon to make good-faith efforts to promote
dialogue and mechanisms of cooperation such as those
presented today in order to preserve the resource for
future generations and to ensure that its use is shaped
by sustainable patterns of production and consumption.
In that regard, Colombia wishes to reiterate the
importance it attaches to the work of the Security
Council. Nevertheless, it believes that the more
appropriate body to engage in water-related debates is
the General Assembly. Considering the functions and
aims of the Assembly and the intrinsic relationship
between water and sustainable development, it is our
view that water-related discussions should be held in
that universal organ, thereby ensuring an inclusive
and comprehensive approach with the participation of
all Member States. It is imperative that we strengthen
cooperation among States and help developing
countries, upon their request, to find responses and
solutions that will enable them build capacities in order
to prevent water-related conflicts.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): Let me first commend the
Senegalese presidency for including this very important
topic on the agenda of the Security Council.
Hungary aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by observer of the European Union.
When speaking about water security and
cooperation, I always refer to the striking conclusion of
a Hungarian-born Nobel laureate physicist, the inventor
of the hologram, Dénes Gábor, who said,
“Until today man has fought nature; from now on
man has to fight his own nature.”
What makes that statement so relevant in the context
of this debate is that the challenges related to the
sustainable management of our freshwater resources, as
well as the looming water crisis, are, to a large extent,
man-made. Interdependence will only increase over
time, as regions and sectors exposed to water shortages
rely more and more on water controlled by others and
face dramatically changing climatic conditions and
challenges that contribute to the growing water scarcity.
Many consider water as a driver of conflict, but,
even more important, I think that it should be a source
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

of cooperation. While more than 140 water-related
treaties have been signed in this century, datasets show
that only about seven minor skirmishes over water
occurred during the same period. War over water is not
strategically rational, hydrogeographically effective or
economically viable. Until today, water cooperation has
prevailed over water conflicts.
Hungary has developed a strong tradition of
prudent water management over the centuries. It also
provides technical assistance to developing nations.
Given the hydrogeological conditions of the country,
transboundary water cooperation is an unquestionable
imperative for Hungary.
We encourage all Member States to join the
relevant United Nations conventions on water. To avoid
mismanagement, distrust and eventually conflict, the
establishment of coordination mechanisms among
countries at the level of transboundary river basins
or aquifers is an absolute necessity. Transboundary
cooperation hinges on political will and on
understanding what the issues are. The cooperation
required for data-sharing over transboundary river
basins and aquifers is very important.
Since 2003, the Budapest World Science Forum,
organized by the Hungarian Academy of Sciences
and UNESCO, has put water cooperation on the front
line of its deliberations. Water diplomacy is a major
issue for us. In just a couple of days, we will hold the
second Budapest Water Summit, under the patronage
of His Excellency the President of Hungary, who is a
member of the joint United Nations-World Bank HighLevel Panel on Water. We believe that the Budapest
Summit meeting next week will give momentum to
the implementation of the water-related agenda arising
from the Sustainable Development Goals and the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change. The aim of the Summit
is to promote the message to all countries that facilitating
the development of sustainable water resources should
be a source of cooperation and of peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement to be made on behalf of the European
Union. In addition, we fully support the statement by
the representative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
in the light of our cooperation on the upcoming split
mandate in the Security Council.

S/PV.7818

I wish to congratulate Senegal on the open-minded
choice of topic for today’s debate, with emphaiss on the
linkages between climate and security.
Water scarcity can be a threat — a multiplier of
instability, a driver of migration and confrontation.
That is why international cooperation is an essential
tool for peacebuilding, preventing conflicts related
to resource scarcity and minimizing threats through
preventive diplomacy, mediation and capacity-building.
The International Freshwater Treaties Database lists
more than 400 water agreements, more than a quarter
of which have been concluded in the past 70 years. They
are the alternative to confrontation.
Italy is party to the so-called Water Convention — the
Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary
Watercourses and International Lakes — which has
played a key role in preventing potential conflicts in the
pan-European region following the end of the Soviet
Union. It has also proved instrumental in many postconflict situations — for example, after the conflict in
the former Yugoslavia.
The Convention’s institutional framework has
promoted cooperation based on equity and sustainability,
and thus has promoted peace and economic integration.
The opening of the Convention to all States Members
of the United Nations as of 1 March offers the
opportunity to create the global multilateral framework
for promoting water cooperation, monitoring progress,
identifying hotspots and triggering preventive
responses. It can offer a home in the United Nations
system for multilateral diplomacy on peace, security
and water.
Italy believes that education, research and
cooperation, with the transfer of know-how, in
sustainable water management are key to our efforts in
conflict prevention. For that purpose, Italy has invested
in specialized courses for engineers, agronomists
and water managers, while promoting an integrated
approach within the water-energy-food security
nexus at the Agronomic Institute of Florence, as well
as by promoting postgraduate programmes at the
Mediterranean Agronomic Institute in Bari. Together
with the increasing number of graduate students from
sub-Saharan Africa, the Mediterranean and the Middle
East, who are now addressing the competing uses of
scarce water in their respective countries, Italian
cooperation continues its long-standing engagement in
local projects for conservation and the sustainable use of

16-3968035/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

water with a focus on rural areas in the Mediterranean,
the Near East, Africa and Latin America.
History reminds us that advanced water
management can contribute to the development and
resilience of societies, as the Roman Empire proved in
the Mediterranean, an area of water stress and climate
variability. Two millenniums later, we cannot fail
to recognize and address the root causes of conflicts
and the challenges that climate change, unprecedented
urbanization, population growth and migration
pose to the stability and security of the world. That
situation, which is particularly evident in Africa,
calls for increased international collaboration. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development offers an
appropriate framework where economic growth, social
sustainability, environmental preservation and peace
and security are connected and mutually beneficial. We
should not miss the opportunity of adopting that new
conceptual paradigm.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Skinner-Klée (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
First and foremost, we would like to thank you, Sir, for
organizing today’s important debate and for the concept
note (S/2016/969, annex). I also thank the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Danilo Türk, Ms. Christine Beerli and
Mr. Sundeep Waslekar for their briefings.
Our delegation believes that a discussion on water,
peace and security is important, since that natural
resource is essential for humankind’s survival, but
also, because of its scarcity and people’s dependence
on it, it could be the fundamental cause of the outbreak
of conflicts. Guatemala shares the concern that water
could be viewed as a cause of conflict, which could
occur because of its uneven global distribution and
its ongoing scarcity caused by urbanization, global
warming and the excessive or disproportionate use of
water. That is why we must be careful and sensible in
the use and conservation of water, especially given the
expected global population increase in the not-toodistant future. That is why we agree with the remarks
by former Secretary-General Kofi Annan, who said that
“competition for fresh water may well become a
source of conflict and wars in the future, but at the
same time it has the potential to be a catalyst for
development and cooperation.”
36/78

22/11/2016

Our strong commitment to multilateralism is based
on the conviction that global challenges such as the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
fight against poverty, the promotion of sustainable
development and the rule of law can be effectively
addressed only within a multilateral framework based
on the premise of cooperation and solidarity. Without
that, the arbitrary and illogical use of resources will
lead not only to shortages but to clashes between
peoples and nations in an attempt to gain access to
those resources.
Environmental
protection
and
appropriate
management of our natural resources will enable us
to achieve harmonious human coexistence, marked
by development and sustainability and guided by
conservation and sustainable use. We need to prepare
a strategic rapid response focused on the underlying
structural issues related to the problem of water
resources, which requires not only a change in rhetoric
but also a substantial change in the way we see and
understand the reality that determines the conservation
of, access to and use of water.
For Guatemala, it is particularly worrying that for
various reasons, and to a great extent man-made ones,
the world’s populations are currently encountering
a serious shortage of fresh water owing to the
unsustainable use, poor management and pollution of
water, as well as to climate change, industrialization,
rapid demographic growth and the reappropriation of
water, all of which add up to a greater demand for the
resource, which could lead to confrontation among
communities, peoples and nations.
Under those circumstances, it is unnecessary
and pointless to emphasize that, unless we change
the conditions under which we are currently using
that resource, the improper use or lack of access to
water will generate still more structural violence in
various regions, putting at risk development and the
implementation of the economic, social and cultural
rights of populations, as well as international peace
and security. That is why we condemn attacks against
water supplies as a method of waging war, whether
of a national or international nature, since that is a
clear violation of international law and international
humanitarian law. Indeed, to use water as an instrument
of war is a crime against humanity, which is why the
relationship between water and peace deserves to be
analysed with reference to current practices and with
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

a view to coordinating policies on conservation and
sustainable use.
In that regard, we recognize the timeliness of this
debate in the interest of highlighting the problem of
water and its supply, which deserves greater attention
from the international community. That is why we
welcome with pleasure the efforts undertaken by the
Global High-Level Panel on Water and Peace to address
the development of proposals for strengthening the
global architecture for the prevention and resolution
of conflicts related to water, as well as their work
to enhance the relevance of water-related issues in
local, regional and international policies with a view
conserving that vital resource for future generations.
The Security Council has the paramount
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. In order to achieve that, it has been recognized
that it is essential to count on a set of mechanisms and
tools applicable to the situations and local circumstances
of the populations involved. In most cases, those tools
have been used to react to conflicts rather than to
prevent them. However, we believe that it is necessary
to ensure that all instruments at the Security Council’s
disposal should be used in an appropriate way to deal
with the various issues involved in order to achieve
sustainable peace and, of course, conflict prevention.
Finally, my delegation considers it important
to include this topic on the Council’s agenda, while
underscoring that water is a strategic resource that
belongs to all humankind and has an impact on security,
development and human rights. That is clear. We have
at hand two important agendas, the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the sustainable peace
agenda. We can make use of and build on them together
for a sustainable and harmonious future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the of Slovenia.
Mr. Logar (Slovenia): Slovenia welcomes the
organization of this debate and the opportunity to
address the complex topic of the linkages between
water, peace and security at the highest level. I commend
Senegal for convening this meeting and for preparing
the comprehensive concept note (S/2016/969, annex). I
thank the Secretary-General and all three briefers for
their relevant and instructive contributions today.
Water is our life support, and its impact on human
development is undeniable. Yet the value and the

S/PV.7818

strategic place of water in international politics have
long been underestimated, as have the dangers of water
scarcity for peace and security. Especially in the light
of climate change, which directly impacts water cycles,
we must adopt a different attitude and a more coherent
approach to water management and the protection of
that indispensable natural resource, which is key for
the survival of our civilization and, indeed, our planet.
The Paris Agreement on Climate Change represents an
important landmark in the process, and I am pleased to
announce that Slovenia recently ratified the Agreement.
Mobilizing political will is crucial for the protection
of water resources, and we must act quickly. For that
reason, Slovenia is one of the countries co-hosting the
Global High-Level Panel on Water and Peace, chaired
by former Slovenian President, Mr. Danilo Türk, and
Slovenia was pleased to co-host a side event on the
topic during the recent general debate of the General
Assembly. Moreover, we participate in Geneva at the
Group of Friends of Water and Peace, where we look
forward to new members joining the Group as a result
of today’s discussions. We would also like to encourage
more extensive cooperation between the two Groups
of Friends in Geneva and in New York, as well as
cooperation with the various high-level panels working
on water-related issues.
The Security Council has an important role to play
in raising awareness of the importance of water for
peace and security, and in preventing possible waterrelated conflicts. We therefore hope that this debate
will contribute to further actions on water management,
while reinforcing structural aspects of the connection
between water and security.
Furthermore, I would like to stress the important
role of regional organizations in contributing to
peaceful and sustainable water management across
national borders. In addition, we must create inclusive
water partnerships. Those partnerships should involve
a range of actors, not just Governments but also civil
society and the private sector. They should be fair and
appropriately financed, with a view to leaving no one
behind, and should encourage all those involved to
choose cooperation instead of conflict.
There is no doubt that the sustainable management
of water resources will become a major global challenge.
But I would also like to highlight its potential to be
transformed from a source of potential conflict into
an instrument of peaceful cooperation. Slovenia has

16-3968037/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

had very positive experience in that regard with the
International Sava River Basin Commission, established
by the four former Yugoslav States, as a result of one
of the first international agreements concluded among
the former Yugoslav States after peace was achieved
following the Balkan wars. As a result, the Sava River
became a symbol of regional cooperation, and the
agreement has had an important regional stabilizing
effect. I am also proud to inform the Council that just
a week ago the Slovenian National Assembly enshrined
the right to safe drinking water in our Constitution.
Furthermore, the sector-specific priorities of Slovenia’s
development cooperation include a special focus on
sustainable water management and access to safe
drinking water.
Safeguarding water means safeguarding our
planet for ourselves and for generations to come. We
must spare no effort to find comprehensive solutions
to water-related challenges, while taking into account
the close links with climate change, food security,
energy and other issues. The higher our awareness of
the importance of water cooperation, the easier it will
be to achieve the goal of the sustainable use of water for
all, which will, in turn, contribute to the maintenance
of peace and security.
Slovenia remains committed to supporting the
nexus between water, peace and security. In that light,
our country is eagerly looking forward to the final
report of the Global High-Level Panel on Water and
Peace and its recommendations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico would like to thank Senegal for
convening this debate on one of the primary emerging
challenges to development and global stability, as
well as to sustainable peace. We acknowledge the
statements delivered by the Secretary-General and the
other briefers.
First, I shall make some brief comments on
behalf of the High-Level Panel on Water, which was
established by the United Nations and the World Bank
Group and is composed of 11 members and a special
adviser. The Panel is co-chaired by the Presidents of
Mauritius and Mexico.
The Panel on Water seeks a fundamental change in
the way in which the world deals with the issue of water
38/78

22/11/2016

in order to prioritize it as humankind’s most important
resource and to mobilize effective action to ensure its
availability and sustainable management for the benefit
of our peoples, based on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and on Sustainable Development Goal 6
in particular. It is for that reason that we believe that
water should be at the centre of our discussions when
we talk about matters such as social and economic
development, peace and security, the protection of the
environment or adapting to climate change.
Last September, the Panel launched an action
plan, together with the Secretary-General and the
President of the World Bank Group, that recognizes
that access to safe drinking water is a human right.
The plan also acknowledges the need to shoulder
greater responsibilities in the face of local, national
and international challenges through a comprehensive
and coordinated approach. In that regard, our leaders
have called for the consolidation of the current
recommendations and research on water and peace in
order to present a new initiative in January 2017.
If the world continues consuming at its current rate,
by 2030 there will have been a 40 per cent reduction
in current water reserves. If we manage to achieve the
2030 Agenda Sustainable Development Goals, we will
create the necessary conditions for diminishing and
eliminating conflicts over water through a preventive
approach. Such an approach must also include
transboundary basins, which are home to 40 per cent of
the world’s population but lack governance agreements
in 60 per cent of the cases.
In its national capacity, Mexico reaffirms the need
to protect that vital resource for the development of
countries and for their inhabitants, thereby promoting
sustainable peace. For Mexico, the foundations of
sustainable peace lie in development, the fight against
poverty and inequality, and access to justice and
institutions as the most effective means of preventing
conflicts and improving the quality of life.
The management and protection of water resources
is a particularly pertinent issue in those areas where
water has been a frequent source of conflict. It is
important to develop the abilities to cooperate and
mediate in resolving disputes related to water. The work
of the relevant United Nations agencies and bodies on
the ground, including the Peacebuilding Commission,
must take into account the specific nature of this issue.
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

The management of water, especially when the
resource needs to be shared between two or more
countries, does not necessarily have to result in conflict.
For over 120 years Mexico and the United States of
America have developed an exemplary framework
for bilateral cooperation through a binational body,
the International Boundary and Water Commission,
which monitors the implementation of the 13 treaties
on the matter, which both countries have signed.
Collaboration and mutual understanding have allowed
us to implement joint projects that have led to the
improved well-being of some 12 million inhabitants of
the border zone. That political will, expressed through
understanding and cooperation, is what must prevail
between neighbouring nations that share watercourses,
borders, security and a future.
The success of the cooperation on our northern
border has been replicated on our southern border,
where two independent international commissions are
in place. That has led to several decades of cooperation
with our neighbours Guatemala and Belize on the
governance of shared water basins and has also resulted
in the strengthening of bilateral relations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): My delegation wishes
to express its appreciation to Senegal for convening
this important and timely debate on the important role
played by water in the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Conflict has cascading effects and far-reaching
implications for water security, which lead to negative
impacts on political situations and on the social,
economic, and environmental aspects of sustainable
development. The impact of water on conflict can be
seen in Africa, particularly in those countries along
the River Nile, as well as in the water-scarce parts
of the Middle East. We therefore believe that water
security must be one of the primary concerns that
should be addressed in the aftermath of conflicts in
order to restore livelihoods and revive economic and
social development.
In global terms, indications suggest that, at the
current rate, the overuse of fresh water relative to its
supply will severely slow economic development. The
lack of clean water will be the cause of massive food
shortages and compromise energy output within the
next 15 to 20 years.

S/PV.7818

Potential conflicts over water resources can pose
an imminent threat to security, both globally and on
the African continent, especially as people continue
to seek better standards of living in the face of
increasingly limited resources. That in turn will result
in consequences such as greater flows of economic
migrants seeking sustenance elsewhere.
That scenario is confirmed in the World Bank’s
recent report entitled High and Dry: Climate Change,
Water and the Economy, which concludes that
“in the next 35 years, water insecurity — made
worse by climate change — could force migration,
spark conflict and be a significant financial drag
on regional governments”.
Coming from a continent where water security
remains such a high priority, I wish to stress the strong
relevance of this issue to Africa. There is no doubt
that the international community must strengthen
its focus on the preservation of water, including by
combating climate change. President Jacob Zuma is a
member of the United Nations and World Bank HighLevel Panel on Water in support of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Developmen and the attainment of
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 6, on clean water
and sanitation.
The Panel, convened at the initiative of the
Secretary-General and the President of the World
Bank, recently called for a fundamental shift in the
way the world looks at water and issued an action plan
for a new approach to water management that will help
the world to achieve the SDGs. Furthermore, the World
Economic Forum, in its Global Risks Report in January,
has identified the scarcity of water as the number-one
long-term risk globally.
We should also work towards making the increase
in competition for water become a catalyst for more
intense cooperation and innovation rather than a
source of conflict. Indeed, the challenges surrounding
water can also be a path for dialogue, mediation and
confidence-building between States. The work of
the Department of Political Affairs in that regard
is commended.
South Africa shares transboundary river basins
with three other African countries. In that regard,
achieving transboundary water security has assisted us
and our neighbours in stimulating regional cooperation.
Shared waters provide opportunities for cooperation

16-3968039/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

22/11/2016

and support political development on wider issues such
as sustainable development and economic integration.

displaced, temporarily or permanently, owing to floods,
droughts, desertification or sea-level rise.

The Southern African Development Community
remains a prime example of such an approach, whereby
the organization coordinates transboundary water
cooperation on 15 basins across Southern Africa. We
should also mention our strong belief that a country’s
water security is intrinsically linked to that of its
neighbouring countries, and is the very cornerstone of
regional integration and development.

Despite those bleak forecasts, the often evoked
“water wars” are not inevitable. We believe that
transboundary water cooperation is the appropriate
answer to achieving effective and lasting regional
solutions for water disputes. Such cooperation must
reflect the interests of all riparian countries and must
be based on efficient and sustainable water use. There
are several positive examples to prove that. In Europe,
there is water cooperation in the Danube and the Rhine
river basins. In Africa, there is water cooperation in the
Lake Victoria basin and the Lake Chad basin. In the
latter example, the riparian States strive to protect the
dwindling Lake Chad and to ensure water security for
the entire region, despite being afflicted by the terror
of Boko Haram.

For South Africa, as a constitutional, democratic
State, inclusiveness and gender sensitivity have always
been core principles of our national policy. Accelerating
the empowerment of women in regional water
management should therefore be viewed as critical,
because women play an important part in the provision,
management and safeguarding of water. The pivotal
role of women as providers and users of water and as
guardians of the living environment is seldom reflected
in institutional arrangements for the development and
management of water resources.
Water scarcity is a major threat to economic growth
and stability around the world. Water is and will
remain at the heart of international peace and security,
the defence of human rights and the imperative for
sustainable development paths. The African Union’s
Agenda 2063 development goals best articulate the
demand that Africa has for water, as it states that,
“Africa shall have equitable and sustainable use and
management of water resources for socioeconomic
development, regional cooperation and the
environment.”
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): I thank the Republic of
Senegal for the invitation to this important discussion
on the links between water, peace and security.
In recent years, the World Economic Forum’s
Global Risks Report has ranked water crises as among
the global risks with the greatest impact and likelihood
of occurring. Water scarcity is a cross-cutting issue that
affects all spheres of human life: drinking water and
nutrition, peace and security, sustainable development
and economic growth. The International Organization
for Migration estimates that by 2050 approximately
200 million environmental migrants will be forcibly
40/78

We are convinced that fostering and promoting
transboundary water cooperation requires stable legal
frameworks. At the global level, the United Nations
Water Conventions of 1992 and 1997 provide valuable
tools for transboundary cooperation, benefiting all
of the riparian countries in a basin. We therefore
encourage all countries to join those Conventions and
make use of their experience and frameworks. At the
regional level, the river-basin organizations are key for
the implementation of the principles laid down in those
two Conventions.
Finally, in order to prevent water from being used
as a method of warfare, it is of the essence to strengthen
the implementation of international humanitarian law.
Let me mention in particular the 1977 Additional
Protocols to the 1949 Geneva Conventions. The recent
example of Da’esh and the Mosul dam has drastically
shown the tangibility of such threats.
In order to be adequately prepared for mitigating
the effects of looming water crises and their potential
implications for peace and stability, as well as to ensure
the successful implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals, we encourage all United Nations
States Members to actively contribute to strengthening
the United Nations water architecture.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See to the United Nations.
Monsignor Grysa: The Holy See is pleased that
the Senegalese presidency has chosen this important
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

topic for an open debate in the Security Council,
therefore increasing the attention paid to the issue by
the international community.
Water scarcity illustrates a paradox. While water
covers two thirds of the Earth’s surface and is not used
up when consumed, it is clear that the availability of
fresh water is diminishing. With expanding deserts,
deforestation and increasing droughts, everyone should
be concerned about a potential worldwide calamity
caused by a diminished water supply.
Water has always been scarce in some places,
owing usually to geographical location. However, in
other places it is scarce because of mismanagement and
misallocation, which have caused waste and inequitable
distribution. Environmental degradation makes water
toxic, and climactic changes alter hydrologic cycles.
Underground water sources in many places are
threatened by the pollution produced in certain mining,
farming and industrial activities, especially in countries
that lack adequate regulations or controls. Industrial
waste, detergents and chemical products continue
to pour into our rivers, lakes and seas. Agricultural
production, the greatest consumer of fresh water, and
industries, the second-greatest consumer, demand more
water than ever, depleting aquifers much faster than
they can be replenished.

S/PV.7818

Water scarcity also has huge implications for justice
and equity. As Pope Francis underlined in the encyclical
Laudato si’, fresh drinking water is an issue of primary
importance given its fundamental role in health and
overall well-being. In that context, one particularly
serious problem is the quality of water available to the
poor. Every day, dangerous water-borne diseases, such
as dysentery and cholera, remain a leading cause of
death, especially among infants and children.
Moreover, a growing tendency to privatize water
and turn it into a commodity dictated by market laws
could seriously compromise access to safe water on
the part of the poor, making it conceivable, as Pope
Francis said,
“that the control of water by large multinational
businesses may become a major source of conflict
in this century”.
While good water management implies expenditures,
as well as fees for water use to encourage its wise
consumption, it is even more important to remember
that access to safe potable water is a basic and universal
human right, since it is essential to human survival
and, as such, is a condition for the exercise of other
human rights. Pope Francis affirmed that our world has
a grave social debt towards the poor who lack access to
drinking water, because they are denied the right to a
life consistent with their inalienable dignity.

In many places, the demand for water exceeds the
sustainable supply, with dramatic consequences for the
short and long term, including implications for national,
regional and international peace and security. Water
poverty especially affects Africa, where large sectors
of the population have no access to safe drinking
water or experience droughts that impede agricultural
production and provoke fierce competition. The
migration of entire populations from regions that are
experiencing drastic water scarcity is seen as a threat
to populations in areas with water.

Water-related challenges to peace and security, and
indeed to life itself, must be considered not only as threats
but also as opportunities for nations to collaborate more
closely in efforts to come up with solutions, instead of
engaging in ever-fiercer competition for a diminishing
essential resource that could ultimately lead to wars and
conflicts. New technologies continue to emerge that
could enable us to avoid a sustainability crisis through,
inter alia, better methods of food production that require
less water and industrial manufacturing that minimizes
pollution of our aquifers and water systems.

In brief, the implications of water for national,
regional and international peace and security can hardly
be overstated. Indeed, water experts and advocates
ominously predict that the Third World War will be
over water. When he visited the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations in 2014, Pope
Francis said,

Moreover, local and traditional solutions to waterrelated challenges must not be abandoned in spite of
technological advances. My delegation wishes to
encourage both the public and private sectors to support
community-driven initiatives for water conservation
and water allocation. Local communities often know
their own water systems better and how best to conserve
and harness them. While the water shortage concerns
vast areas, local solutions are always key components
in coming to grips with the water problem.

“[w]ater is not free, as we so often think. It is a
grave problem that can lead to war”.

16-3968041/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

Finally, education on the fundamental importance
of water is crucial. Water continues to be wasted and
polluted, not only in the developed world but also
in developing countries that possess it in relative
abundance. That shows that there is much to do in
educating individuals and communities on issues such
as water conservation, wise consumption and equitable
use of this universal common good on the part of all.
It is important to cultivate among peoples and their
leaders a conscientious awareness that considers access
to water a universal right of all human beings, without
distinction or discrimination. The water challenges that
are provoking peace and security threats are technical,
economical, political and social, but let us not forget
that ultimately they are ethical and moral issues as well.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Winid (Poland): Let me begin by congratulating
you, Mr. President, and your dedicated team on the
organization of today’s debate on water, peace and
security and on the outstanding concept note (S/2016/969,
annex) prepared by Senegal to guide our discussion.
We fully agree with your assessment that water is a
fundamental pillar of development and security policy
and of great relevance in national, regional and global
policymaking. Poland is impressed with the enormous
efforts of the Senegalese Government to facilitate
access to water for its citizens.
While Poland aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union, allow me to
make some additional points in my national capacity.
The President mentioned in his concept note
an interesting fact: that out of 263 international
watercourses, 158 still have no cooperation framework.
As a country actively engaged in various international
and regional mechanisms dedicated to water cooperation
and water resource management, Poland is ready to
share its experience and best practices in that area.
We are a member of the Council of the Baltic
Sea States — an overall political forum for regional
intergovernmental cooperation, made up of 11 countries
and the European Commission. The Council constitutes
an important platform for building trust, safety and
security in the Baltic Sea region and serves as a platform
for dialogue on a wide spectrum of areas — energy
efficiency, migration, border control and human
trafficking, to name a few. One of the conclusions of
Poland’s presidency in that organization, completed
42/78

22/11/2016

earlier this year, is that a prosperous, stable and secure
Baltic Sea region represents a crucial component of the
European security system.
We share the view expressed by some of the previous
speakers that a peaceful solution to conflicts arising
from competition between States over transboundary
water is of the utmost importance. Poland is a State
party to the main international treaties on watercourses,
including the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea. Since 2005, Professor Stanislaw Pawlak,
a Polish judge, has served in the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, which plays a major
role in the global architecture to prevent and resolve
water-related disputes.
Today’s debate affords us an excellent opportunity
to highlight the fundamental nexus between security
and development, recognized also in various United
Nations initiatives related to water. As a member of
the United Nations Group of Friends of Oceans and
Seas, Poland has strongly supported the establishment
of Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 14, devoted
to the conservation, protection and sustainable use of
oceans, seas and marine resources. That Goal is crucial
for countries, including small island developing States,
with economies that are highly dependent on the use of
oceans and seas.
Let me also draw the Council’s attention to the
10X20 Initiative on Marine Protected Areas, launched
earlier this year, which contributes specifically to
the accomplishment of target 5 of SDG 14, aiming to
conserve at least 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas
and biodiversity by the year 2020. Poland is one of the
Vice-Chairs of the Steering Committee of the 10X20
Initiative, along our friends from Italy — the Chair —
and the Bahamas, Kenya and Palau as Vice-Chairs.
Finally, we look forward to continuing the
discussion on water-related issues and possible
security implications of climate change within the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change. I have the honour of informing the Council
that, following the decision adopted in Marrakesh, the
twenty-fourth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change will
be held in Poland in 2018. The international community
has entrusted Poland with the very responsible task for
the fourth time, and we are very proud of that.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate. We thank your delegation for
preparing the useful concept note (S/2016/969, annex),
and the briefers who have provided very interesting
perspectives on the subject.
While the topic of today’s discussion is water,
peace and security, the importance that water has for
humans far exceeds this perspective. Water sustains
life on Earth. India’s philosophical tradition, like many
others, is replete with references to the centrality of
water to human existence. The Rig Veda, an ancient
Indian scripture, has an invocation:
“Gracious be divine waters for our protection. Be
there for our drink, and stream on us bliss and
happiness. Sovereigns over precious things, and
rulers over men, ye waters. We seek healing balm
of you.”
There are myriad ways in which societies have
successfully harnessed water resources throughout
human history. They have varied and evolved, and
continue to do so. Today water has multiple uses,
from drinking to sanitation, from growing food to
industrial applications. Rivers and oceans are also
pathways for navigation and trade within countries and
across continents.
Access to fresh water and its longer-term
availability have acquired importance in view of the
rapid population growth and unsustainable practices
of water use. Climate change and warming patterns
alter water availability, thereby highlighting the need
to better manage our water resources. The growing
realization of the close linkages among water, food and
energy is also focusing attention on the impact of those
interlinkages on sustainable development.
Across the planet, nearly 1 billion people do not
have access to adequate safe drinking water. Nearly
2.5 billion people lack access to basic sanitation.
Waterborne diseases remain a concern. The Millennium
Development Goals sought, and now the Sustainable
Development Goals seek, to prioritize ways to address
those concerns. Increasing attention is being paid to the
blue economy and its sustainable uses.
There are several issues of policy that we are
grappling with in the management of water as a
resource. They range from issues relating to private
versus community ownership of water, relative pricing
of water for personal use, agricultural versus industrial

S/PV.7818

use, allocation for survival versus luxury uses, treating
water as a commodity versus as a right, developing
mandatory standards for efficiency of water use and
so on.
Recognizing the multiple facets of water in our
lives and the need for wider cooperation, several United
Nations agencies have been active on various aspects of
issues relating to water. For instance, UNESCO initiated
its International Hydrological Programme in 1995. Since
2003, UN-Water has been the inter-agency coordination
mechanism for all fresh water and sanitation-related
matters. The decade from 2005 to 2015 was declared
the International Decade for Action, “Water for Life”.
The transboundary aspects of significant water bodies
and the imperative for international cooperation in
that regard have also been well acknowledged for a
long time. Many multilateral environment agreements,
such as the 1971 Ramsar Convention on Wetlands, the
1992 Convention on Biological Diversity and the 1994
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification,
facilitate such international cooperation. The 1982
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea is of
relevance in the context of offshore freshwater aquifers.
While wider acceptance of the 1997 United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Non-Navigational Uses
of International Watercourses has so far made limited
progress, there have been a range of bilateral and regional
treaties and arrangements promoting cooperation across
upper and lower riparian States. The concept note points
out that 200 treaties, on 60 international watercourses,
have been signed in the past seven decades. Experience
therefore shows that, while international cooperation
is essential in cases dealing with the transboundary
nature of bodies of water, each specific instance has its
own unique characteristics. The countries concerned
have found ways to cooperate in specific contexts in
their collective interest.
India is both an upper and lower riparian State for
a number of different rivers, and we are familiar with
the issues involved in the cooperative management of
transboundary river waters. The partition of India, in
1947, also partitioned rivers to the west and east. We
have engaged with our neighbours in managing those
shared waters. The landmark 1960 Indus Water Treaty
was finalized several years before the 1966 Helsinki
Rules on the Uses of the Waters of International Rivers
for transboundary water-sharing. We are also involved
in a series of other ongoing collaborative efforts with
our neighbours to do with sharing waters.

16-3968043/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

Water impinges on every aspect of human survival,
including human security. While the possibility
of water-related conflicts cannot be ruled out, it is
encouraging to note that the international community’s
overall experience in evolving specific, innovative,
cooperative approaches to transboundary issues has
been positive. In today’s world, and with our current
understanding of the interconnectivity and mutuality
of our environmental challenges, we should aim to
ensure that the key term in international discourse in
this area is water as a driver of cooperation, instead of
considering approaches that tend to turn water issues
into security problems. The first path will engender
genuine international collaboration; taking the second,
on an issue as complex and cardinal to life as water, will
only be doing an injustice to humankind as a whole.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Ms. Adamson.
Ms. Adamson (spoke in French): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its
member States. The candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
I would first like to commend Senegal, which has
long been committed to advancing the discourse on
water and peace, and thereby enabling us to work to
change global perceptions about water. In the wake
of the Arria Formula meeting held on the subject in
April, today’s debate is a new opportunity to take
a closer look at the question of water as a potential
vector for conflict, particularly when the geography
of aquifer systems, lakes, rivers and watersheds does
not follow State borders. But it is also an opportunity
to reflect further on how to strengthen dialogue and
cooperation in order to resolve and prevent waterrelated disputes and conflicts. Experience has shown
that inadequate water management, growing demand,
water stress, conflicts and natural disasters, and water
insecurity exacerbated by climate change are sources
of conflict both between and within States. Good water
management is essential not only to economic and
social development but also from the point of view of
preventing and managing risks.
44/78

22/11/2016

The European Union believes that preventing
tensions and conflicts related to access to water
must involve managing the effects of climate change,
population growth, economic development, the various
uses of water resources and water-related transborder
challenges. Our collective recognition of water as
a priority issue and its designation as a goal, in the
form of Goal 6 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, represent a major step in that direction.
Since then, the Global High-Level Panel on Water
and Peace has been established, with an action plan
proposing new investments and initiatives that can
contribute to achieving Goal 6 on a global scale. The
Paris Agreement on Climate Change, which entered into
force on 4 November, was another key step, marking
the success of multilateralism and our collective
commitment to a transition to climate neutrality and
adaptation to climate change. The Agreement could
also have a significant positive impact on the security
of water supplies and usage.
The European Union and its member States have
been long and firmly committed to addressing waterrelated challenges around the world, including through
our development assistance. Since 2007, in addition to
bilateral aid from member States, we have allocated
more than €2.2 billion to water and sanitation projects
in more than 62 countries all over the world. Europe is a
land where water resources are shared. Sixty per cent of
its territory is located in transboundary basins, and it is
that experience across the continent that is our guide in
terms of collaboration and regional cooperation.
(spoke in English)
Part of that commitment is supporting initiatives of
dialogue and cooperation aimed at reaching agreements
that enable common, collaborative and sustainable
management of the water resources shared by the
various actors involved. It is legitimate for States to
use their water resources for generating energy, but it is
equally legitimate for downstream countries to demand
a fair share for safe drinking water and the purposes of
sanitation and irrigation.
Development
cooperation
programmes
are
supporting transboundary water management in
several basins where the potential for conflict exists.
They are also promoting an integrated approach within
the water-energy-food-security nexus, addressing
competing uses of scarce waters. Regional dialogues on
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

the nexus will be supported in Africa, Asia and Latin
America, and in the European neighbourhood.
The European Union is also fully supportive of
international agreements on water cooperation as a
basis for collaborative, sustainable and rule-based
solutions. We welcome the entry into force of the
1997 United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses
and encourage its implementation. We also welcome the
global aspirations of the 1992 Economic Commission
for Europe Water Convention, which has been able
to accept the accession of any country in the world
since March. Other relevant instruments and regional
agreements that promote the sustainable management
of transboundary river basins are also important.
The European Union and its member States are very
supportive of efforts to achieve the objectives of the
availability and sustainable management of water for
all and of integrated water resources management at all
levels, including through transboundary cooperation,
as appropriate.
It has long been known that preventing conflicts
is more efficient and effective than engaging with
crises after they break out. With the recent adoption
of the European Union Global Strategy on Foreign
and Security Policy, we have committed to redoubling
our efforts to prevent and monitor the root causes
of conflicts, where resources stress — and climate
change as a threat multiplier catalysing water and
food insecurity — go hand in hand with human rights
violations and inequality. Sustainable access to and
use of water are essential to societal resilience and to
stability and security around the world.
We will also keep working to address the direct
and indirect international security impacts of climate
change, including through climate-change risk
assessments and support for capacity-building. In
that context, the European Union looks forward to the
Security Council continuing its work on climate change.
Senegal’s concept note (S/2016/969, annex) also
sheds light on the significance of the protection of
water during armed conflict. By reaffirming the
need to respect and ensure respect for international
humanitarian law, human rights law and the laws on
transboundary water resources, we may ensure better
protection of water during armed conflict. That will
contribute to strengthening the protection of that
natural resource during times when it is most at risk.

S/PV.7818

Today’s debate makes clear the importance of
water for sustainable development and the preservation
of peace. The European Union and its member States
will maintain and strengthen their commitment to work
with partners around the world on water diplomacy in
support of those goals.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): First of all, I would like to congratulate the
Senegalese presidency on its commitment to giving
prominence to water diplomacy as an instrument of
cooperation among States.
My statement is meant as a complement to
the statement just delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
First of all, I would like to underline what an
excellent idea it is to have a Security Council debate
on the topic of water, peace and security. As we
consider this issue, we see that the links among the
various elements are numerous. It is also important
not to underestimate the role that water plays both as a
potential source of conflict and as a potential element
of cooperation. I would like, in that connection, to raise
three points: first, the tools available to the Security
Council on dealing with the subject; secondly, the
specific case of the Sahel; and, thirdly, the situation of
small island developing States.
First, looking at the tools that the Council has at its
disposal, I would like to draw everyone’s attention to
the Peacebuilding Commission. Its advisory function
should be used more actively. The link between
security and development, which is at the core of the
Commission’s mandate, makes it an essential partner
for ensuring that in post-conflict situations natural
resources, including water, are put at the service of
sustainable development. Belgium therefore urges
the Council to agree that the advisory function of the
Peacebuilding Commission should be fully used by the
Council to deal with the issues on our agenda today.
At the same time, the Peacebuilding Fund also offers
opportunities. Belgium, which participates in financing
the Fund, looks favourably on any Fund project that is
devoted to the prevention or the resolution of issues
relating to the sharing of or access to water.
Secondly, peacekeeping missions also have an
important role to play. The mandates of certain missions,

16-3968045/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

such as the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, include elements that call
on the missions to monitor the environmental impact of
their activities. Those elements usually take the form
of guidelines for water management. I think we can
only welcome such developments, because experience
has shown that the way in which water is managed
by major United Nations Blue Helmet bases can have
an impact on the drinking water resources and the
sanitary services of the towns and villages surrounding
the bases.
Finally, the experience of the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy in Central
Asia, which regularly reports on its activities to the
Security Council, is worth mentioning. Its facilitation
role to assist the Central Asian States in modernizing
their existing legal framework in the area of the regional
management of transboundary waterways is certainly
rich in lessons to be shared with other United Nations
entities, such as the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel.
With regard to the Sahel, on 26 May an open debate
(see S/PV.7699) was held that underscored the direct
impact of climate change and population growth on
desertification and the availability of water in the region.
The intensive use of water resources has contributed to
the generation of security tensions, migratory flows,
sanitary problems and declining agricultural yields.
However, as the Senegalese presidency points out in
the concept note (S/2016/969, annex) for this debate, as
well as during the Arria Formula meeting on 22 April,
there are encouraging examples of cooperation between
the States in the region aimed at taking up the challenge
of access to water resources. Those initiatives, in
particular in the Gambia and Senegal River basins,
should be welcomed and supported.
For its part, Belgium — as part of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, which aims
at promoting national and regional mechanisms for
managing natural resources, in particular water — has
developed projects on water management and sustainable
agriculture in order to combat desertification in several
countries of the region.
The third topic that I would like to focus on concerns
small island developing States. That category of States,
because of their particular physical, demographic and
economic characteristics, faces complicated issues in
the management of their freshwater supplies. Global
46/78

22/11/2016

warming has further aggravated the situation that
those islands find themselves in. It has led to rising
ocean levels, which causes saline infiltration that
contaminates groundwater tables. The danger that
threatens the very survival of those States should be
recognized by the international community. Climate
change must be countered in an effective way. Inaction
would be disastrous for our planet.
In conclusion, I want to say that water, like other
natural resources, is a crucial element for human
development, but also, as a corollary, for international
peace and security. Owing to the increasing link
between water resources management and peace and
security issues, the Security Council will in the future
have to deal increasingly with issues related to that
topic. Certainly, Belgium urges the Council, in keeping
with its efforts aimed at sustaining peace, to become
actively involved in the topic.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): Nigeria welcomes this
opportunity to participate in today’s open debate on
water, peace and security. We commend the delegation
of Senegal for its initiative in convening this debate
and for the well-articulated concept note (S/2016/969,
annex) to guide our discussion. Our appreciation also
goes to the briefers for their useful insights.
As we hold today’s debate, there is a palpable fear
of the possibility of a global water crisis. The reason
for that is not far-fetched. As populations grow and
countries and societies modernize, the demand for water
needed to produce food, energy and goods increases.
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development estimates that by 2050 the world’s demand
for water will increase by 55 per cent. Competition
between water users and nations demanding water
resources is also predicted to escalate drastically.
Studies have shown that 60 per cent of the world’s
water reserves are domiciled in nine countries. The
Food and Agricultural Organization of the United
Nations has indicated that 33 countries across the
world depend on other countries for over 50 per cent of
their renewable water resources. Added to the scarcity
of that vital resource are the challenges of population
explosion, urbanization and climate change.
The growing scarcity of water is a potential
source of conflict not only within countries but across
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7818

international boundaries. This compels the exploration
of the best way to share this valuable commodity, which
should constitute a fundamental feature of the global
policy agenda. Averting potential conflicts stemming
from water insecurity should be the thrust of our
collaborative efforts in this regard.

Consistent with the foregoing, and in accordance
with the Geneva Conventions, all objects indispensable
to the survival of the civilian population, including
water installations, must enjoy special protection.
We therefore call on all concerned to respect these
principles at all times and in all circumstances.

We must recognize the imperative to sustain
cooperation among nations on water security even
in situations of political tension. Nigeria seizes the
opportunity of this debate to commend the efforts
made over the years to promote the peaceful resolution
of water-related crises, including the more than
200 bilateral treaties concluded in this regard. We
underscore the need for more efforts to bring about
many more cooperation frameworks in managing
water-sharing and access to water.

In closing, we are convinced that to avoid waterrelated conflicts, there is a need for the strengthening
of cooperation between the United Nations and Member
States as well as regional organizations dealing with
water issues, particularly in the area of capacitybuilding. Member States must all also deeply reflect
on how best to protect water resources during armed
conflict by reaffirming the need to respect international
humanitarian law.

In the spirit of these efforts, Nigeria joined other
West African nations in establishing the Niger Basin
Authority. The Authority is one of the oldest African
intergovernmental organizations, created to promote
cooperation among member countries and especially to
foster the integrated development of resources in the
Niger River basin.
The Authority has worked to create an integrated
development plan for the basin, especially focusing
on cross-boundary projects. Drawing on water and
hydroelectric resources, the Authority has harmonized
the development of the energy, agriculture, forestry,
transport, communications and industrial resources of
member nations.
Nigeria has also, in conjunction with Cameroon,
Chad and the Niger, established the Lake Chad Basin
Commission. The mandate of the Commission is to
sustainably and equitably manage Lake Chad and
other shared water resources of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission so as to preserve the ecosystems of the
Lake Chad environmental basin, and to promote
regional integration and peace and security across the
basin. Efforts are currently being made to regenerate
the lake to sustain the inhabitants of the Lake Chad
basin and for the entrenchment of peace and security.
While encouraging States to enter into cooperation
agreements to share common water resources as
appropriate, I wish to underscore that according to
applicable human rights law, water is a component of
the right to an adequate standard of living. Therefore
there is a need for States to guarantee the provision of
this resource in all circumstances.

The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
should like first and foremost to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the excellent timing of the choice
of topic for this morning’s debate, which is taking
place just a few days after the closing of the twentysecond Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP 22)
and the adoption of the Marrakech Action Proclamation.
For two weeks, the States Members of the United
Nations had the opportunity to discuss, inter alia,
the issue of water, one of the natural resources most
affected by climate change and the repercussions of
whose use go beyond ecosystem disruption to become a
sources of conflict in societies.
Consensus on this issue has been established on the
fact that, inter alia, water and sanitation are key to the
achievement of many of the Sustainable Development
Goals and are inextricably linked to climate change,
agriculture, food security, health, energy, education,
and, above all, to international peace and security.
For the first time in the history of the COP process,
an Action Day for Water was held in Marrakech, a
day that was devoted entirely to drawing attention
to the water sector and to providing solutions for the
implementation of the Paris agreement. The goal is to
ensure the central place of the issue of water not only
in climate negotiations but also through civil-society
action and private-sector engagement.
The Action Day for Water made it possible to
launch an initiative on water for Africa, which was

16-3968047/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

rolled out by Morocco with the support of the African
Development Bank, with the foal of resolving the
problem of climate justice throughout the continent
by mobilizing international political, financial and
institutional partners to improve water-service supply
in Africa.
Water scarcity and water stress due to climate
change are harbingers of conflict and suffering, in
particular in Africa. According to the United Nations,
by 2025 25 African countries will likely suffer from
water shortages and or stress. In the Mediterranean
region, 20 million persons currently lack access to
safe drinking water, particularly in the countries of the
south and the east, and 80 million inhabitants of the
Mediterranean will experience water scarcity by 2025.
On a global scale, we are expecting a 40 per cent
shortfall in water supply by 2030, and by 2050, the
demand for water is estimated to have increased by
55 per cent. This reduction in available resources goes
hand in hand with strong spatial inequalities at all
levels. Entire regions of the planet are faced with water
stress, and, conversely, some 10 States share 60 per cent
of available water resources.
Tensions can be exacerbated when rivers constitute
borders between States; in those instances where
two States have to share a single water resource; and
whenever an increase in the use of water drawn from
a single source or from resources available in a given
region comes into play.
Moreover, the use of subterranean water resources
could trigger additional theatres for water conflict in the
near future. These are glaringly unnerving projections
that mean that we have a shared responsibility to
address water-related tensions at this, the dawn of the
third millennium.
The spectre of future water-related wars is regularly
raised by the media and certain politicians, for good
or for ill. But in reality, historians agree that there are
very few examples of wars that were directly triggered
by water. Rather than being a source of conflict in the
majority of cases, water seems to have been but one
element thereof; in some cases it can be a pretext for
conflict, but more often it is the result of a tipping point
being reached in a buildup of historical resentment or is
due to geographical factors.
Nonetheless, we cannot but acknowledge that
water can be used as a method of pressure and a tool
48/78

22/11/2016

of war during conflict. The history of humanity is
replete with examples of this in all regions of the world,
where water is a tool or a target in times of conflict.
This is all the more true when water-supply systems
are modern and connected to electric-supply networks,
thus enhancing their vulnerability in times of conflict
as they become a principal target. Water, which is often
seen as the source of many conflicts in water-conflict
areas, could also become a promoter of peace, thanks to
the evolution of technology, an increased willingness to
preserve our water resources and the establishment of
international jurisdictions.
Managing and reconciling water affairs in an
equitable and sustainable way and working to turn
interdependence into cooperation and mutual advantages
is intrinsically linked to the proper governance of water
both within countries and at the international level.
Here I would note that the two Additional Protocols of
1977 to the Geneva Conventions of 1949, which prohibit
attacking, destroying or removing goods vital to the
survival of the civilian population, such as drinkingwater facilities and reserves and irrigation structures,
represent considerable progress. However, these two
Protocols have not been ratified by all States, and new
forms of conflict are not yet enshrined in international
humanitarian law. Apart from the rather feeble role of
the International Criminal Court, there is no effective
international institution in terms of the implementation
of the provisions of the Protocols.
Another challenge lies in working on the ground
through innovative technical solutions. Increasing
availability when supply is inadequate can involve the
long-distance transfer of water, even if very costly.
Alternative techniques can be explored, such as
those aimed at conserving water, including improved
management so as to increase the effectiveness of the
resource’s use in various areas. Moreover, we should
take action with regard to demand and not only supply.
That involves reducing waste and misuse and improving
the efficiency of the use of water.
Improving international cooperation in managing
tensions and conflicts over sharing water resources will
necessarily entail strengthening capacities for regional
dialogue. Cooperation among States on water makes
it possible to establish a climate of trust and lay the
foundation for cooperation in other areas. As illustrated
by numerous examples, water can therefore become a
catalyst for independence and cooperation.
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

On the occasion of COP 22, Morocco and Senegal
organized a meeting that brought together 50 African
ministers and sought to reach an agreement among
African countries regarding concrete measures to
confront the principal security threats posed by climate
change, including the decrease in water availability. To
that end, the Marrakech proclamation seeks to achieve
sustainability, stability and security in Africa and calls
for a “3S task force” to ensure that member States work
towards preventing the dangerous effects of climate
change on unstable and fragile areas. It also calls upon
the African Union, its regional economic communities
and all the relevant supranational institutions to secure
natural resources and ensure sustainable and safe means
of subsistence. It is that kind of interregional cooperation
initiative that should be encouraged and duplicated for
the well-being of Africa and all humankind.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Ms. Khaled (Bangladesh): We thank the Senegalese
presidency for convening this open debate. We
also thank the briefers for sharing their insights
and recommendations.
As a finite resource of the global commons, water is
fundamental to the three pillars of United Nations work
on development, human rights, and peace and security.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development has
articulated the interlinkages between water and wider
sustainable development. Water resources, and the
essential services they provide, are among the keys
to achieving poverty reduction, inclusive growth and
food, health and energy security.
Nearly 750 million people around the world continue
to lack access to an improved source of drinking
water. Access to safe drinking water and sanitation
are therefore duly recognized as human rights. The
sustainable use and management of water are vital for
promoting the dignity and well-being of all humankind.
The interface between water and international peace
and security is becoming increasingly self-evident.
A number of conflict situations around the world
can be directly or indirectly linked to some form of
water scarcity or water-related natural disasters, in
conjunction with other factors.
As stated in the concept note (S/2016/969, annex)
for this debate, water-related issues among countries
can often aggravate the sense of insecurity and act as
a potential trigger for inter-State or regional conflicts.

S/PV.7818

The Water Cooperation Quotient, developed by the
Strategic Foresight Group, makes an interesting case
about the lack of institutional cooperation in shared
river basins as an underlying cause for conflicts in
different parts of the world. There are a number of
instances in which effective dialogue and cooperation
among the States concerned in shared-basin areas
have helped prevent, avert or diminish the chances
of conflicts. In other instances, investment in waterintensive technologies and innovations, including
through international partnerships, has effectively
mitigated the potential drivers of conflict.
In terms of conflict resolution, water may need to
be factored in as an essential component of sustaining
peace and peacebuilding in certain contexts. It might
be relevant for the Peacebuilding Commission to
consider, as part of its thematic discussions, the role
of water in promoting a comprehensive approach to
sustaining peace.
The particular needs of the most vulnerable,
including women and children, need to be mainstreamed
into our various approaches and analyses. In many parts
of the world, women and children must be freed from
the burden of fetching water on a daily basis so as to
open up enhanced opportunities for their empowerment
and education.
In that connection, water must be seen as an integral
part of the international development architecture, with
focus on meaningful global partnership in achieving
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 6. The need to
mobilize enhanced resources and expertise for waterrelated infrastructure and services should continue to
feature prominently in the United Nations development
discourse. We reiterate the call made by our Prime
Minister at the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in
Marrakech earlier this month to establish a global fund
on SDG 6 to support, inter alia, water-related research,
innovation and technology transfer.
The
protection
of
water-related
critical
infrastructure and essential services during armed
conflicts also deserves the international community’s
priority attention. The severe impact of breakdowns
in water-related services and of restrictions in access
to water in certain conflict situations continues to
increase the vulnerability of civilian populations. The
relevant international humanitarian law provisions
stipulated in the 1977 Protocols Additional to the

16-3968049/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

Geneva Conventions of 1949 should provide guarantees
against indiscriminate attacks on or restriction to
water resources and installations by various parties to
armed conflicts There is a need for further informed
discussions on ensuring accountability for such
breaches and offences, in the light of the Rome Statute
and other applicable international law. We urge the
Global High-Level Panel on Water and Peace, among
others, to further consider those issues.
In Bangladesh we consider water to be the vital,
sustaining force of our economy, environment, ecology
and culture. As a lower riparian and low-lying delta
State vulnerable to climate change, we constantly
grapple with challenges relating to the availability of
fresh water, especially during the lean season. The
growing saline intrusion in our coastal areas, the
depletion of groundwater reserves in large urban areas
and the persistent challenge of arsenic contamination
of groundwater in certain parts of the country add
to the systemic constraints in our overall water use
and management.
Against the backdrop of such challenges, today
more than 98 per cent of our population have access
to safe drinking water, and more than 65 per cent have
access to safe sanitation. Open defecation, involving as
much as 42 per cent of the population in 2003, has been
reduced to less than 1 per cent.
As a member of the United Nations-World Bank
High-level Panel on Water, our Honourable Prime
Minister Sheikh Hasina is scheduled to attend the
Budapest Water Summit 2016 next week. Among
other issues, Bangladesh will continue to advocate
for the efficient governance and management of water
resources, integrated management of shared river
basins and access to less water-intensive technologies
and crop varieties.
We commit to remain at the forefront of the
international community’s efforts in building a watersecure world for all.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): I, too, would like to join
the previous speakers in congratulating and thanking
the Senegalese presidency for organizing this important
debate on water, peace and security, which marks the
first time that the issue has been formally considered
in the Security Council. We appreciate the briefings
50/78

22/11/2016

that we have heard. Of particular interest to us were
the conclusions presented on the second meeting
of the Global High-Level Panel on Water and Peace,
held in Senegal this year, and the proposals voiced in
connection with advancing hydro-diplomacy.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement made earlier
by the delegation of the European Union. I would like
to make the following remarks in my national capacity.
Water is indeed a vital resource and fundamental
pillar of development and security policy. The scarcity
of water resources and questions of access, management
and exploitation have the potential to be used as
triggers and methods of war. We need to address those
questions in both security and development contexts.
The linkages between Sustainable Development Goals
6 and 16 are particularly relevant.
We recognize the significance of transboundary
cooperation to restore and prevent the degradation of
damaged aquatic ecosystems. Over the past several
decades, Georgia has concluded a number of agreements
with neighbouring States regulating the management
of water resources and has participated in numerous
regional projects aimed at developing ecologically
sound and rational water management. To that end,
the sustainable utilization of water resources has been
set as a priority, and national legislation on water
management has been brought into full compliance with
the internationally recognized principles of integrated
water resources management.
Many villages across the occupation line in Georgia
have suffered from water shortages following the 2008
foreign military intervention. The occupation forces
have cut drinking-water supplies and blocked irrigation
channels originating in the occupied Tskhinvali
region. Villagers have been unable to carry out their
agricultural work, which is the main source of income
in those areas. We have managed to resolve the problem
by constructing alternative trunk canals and building
the necessary infrastructure.
Let me also mention a number of joint water projects
that have become an instrument for restoring trust
between the war-torn communities. A vivid example
of that successful practice was the project aimed at
improving the security of the Zonkari reservoir. That
project allowed Georgian authorities to ensure a safe
and sufficient water supply for the villages situated
in the occupied region. With the mediation and
financial support of international partners, notably the
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
Georgia carried out rehabilitation projects aimed at
ensuring drinking-water supply and the functioning of
irrigation systems in conflict-affected villages across
the occupation line. Those efforts demonstrate that water
has a significant potential for confidence-building. It
also demonstrates the importance of cooperation with
regional organizations on the issue, something that was
rightly emphasized in the concept note (S/2016/969,
annex), presented by the Senegalese presidency.
In view of climate change, we have to develop
a comprehensive approach to climate, economic
development and water-security issues. Georgia has
already experienced the devastating effects of the deadly
flooding in Tbilisi in 2015, which killed 19 people and
caused mass destruction. Since then, the Government
has broadened its efforts to tackle environmental
threats. We are committed to increasing local resilience,
improving relief capabilities and facilitating relocation
from the most vulnerable areas. With the support of
international partners, we have carried out several
projects aimed at improving the resilience of regions
highly exposed to hydrometeorological threats. Along
with those activities, we have taken the first steps in
establishing a comprehensive early warning system in
the country.
In conclusion, let me reiterate our readiness to
further cooperate on questions related to the watersecurity nexus.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cyprus.
Mr. Emiliou (Cyprus): Cyprus aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union and would like to add some additional remarks
in its national capacity.
Allow me first to thank Senegal for organizing
today’s open debate and for all the initiatives that
the country has taken in order to promote dialogue
within the United Nations on the issues of water, peace
and security.
Climate change, the growing world population and
urbanization have led to an increase in water scarcity
and to problems of access to safe drinking water and
sanitation, with significant repercussions on everyday
life for people around the world. Water access and
management is also affected by conflict, with wateraccess disruptions, while political exploitation of water

S/PV.7818

issues is not uncommon. Efforts to ensure control over
water resources may also become a cause of conflict, as
noted in the World Water Development Report of 2015.
Cyprus, being surrounded by water and having
experienced drought and water scarcity on many
occasions throughout its history, has its own extensive
experience and views on the significance of good water
management for sustainable development and for peace.
We have successfully used innovation and technology as
a method of addressing water shortages, with a state-ofthe-art desalination system, among other things. We
stand ready to share our experiences and our lessons
learned and to contribute to the cooperation between
countries, and, given the interconnection between the
Goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, to the overall implementation of the
2030 Agenda.
We welcome the increasing focus of the United
Nations on the issues of water and sanitation.
Sustainable Development Goal 6, on the availability
and sustainable management of water and sanitation
for all, is a significant step by the international
community in putting the issues of water and sanitation
at the forefront. The full implementation of the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change will have a significant
effect on improving current problems of water scarcity
and water management. We also recognize the positive
contribution of the call to action of the High-Level
Panel on Water. Moreover, we support the relevant
activities and ongoing discussions within the United
Nations aimed at promoting the better coordination and
work of the United Nations system in an effort to better
address water-related challenges around the world.
In order to address water-related issues and their
links to conflict, there needs to be better understanding
of those issues. In that context, we believe that
the dimension of water-related issues should be
incorporated into conflict prevention, where relevant.
We also appreciate the contribution of the Global HighLevel Panel on Water and Peace.
The protections afforded by international
humanitarian law during armed conflict cannot be
stressed enough. In that regard, we believe that it is
important to further study in depth the interlinkages
between conflict, access to water and sanitation, and
violations of international humanitarian law in order to
enable the better implementation of humanitarian law
in those instances.

16-3968051/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

Furthermore, it is our strong belief that water can
become a source of stability and peace. As such, we
believe that the promotion of transboundary agreements
on water management and the promotion of waterrelated confidence-building measures are crucial. Such
agreements and measures should be carefully built on
provisions that will be for the benefit of all countries
concerned, with no winners or losers. They should also
be promoted with a sharp focus on ownership by the
States or parties concerned.
In conclusion, please allow me to reiterate our
support for today’s debate and to express the belief
that it will provide useful guidance as to the further
development of this important matter within the United
Nations system.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Palau.
Mr. Otto (Palau): We commend and thank Senegal,
President of the Security Council for the month of
November, for convening this meeting about a matter
that is of great importance to all of us. I also thank the
delegation of Senegal for the very useful concept note
(S/2016/969, annex). We express our gratitude also for
the briefings. The information shared by the briefers
is both very important and useful in understanding the
issues around water and the way forward in addressing
relevant problems, especially those related to security
and peace.
In March this year, my President declared a state
of emergency in Palau owing to a drought caused by
El Niño, impacting the whole population. The potential
negative impacts of the lack of water, many of which
were elaborated this morning, make water a very
important issue for all of us. That is true for practically
all of the small island developing States, as we have
already heard. Allow me to present five ideas for the
Council’s consideration.
First, we need more information of the impacts of
the lack of water on our security and peace. We firmly
believe that, in order to ensure sustainable peace, we
must have security first. That is linked to article 3 of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, under
which everyone has the right to life, liberty and security
of person. Palau has fought for that basic principle in
the Human Rights Council and will continue to do so.
Regarding the much-needed information, there should
be agreement among Member States on requests for
the updating of the relevant reports of the Secretary52/78

22/11/2016

General, because updated information is key to making
our decisions.
Secondly, access to water is a human right. Our
body is approximately 80 per cent water, and our
health and well-being depend to very large extent on
the availability of this most basic nutrient. Therefore,
water cannot and should never be allowed to become
a business. We recognize that both the innovation and
drive of the private sector, on the one hand, and the
public investment in genuine and durable partnerships,
on the other hand, as expressed in the Samoa Pathway,
are needed, including the 10X20 Initiative mentioned
earlier. But the role of the United Nations is to ensure,
together with national Governments and civil society,
that access to drinkable and safe water is secured
for all, especially the most vulnerable. Palau thanks
non-governmental organizations for their drive on
this point.
Thirdly, water is linked to the impacts of climate
change. Climate change is a threat multiplier that
impacts our security and peace. We therefore think that
the contributions of the Department of Political Affairs
and of the Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral to addressing water challenges will be
enhanced by having well-coordinated staff and experts
serving in the field. That is why we have called also
for the nomination of a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Climate Change and Security.
Special political missions, both current and future,
have a very important role to play by reducing their
climate footprint and improving their management
of the environment, acting also as catalysts to bring
partners to act together in addressing the challenge of
climate change and water. Local populations should
never have to compete with United Nations personnel
for local resources, or suffer negative impacts caused
by their presence. With its partners, Palau has pushed
in the General Assembly’s Fourth and Fifth Committees
for the greening of the special political missions.
Fourthly, actions on water in the Security Council
and the General Assembly have to be aligned. We believe
that the delivery by the Security Council on the issues
of water and climate change has to be significantly
improved, not just as part of conflict prevention but also
as part of the recipe for successful conflict resolution.
During the debate on the Sahel and terrorism in this
Chamber earlier this year (see S/PV. 7699), relevant
questions were raised as to how can women stop their
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

men from joining armed terrorists for cash if they are
away from home searching for water, or how can girls
be empowered through education if they cannot study
either because they their basic needs — including
water — are not met, or because they are out looking
for or fetching water.
Finally, it is urgent to take decisive action. The time
period we have to transform the world as envisioned in
the 2030 Agenda is very short. We cannot attain much
without security and peace. We therefore believe that we
should work together during the seventy-first session of
the General Assembly on two parallel draft resolutions
in the General Assembly and the Security Council on
the impacts of water and climate change on security
and peace, following the successful example of the
review the United Nations peacebuilding architecture.
We are hopeful that the Security Council and all
Member States, working with the good offices of the
new Secretary-General, will find success in taking
action in the field on climate and water so that all of the
“we the peoples” whom we serve will have their basic
human rights, such as the rights to water, life, liberty
and security, fulfilled.
Once again, we thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Senegal for bringing this very important
issue to the fore by convening today’s meeting.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): It is my pleasure to
address the Security Council on behalf of Portugal.
We very much welcome today’s open debate, promoted
by the Senegalese presidency, on a very important and
ever-timely subject.
My brief statement is fully aligned with that
delivered earlier by the observer of the European
Union. I would like to make some additional remarks in
my national capacity.
Throughout human history, access to clean
water has always been a potential source of conflict.
Although water is the most abundant resource on the
planet, the fact that fresh water makes up less than
3 per cent of the Earth’s hydric resources ready for
human consumption turns it into a scarce and valuable
resource. Furthermore, there is a great imbalance in
its availability, with water being a relatively abundant
resource in some regions and almost non-existent in
other populated areas.

S/PV.7818

The uneven distribution of this most critical
commodity, together with such other factors as
population growth, generates tensions, both internally
and among neighbouring countries, that can easily
escalate into major disputes and conflicts, as often has
been the case. The gradual diminution of quality water
supplies can also be traced to the pernicious effects of
climate change, as is well documented.
We know the facts. Lessons must be learned, and
actions should be taken to prevent potential conflicts
in future. That means we need to move definitively
away from the paradigm of water scarcity as potential
conflict generator, turning it into one of cooperation
based, one hopes, on solidarity among communities
and nations.
United Nations institutions, particularly the
Security Council, long ago recognized and have often
mainstreamed the importance of rational and inclusive
management of natural resources as a pre-emptive
measure for conflict prevention, which must be, and
increasingly is, at the very heart of United Nations
concerns and efforts. However, that has not prevented
new tensions and conflicts related to access to water
resources from emerging in different parts of the world.
The connection among natural resources,
social development and peace was first laid out in
the Stockholm Declaration of the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment, in 1972, where
the impact of the human footprint on the environment
was recognized and a normative structure for tackling
its negative effects was formulated. That paved the way
for the broader compromises of the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development, in Rio
de Janeiro in 1992, and 20 years after that of the Rio+20
conference, in 2012, where water sustainability issues
were at the very core of the discussions.
Goal 6 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development reflects the full recognition of the
importance of preserving our planet’s water resources
and the right of access to sources of clean water. It
explicitly calls on countries to implement the human
right to water and sanitation, which Portugal has
consistently supported, promoting it as ultimately
the right to life. The oft-quoted Antoine de SaintExupéry once said that water is “not necessary to
life, but rather life itself”. This has multiple valuable
implications, certainly including from a peace and
security perspective.

16-3968053/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

Forging common ground, building comprehensive
partnerships
and
strengthening
international
cooperation is a path worth pursuing in this regard.
Against that background, despite the fact that the process
is lengthy and challenging, the action plan of the HighLevel Panel on Water, adopted last September, sets an
optimistic tone and includes important considerations
and key requirements and principles, notably the need
for political leadership for a comprehensive approach, a
commitment to the human right to safe drinking water
and sanitation, transparency and inclusion, autonomy
of all actors involved, collaboration among countries
and organizations, and continuous engagement.
The action plan also sets a wide range of mostly
interrelated priority actions, which in our opinion
deserve support, as they can truly have a positive impact
on improving water security, including undertaking a
profound analysis of water crisis risks and identifying
good practices for managing water-related natural
disasters. On that point, we believe that just as there are
so many regrettable disputes based on access to water,
there are also many successful examples of cooperation
based on negotiation and agreements, which could be
used on a case-by-case basis as good references for joint
water-management mechanisms and the disciplined
sharing of water resources.
Other priority actions involve encouraging the
United Nations to establish a common platform
where States can exchange views and good practices,
providing information to the States on the benefits of
water-use efficiency, promoting academic studies on
the impact of water-related disasters and ways and
means to prevent them, and implementing projects that
bolster water security and the economic resilience of
marginalized communities. In our opinion, the message
set out in the action plan is a good one that should be
spread through traditional media and social networks.
We must make sure it reaches a widespread audience,
particularly local communities and youth.
Portugal shares the view that only a cross-cutting
and interdependent process based on a transnational
approach can provide the necessary legal and political
framework to manage the availability and use of fresh
water and access to sources for countries and populations
for whom that resource is scarce or access involves
risks. Portugal is fully committed to this common
endeavour and will present its voluntary national
review, in next year’s High-level Political Forum on
Sustainable Development, on the implementation of the
54/78

22/11/2016

Sustainable Development Goal 6 and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Republic of Senegal
for convening this important meeting. I would
also like to thank all of today’s briefers for their
valuable presentations.
Water scarcity is a threat to human life and health.
It is also a factor that threatens and undermines
economic and social development, and a potential
source of political instability and conflict — unless
we are collectively able to deal with the emerging
challenges posed by the crises of the lack of potable
water and unequal access to water. We all share the
human responsibility to make water a tool for regional
and international cooperation and a factor of economic
and social well-being in the effective implementation
of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The scarcity of water resources in Jordan affects our
security and sovereignty, not only because it stands in
the way of achieving the SDGs, particularly Goal 6, but
also because Jordan suffers from serious water scarcity
and a lower per capita share vis-à-vis international
standards. Jordan is the third-poorest country in water
resources, and the per-inhabitant share of renewable
water resources is lower than that in the international
Water Poverty Index.
The protracted refugee situation adds pressure
to the infrastructure in host countries. The common
factors of that pressure are water, energy and the
human environment. The humanitarian crises,
particularly the Syrian refugee crisis, has depleted our
fresh-water aquifer, which should have been protected
and preserved for future generations. Those are not
the only challenges. Others include the possibility
of groundwater contamination, not to mention the
possibility that that water too might be depleted due to
the increase in population.
The demands on fresh-water sources in Jordan
since the crisis in Syria began have increased by more
than 25 per cent. Jordan hosts the largest number of
refugees in the world in overall numbers. Hence, we
have shouldered the responsibility on behalf of the
international community, and that has created new and
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

more complex realities that have greatly challenged the
ability of Jordan to achieve the SDGs. In that connection,
I wish to thank the International Committee of the Red
Cross for its help in meeting those challenges through
its joint cooperation with Jordan in the rehabilitation of
my country’s water networks in order to provide services
to over 150,000 inhabitants in the host communities of
Syrian refugees.
The dangers of water scarcity and the challenges
of climate change, pollution, population growth and
the movements of internally displaced persons and
refugees require an approach based on international
governance that would make these issues priorities
of the international community. They are central to
Jordan’s interests, both at the political and technical
levels. Therefore, we have contributed to, and actively
participated in, all international forums that support
international cooperation frameworks to solve our water
problems, including the Secretary-General’s Advisory
Board on Water and Sanitation and the High-Level
Panel on Water that was set up by the United Nations
and the World Bank to devise effective measures to
expedite the implementation of SDG 6, on the provision
of clean water and sanitation.
We would like to reaffirm that it is ethically and
legally unacceptable to use water as a tool of war and
conflict, as that affects the water rights of civilians
in their lands, which leads to the deterioration of
humanitarian conditions and more refugees and
internally displaced persons.
The threat pertaining to water is not just a matter
of scarcity or unequal access. It also includes the threat
of the expansion of the activities of terrorist groups
that spread the message of fear through killing and
violence, as well as the possibility of contaminating
water resources. Through their malicious acts, those
gangs have made it clear that they adhere to no ethical
boundaries, as they are desperate to use water resources
as tools of threats, intimidation and terrorism.
In conclusion, we call upon the international
community to work seriously to encourage international
and regional cooperation with regard to water resources.
That would protect the human environment and ensure
water security so as to spread peace among countries in
conflict and provide a social and economic environment
that benefits all people.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Djibouti.

S/PV.7818

Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank the Senegalese presidency
for convening this Security Council open debate on
an issue that falls under the theme of the maintenance
of international peace and security: water, peace and
security. My delegation would like to thank today’s
briefers — the Chair of the Global High-Level Panel
on Water and Peace, Mr. Danilo Türk; Ms. Christine
Beerli, Vice-President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross; and Mr. Sundeep Waslekar, President
of Strategic Foresight Group — for their contribution
to this important public debate. We also wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for your concept note (S/2016/969,
annex) in preparation for this meeting, as it highlights
the salient points of our debate.
(spoke in English)
Djibouti wishes to commend Senegal for its
leadership in convening the Arria Formula meeting
on the same subject last year, presided over by His
Excellency President Macky Sall. It built on past efforts
by the Security Council to consider the nexus between
water, peace and security and the protection of natural
resources as a tool for preventing conflicts and building
peace in post-conflict countries.
Since the General Assembly’s adoption of resolution
47/193, of 22 December 1992 — which declares 22 March
each year World Day for Water — pressure on water
has been rising and action is urgent. In many places
growing populations, more water-intensive patterns of
growth, increased rainfall variability and pollution are
combining to make water one of the greatest obstacles
to poverty eradication and sustainable development.
Flood and drought have already imposed huge social
and economic costs, and climate change is making
water extremes worse. The action plan of the HighLevel Panel on Water and Peace affirms that
“If the world continues on its current path,
projections suggest that the world may face a 40 per
cent shortfall in water availability by 2030. The
consequences of such stress are local, transboundary
and global in today’s interconnected world.”
Water is an important element of the discussion as a
potential driver of conflict, a potential cause of disaster
and an essential precondition for development. It is high
time that we raised the political commitment to urgently
address the issue. Africa has 64 transboundary river
basins, covering 90 per cent of the continent.. There
is still no agreement for some of those river basins

16-3968055/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

in Africa. There is also increasing recognition that
transboundary groundwater must be better factored
into transboundary cooperative arrangements for
water. Moreover, transboundary water cooperation is
needed for the proper implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals, especially indicator 6.5.2, on
the proportion of transboundary basin areas with an
operational arrangement for water cooperation.
(spoke in French)
The Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), our regional organization, has devoted much
time and attention to developing a regional policy and
legal framework for water resource management. In
2015, ministers responsible for water resources of the
member countries of IGAD demonstrated strong political
will to meet, in a coordinated manner, the multiple
challenges linked to the common management of
natural resources, in particular water governance. They
agreed to promote closer cooperation for the equitable,
sustainable, lasting and coordinated use, protection,
conservation and management of transboundary water
resources within the IGAD region; to promote and
facilitate the establishment of institutional agreements
and arrangements for the management of transboundary
water resources within the IGAD region; to foster
the harmonization of policies and legislation on the
use of the development, protection, conservation and
management of transboundary water resources; and
to encourage research, technological development,
awareness and capacity-building in the development
and management of transboundary water resources.
(spoke in English)
It is also worth underlining that IGAD and the
United Nations have agreed to develop a collaborative
effort aimed at sharing experiences and good practices
and, most important, at promoting a conflict-sensitive
approach to managing natural resources, including
fresh water and rivers.
We wish to take this opportunity to commend
the role played by the International Committee of
the Red Cross in raising awareness about the norms
of international humanitarian law and in continuing
to ensure the protection of water in times of armed
conflict, and also for its vital humanitarian work as one
of the main providers of water to populations affected
by armed conflict.
56/78

22/11/2016

To conclude, Djibouti wishes to reiterate its
profound gratitude to Senegal and to the members
of the Security Council for putting this issue on our
agenda. We are convinced that investing in prevention
so as to avoid the escalation of tensions in water-related
conflicts should be one of the main priorities of this
organ, as it has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
benefits far outweigh the costs.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Wilson (Australia): Water gives life, supports
human development and enables sustainable economic
growth. Yet water crises are ranked by the World
Economic Forum as one of the top 10 global risks.
Climate change has the potential to exacerbate water
crises, which could in turn lead to or intensify conflicts
and fuel forced migration.
Australia is concerned about the increasing risks to
peace and security created by extreme weather events,
including water scarcity. Cities, towns and peri-urban
areas require functional water supply and sanitation
systems. Failure to provide such services often leads
to community tension and instability and can easily
result in conflict. We see improved water governance
as a key component in adapting to climate change,
while planning for a growing population and ensuring
economic development.
Good water governance is also essential to
achieving many of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) — most directly SDG 6, on ensuring the
availability and sustainable management of water and
sanitation for all. The 21 September joint statement of
the High-Level Panel on Water called for a fundamental
shift in the way the world looks at water. The Panel
presented a transformative agenda to deliver change
in water management and to increase investment on
a global scale to build more resilient economies and
societies. For Australia — a dry continent prone to
highly variable rainfall — effective water management
is critical to our economy. It has allowed us to make
the most efficient use of our scarce water resources
and to enable investment to meet the growing needs
of agriculture, industry and urban communities, while
ensuring there is water for the environment.
Through the High-Level Panel on Water, Australia
has committed to a number of practical initiatives
aimed at strengthening the capacity of countries facing
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

water crises. We are preparing a guide to improved
water management, drawing on experience from within
Australia and in our region, to help other countries
effectively allocate water among competing users. That
will have flow-on effects for food production, health
outcomes and economic development. We have also
established the Australian Water Partnership to assist
countries to improve their water governance. It is a
practical way to improve water resources management
in partnership with countries and the United
Nations system.
Australia also believes that the effective
implementation of SDG 6 requires explicit attention
to gender equality and social inclusion. Women and
vulnerable populations face an increased risk of
violence where water and sanitation services are only
available outside the home, often in unsafe locations.
Furthermore, we need to deliberately and proactively
engage women and marginalized people and encourage
their participation in strengthening water governance.
Australia is committed to encouraging and
supporting sound water governance at the highest
levels. That is why Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull
is an active member of the High-Level Panel on Water,
and it is why Australia will continue to work with
countries in our region and beyond to protect precious
water resources — in peace and in conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Finland.
Mr. Sauer (Finland): Finland aligns itself with the
statement of the European Union (EU).
Finland welcomes the initiative to discuss the
interlinkages between water, peace and security at this
important forum.
While conflicts have globally decreased in number,
they have also become more complex in nature. The
root causes of different conflicts vary, but competition
over natural resources is likely to increase in the future.
Demand for fresh water is expected to increase by more
than 50 per cent by 2050. At the same time, climate
change, together with environmental degradation, is
putting more pressure on the availability of natural
resources — especially water. The growing interest
in resources is a potential driver for conflict, and
the Security Council, together with the SecretaryGeneral, should assume its responsibility in terms of
preventive response.

S/PV.7818

One of the key prevention tools is mediation.
Through our co-chairmanship of the United Nations
Group of Friends of Mediation, as well as in similar
groups in the Organization for Security and Cooperation
and in the EU, Finland has worked hard to strengthen
the normative and institutional basis for mediation. We
aim at equipping mediators with better skills, tools and
partnerships. As part of those efforts, we supported
the joint guidance note entitled Natural Resources
and Conflict: A Guide For Mediation Practitioners,
published by the United Nations Department of
Political Affairs and the United Nations Environment
Programme in February 2015. The guide translates
decades of experience in natural-resources-related
dispute resolution into concise and practical advice,
with specific chapters on water. It creates a framework
for resolving disputes that centre on natural resources.
As experience has shown, water can also serve as
a basis and an entry point for collaboration instead of
for conflict. To achieve that, it is of vital importance
to prove the win-win proposition in sharing resources
and negotiated solutions. Approximately 40 per cent of
the world’s population lives in areas that share water
resources with two or more countries, but only a third
of transboundary river basins are covered by proper
cooperation mechanisms. It is therefore of the utmost
importance that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development includes a target to promote cooperation
on transboundary waters at all levels, as appropriate.
We need strong commitments to implement that target.
The steering committee of the Group of Friends
of Water in New York, of which Finland is a member,
has been a strong advocate for the comprehensive water
agenda to ensure the implementation of Sustainable
Development Goal 6 and all water-related targets
of the 2030 Agenda. Our own experiences show that
institutional arrangements such as river commissions
and international water conventions, together with very
concrete measures such as regulation of water flows
and fish stocks, measures to reduce pollution and the
monitoring of water quality can be agreed upon in a
manner that benefits all parties to those agreements and
arrangements. In 1966, the International Law Association
adopted the Helsinki Rules on the Uses of the Waters
of International Rivers. Two international framework
conventions — namely, the 1992 Water Convention, of
the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe,
the so-called Helsinki Convention, and the International
Watercourses Convention, adopted by the General

16-3968057/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

Assembly in 1997 — are now in force. Transboundary
water cooperation and the related water conventions
function as confidence-building mechanisms to prevent
conflicts with a long-term view.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the delegation
of Senegal for highlighting this important aspect
of conflict prevention and to assure the Council of
Finland’s commitment to do its share in promoting
the important discussion of the interlinkages of water,
peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Israel was not blessed with
an abundant supply of fresh water. Since its early
beginnings, we had to find innovative ways to provide
our people with access to this vital resource. As the late
President of Israel Shimon Peres once said,
“In Israel, a land lacking in natural resources,
we learned to appreciate our greatest national
advantage: our minds.”
Faced with adversity, Israel developed groundbreaking
water technologies, including drip-irrigation systems.
In Israel we make every drop count.
While Israel still faces challenges to peace and
security, it has successfully overcome its water crisis.
After years of water shortage, today Israel enjoys the
first water surplus in its history. In less than seven
decades, the pioneering spirit of Israelis has made the
desert bloom and transformed the land of swamps and
sand into a start-up nation. Out of necessity, Israelis
learned to squeeze the most out of every drop, while
finding solutions to create as much as possible using as
little as possible.
Today, Israel is committed to sharing those
solutions with countries in need. This strong sense
of responsibility towards others is rooted in our own
history and the Jewish principle of tikkun olam — the
duty to repair the world. It was in that spirit that our
founding fathers and mothers created Mashav, Israel’s
Agency for International Development Cooperation.
Mashav utilizes cutting-edge technologies such as
drip irrigation in humanitarian operations around the
world. Drip by drip, Mashav experts are introducing
this technology around the world, making a big splash
from the greenhouses in South Africa to the sugarcane
fields of Peru.
58/78

22/11/2016

Israel continues to seek out new partnerships
and to build bridges between nations. In 2012, the
Governments of Israel, Italy and Senegal entered
into a trilateral partnership to address the critical
issues of food security and income growth for the
people of Senegal. Today, Israel is helping the people
of Senegal by sharing modern farming practices, as
well as technical and business skills, with smallholder
farmers, especially women. By decreasing labour
requirements for irrigation and weeding, Mashav
experts are empowering Senegalese women, helping
them to improve crop yields, achieve financial security
and bring a better quality of life to their families
and communities.
Israel’s water cooperation also takes place close to
our home. Since the historic peace treaty with Jordan
in 1994, the two countries have worked closely in many
areas, including water technology. Recently, Israel
signed a new agreement to supply Jordan with additional
fresh water from the Sea of Galilee, thereby creating
benefits for both countries and further strengthening
our partnership for peace.
As we did with our friends in Africa and with
our Jordanian neighbours, Israel is ready to assist
the Palestinian Authority to address critical water
challenges. We have taken important steps towards
improving the conditions on the ground. Israel recently
authorized additional water supplies to the Palestinians
in the West Bank and Gaza within the framework of the
memorandum of understanding known as the Red-Dead
Memorandum. The additional supply to Gaza covers the
entire amount of the Palestinian request for increased
water supply from Israel. The Palestinians have made
clear that they are not interested in an additional supply
beyond that amount.
Israel is currently preparing a comprehensive,
multi-year master plan for improving the water
infrastructure in the West Bank. Moreover, Israel has
also reaffirmed its approval of desalination, water
infrastructure and sewage projects in Gaza, including a
large desalination plant that is being planned.
Unfortunately, the Palestinian leadership refuses
to cooperate with the Government of Israel on waterrelated issues. Despite our dedicated efforts, we
have encountered several obstacles standing in the
way of the improvement of the current situation. The
Palestinian Authority has yet to sign the protocols for
the implementation of the Red-Dead Memorandum, and
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

therefore prevents the implementation of the authorized
addition of water to the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip. Moreover, due to the Palestinian Authority’s
unwillingness, the joint water committee has yet to
be renewed, preventing progress on dozens of water
infrastructure projects in the West Bank.
Those actions on the part of the Palestinian Authority
clearly deepen the crisis and hinder progress towards
a solution. We continue to hope that the Palestinian
Authority will start demonstrating responsibility for
its own people. However, the international community
should be aware of the fact that, without an immediate
change in the Palestinian refusal to engage with Israel
on the critical issue of water, a severe water crisis is to
be expected this coming summer.
Water knows no borders and technology knows
no language. United States President John F. Kennedy
once said,
“Anyone who can solve the problems of water will
be worthy of two Nobel prizes — one for peace and
one for science.”
Israel is committed to promoting innovative solutions to
the challenges of water to bring nations closer together
and to bring the life-giving power of water to all people.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank the Senegalese presidency of the Security Council
for having organized this extremely useful debate.
Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union. I would now like to
make some remarks in my national capacity.
(spoke in English)
An ancient Chinese proverb says that water can
sink boats as well as float them, and water can indeed
be simultaneously productive and destructive. We live
in a divided world in which less than half of the global
population has achieved water security. It was pointed
out at last year’s Davos World Economic Forum that
water-related issues such as drought and pollution
would be the biggest threats to the planet for the next
decade. Water is a very political matter. The action
plan released in September by the Global High-Level
Panel on Water and Peace clearly underlines the fact
that technical solutions to many of the world’s water
problems already exist, but that we need strong and

S/PV.7818

coordinated political leadership to make progress.
Water is also a finite and irreplaceable resource,
renewable only if well managed. Today, more than
1.7 billion people live in river basins whose depletion
through use exceeds their natural recharge. If that trend
continues, by 2025 two thirds of the world’s population
will be living in water-stressed countries.
For many small island developing States, dealing
with water threats is a matter of survival, owing to rising
sea levels. Many least-developed countries are affected
by increasing droughts and extreme weather events.
They require better access to funds for adaptation
projects, but they also need us to revisit the paradigm
of water governance, because water issues are linked to
climate change, poverty, food, health and energy and
should be seen as cross-sectoral and multidisciplinary.
Romania fully supports working to ensure
sustainable water resources around the globe.
In that regard, we sponsored the draft resolution
introduced in the Second Committee by Tajikistan
entitled “International Decade for Action, ‘Water for
Sustainable Development’, 2018-2028” (A/C.2/71/L.12),
and we welcome the high-level conference in support of
the implementation of Sustainable Development Goal
14 that Sweden and Fiji will organize in New York
next June.
The lack of institutional capacity for managing
shared water resources could lead to misperceptions
and fears. In some parts of the world there is a long
history of mistrust around joint access to water
resources. Some of the best known such examples
revolve around the Nile and Jordan Rivers, while the
question of water-sharing is one of the final status
issues in the peace negotiations between Israel and
Palestine, as defined by the Oslo Accords. We therefore
encourage the promotion of international agreements
on water cooperation.
While the Geneva Conventions regard water
resources and installations as key areas of civilian
infrastructure, and therefore supposedly protected from
attack, reality has unfortunately proved otherwise.
Perhaps no conflict has reflected the effects of the
horrors of war on civilians more than the situation in
Syria, where water has become a weapon. Limiting
civilian populations’ access to water supplies is a
grave breach of international humanitarian law and
human rights.

16-3968059/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

Water insecurity in some parts of the world
represents a threat to the entire world because, as other
speakers have pointed out, water ignores boundaries.
Good communication, strengthened relations between
upstream and downstream States and strong institutions
are therefore essential to successful negotiations on
water. Many opportunities can also emerge from
negotiations on energy, agriculture and infrastructure.
Education matters, too, because it will shape the next
generation of leaders on the issue of water. Bilateral
cooperation and international mediation, facilitation,
good offices and dialogue are effective methods of
preventing, managing and resolving water disputes.
The United Nations should therefore continue to
deploy sustained diplomatic efforts to secure regional
cooperation on water.
Where the experience of my own region is
concerned, the European Union Strategy for the Danube
Region, initiated by Romania and Austria, has helped
to advance cooperation among the Danube’s riparian
countries in areas such as transport, energy security,
environmental protection, education, tourism and rural
development. Last but not least, since 2010, Romanian
experts, in partnership with the United Nations and
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development, have been providing professional training
for water-supply specialists from Eastern Europe, the
Black Sea region and Central Asia.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank the Government of
Senegal for organizing today’s open debate on water,
peace and security, and for the related concept note
(S/2016/969, annex). At the United Nations and in the
principal international forums where water issues are
discussed, as well as in the multilateral and bilateral
international conventions, water is considered a
fundamental element in development and our continued
existence. In that context, we are concerned about some
of the statements in the concept note, such as that water
has always been considered a driver of conflict. There
is no evidence for that notion. In Argentina’s view,
water is a catalyst for peace and countries’ efforts
aimed at cooperation, dialogue and integration should
be founded on that concept.
We should recall that General Assembly resolution
1803 (XVII) and the outcome document of the
60/78

22/11/2016

2012 United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development on “The future we want” (General
Assembly resolution 66/288, annex) recognize the right
of peoples and nations to permanent sovereignty over
their natural wealth and resources. Argentina supports
the development of the concept of the right to water
and sanitation as a human right that every State must
assure for individuals subject to its jurisdiction, without
regard to other States. Similarly, and more recently,
with the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the international community established
that one of its Goals is to
“[e]nsure availability of water and sustainable
management of water and sanitation for all”.
Considered in that way, the issue of water must be
addressed from the perspective of poverty eradication
and sustainable development. I should emphasize
that Argentina is a sponsor of the draft resolution
being negotiated in the Second Committee entitled
“International Decade for Action, ‘Water for Sustainable
Development’, 2018-2028” (A/C.2/71/L.12), and we
also support the work of the Global High-Level Panel
on Water and Peace launched by the Secretary-General.
I would like to reaffirm the definition of water
security for the strategic plan of the eighth phase of
UNESCO’s International Hydrological Programme as
“the capacity of a population to safeguard access to
adequate quantities of water of acceptable quality
for sustaining human and ecosystem health on a
watershed basis, and to ensure efficient protection
of life and property against water-related hazards”.
(IHP/2012/IHP-VIII/1Rev, p. 5)
In that context, Argentina supports the concepts of
the integrated management of water resources, of
watersheds and the need for cooperation and rational
use where resources are concerned, at both the regional
and international levels, in order to achieve sustainable
water management. We should also recall that
international humanitarian law forbids attacks during
armed conflicts aimed at preventing people’s access to
water, used as a weapon of war.
In accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
the Security Council has the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. Argentina
continues to maintain a constructive position, but we
believe that the Council should not distort its functions
by acting on issues that are beyond its remit or link
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

environmental problems to security issues, since in the
case we are discussing, water is not in itself a cause
of conflict. Based on the points I have mentioned, it
is up to the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, the United Nations Environment
Programme, the United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements, UN-Water, the Commission on Sustainable
Development, the regional economic commissions, the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and other specialized agencies to address water
and other environmental issues.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.
Mr. Sisa (Botswana): I would first like to join
other delegations in congratulating you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of November. My delegation
would also like to thank you for convening today’s
open debate on water, peace and security under the
agenda item on the maintenance of international peace
and security. I would also like to take this opportunity
to thank Mr. Danilo Türk, Chair of the Global HighLevel Panel on Water and Peace; Ms. Christine Beerli,
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross; and Mr. Sundeep Waslekar, President of
the Strategic Foresight Group, for their detailed and
insightful briefings.
Botswana welcomes this open debate because
water is increasingly becoming a scarce resource in
our country. In that regard, we consider the sustainable
use of natural resources, including water, as critical
to national development and to the maintenance of
international peace and security, since water is a scarce
and shared resource. Botswana therefore supports
regional and global initiatives that promote a sustainable
and resilient development pathway. The principle of
sustainability underscores the importance of meeting
the current generation’s needs without affecting the
ability of future generations to do the same.
The scarcity of water and its inequitable
geographical distribution makes it a potential source of
conflict. In that respect, it is important that neighbouring
countries sign bilateral and multilateral agreements on
shared watercourses in order to promote cooperation in
the management and sharing of water. In furtherance of
that objective, States members of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), of which Botswana
is a member, signed the Revised Protocol on Shared

S/PV.7818

Watercourses on 7 August 2000. The Revised Protocol
is underpinned by concepts of environmentally sound
management, sustainable development and the equitable
and reasonable utilization of shared watercourses in the
SADC region. In addition, the Revised Protocol also
promotes the exchange of available information and
data on hydrology, hydrogeology, water quality and
the meteorological and environmental conditions of
shared watercourses.
It is important to stress that the conservation,
protection, development and the economical use of water
resources should be promoted to meet the declining
levels in water supply, the growing demand for water
for domestic, agricultural, industrial, navigational and
environmental purposes and for the benefit of current
and future generations.
I have to underscore here that shared watercourse
agreements are necessary to resolve any potential
conflicts on shared watercourses. In that regard, we
commend Member States that have signed international
watercourse agreements and the United Nations
Convention on the Law of Non-Navigational Uses of
International Watercourses. Transboundary water
resources play an instrumental role in Botswana’s water
security, as the country relies on international waters.
In that connection, Botswana has signed and ratified
agreements in respect of four river basin commissions
established with riparian States to promote closer
cooperation in the management of shared watercourses.
We recognize the importance of holding continuing
debates on this matter, as studies forecast that water
scarcity, exacerbated by climate change, may threaten
international peace and security in the future. Studies
estimate that the number of regions that will experience
inadequate water supplies will continue to grow, hence
the high risk of water conflicts.
In conclusion, we applaud the efforts made by the
Security Council to regularly convene open debates on
water, peace and security and for adopting a forwardlooking approach.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Castro Cordoba (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica congratulates you, Mr. President,
as well as the Permanent Mission of Senegal, for having
convened this open debate during your presidency of the
Security Council. We believe that having an opportunity

16-3968061/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

to discuss this vital resource for the survival of this and
future generations, especially in the Council, gives
water the appropriate and necessary political priority
that it needs within the United Nations.
Many have predicted that future wars will be
fought over water, and some countries have declared
that water is a matter of national security. However, we
believe that water can also be a source of opportunities
for peace and conflict-prevention through strategic
cooperation and synergies that could be forged at the
local, national, regional and global levels.
What is certain is that water on our planet
is sometimes scarce and is unevenly distributed
geographically. But that resource is also facing major
threats due to its inadequate management, waste,
pollution and, last but not least, to climate change,
whose effects can be seen in water in the form of
droughts, floods and hurricanes, as we were warned by
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
All those threats could increase water-related
conflicts, both internally and internationally. That
is why we believe in the need to ensure that the
protection of water protection becomes an international
political priority. Although we have an international
agreement dealing with transboundary waters, another
one on wetlands and many binational agreements
on watercourses, we need to think about a dedicated
binding international instrument that would protect
this resource as a strategic asset for the survival of
humankind, but also for the survival of ecosystems.
We must also have in place an institutional architecture
that would protect this precious liquid, so that future
generations can see in it opportunities for peace and
sustainable development, and not as sources of conflicts
and wars as predicted.
We trust that progress in our efforts, as well as
progress in the discussion on the importance of water
resources in forums and relevant documents — such
as the Agenda 2030 for Sustainable Development, the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the New Urban
Agenda (Habitat III), among others — will allow us to
identify and to act on opportunities for the benefit of the
common good and to contribute to creating real options
to achieve lasting peace and sustainable development
throughout the world. In that regard, the achievement
of Sustainable Development Goal 6 — ensuring the
availability and sustainable management of water and
62/78

22/11/2016

sanitation for all — and of all the interrelated goals and
objectives, should be a central element of our mission as
a multilateral body. Such progress will be fundamental
for protecting the human right of access to water and
sanitation, since the United Nations itself recognized
that this is a vital right, one that is necessary in order to
enjoy all the other human rights.
Costa Rica has had valuable experiences in terms
of cross-border cooperation, since on both borders we
have rivers that unite us with our neighbours. We firmly
believe in the need to bolster cross-border cooperation
in water management in an ongoing fashion, and not
only in the form of projects for the benefit of the crossborder population, which in our region is among the
most vulnerable.
Our experience in integrated water management
and its impact on the well-being of the population are
proof of the contribution of water in peacebuilding and
peacekeeping, in a real and lasting peace. Hence our
interest in promoting regional cooperation mechanisms
that would pool national experiences and could be
shared with other developing countries.
We must develop management, financial and
planning mechanisms to protect the sources of water
that are necessary to guarantee future access to water
for our populations, especially the rural population and
indigenous communities, while making them active
participants in local communities in protecting that
resource, which would prevent conflicts over access
to water. Within those mechanisms, we can mention,
for example, our experience in the payment for water
environmental services and measuring the water
footprint of all our activities.
The fact that the Security Council has devoted an
open debate to the issue of water, peace and security
is of paramount importance for this natural finite and
vulnerable resource. It shows that we have begun to
realize that, if we do not protect it adequately, if we do
not measure its true value as a development instrument,
if we do not create the institutional and legal structure
that is required, water will be a threat to international
security, and not a never-ending source of sustainable
development and peace as it should be.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands) (spoke in French):
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for your vision
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

in including this item on the agenda of the Security
Council. My country supports you whole-heartedly
in this matter, particularly given the close bilateral
cooperation between Senegal and the Kingdom of the
Netherlands in the area of water and water protection.
(spoke in English)
The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.
In view of time constraints, I will read out a
shortened version of my statement. My full statement
will be available on Twitter.
We fully support the statement made by the
representative of Italy, also in the light of our cooperation
related to the upcoming split term with Italy in the
Security Council. During this split term, in 2017 and
2018, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, together with
Italy, as announced by our colleague earlier today,
will continue your sustained efforts, Mr. President, to
address climate and water issues in the context of the
peace and security agenda.
Our planet has sufficient water resources to provide
water security for all, but at the same time people around
the globe face situations where there is too much or too
little water, or where the water is too dirty.
Let me highlight three issues in this context: first,
water and the need for international cooperation;
secondly, water, climate change and migration; and,
thirdly, the need for water diplomacy.
First, on water and cooperation, the Prime Minister
of the Netherlands is honoured to be on the Global
High-Level Panel on Water and Peace, together with,
inter alia, President Macky Sall of Senegal. This United
Nations/World Bank-supported Panel will champion a
comprehensive approach to developing and managing
water resources. It will also focus on improving
water- and sanitation-related services. We commend
Singapore for its leadership on this issue. The SwissSenegalese initiative of a panel on water, peace and
security is equally timely, and we look forward to
working together to ensure the appropriate connections
between the two panels, or may I say bridges, in today’s
context. Furthermore, the capacity to prevent waterrelated conflicts through mediation and other political
means needs to be strengthened. An excellent example
was given earlier today: the Senegal River Basin
Development Organization.

S/PV.7818

This brings me to my second theme: water and
migration issues.
People do not want to leave their homes unless they
are forced to do so. As our colleague from Palau just
said, climate change threatens the existence of people
in small island developing States. In the past year we
have seen the migration crisis soar, which has made
clear that we need to tackle the root causes of migration.
Water scarcity, climate change and food insecurity
are among these root causes. They can be connected
to social instability and potentially violent conflict.
We welcome the fact that climate-related factors were
acknowledged at the United Nations migration summit
last September. As we move forward, our policies and
funding will need to follow suit. In this regard, the
Dutch Government is identifying options to intensify
our cooperation on water issues with countries in the
Sahel region.
The third issue is the need for water diplomacy.
We must make sure that water unites us and does not
divide us. We therefore need to intensify effective water
diplomacy. As an example, last March we organized a
seminar in Khartoum for diplomats from the States of
the Nile basin, so as to prevent future water conflicts.
Furthermore, last year the Netherlands launched a
planetary security initiative, which is a global platform
to address security issues from a climate-change
perspective. The next conference is planned for 5 and
6 December, again, like last year, at the Peace Palace in
The Hague, the legal capital of the world.
In conclusion, I thank you once again, Mr. President,
for having put this issue on our agenda. Let us all work
together to address water issues in a comprehensive
manner, connecting all the pillars of the United Nations.
Let us work together to ensure that water is a cause
for cooperation and not conflict, and to ensure that
water contributes to peace, justice and development.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue to be a
partner for that important purpose.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): One of the priorities of the national water plan
of action of the Syrian Government is to ensure a supply
of water now and into the future. Prior to the crisis
in Syria, we had registered significant achievements
by providing citizens with 99 per cent of their water

16-3968063/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

needs in cities, and 90 per cent in rural dwellings.
Unfortunately, these rates have decreased during the
crisis in the light of the fact that most of the waterpumping stations and water wells have been destroyed
or looted by armed terrorist groups, particularly in
unstable regions.
It is important to stress that using water resources
as a weapon is a gross violation of all relevant provisions
of international humanitarian law. This leads us to take
a closer look at what armed terrorist groups are doing
in my country, Syria. Some like to call them the armed
opposition, or non-State armed groups. Those groups
use water resources as a weapon to bring pressure to
bear on the Government of Syria and civilians.
What has been witnessed in Aleppo and Damascus
is a clear example of this. Civilians in both cities
suffered from long periods of water interruption after
armed terrorist groups bombarded wells and pipelines,
poisoned the water and looted and blew up pumping
stations. This is in addition to the bombing of water and
electricity facilities by what is called the international
coalition, which led to acute water scarcity and had
negative repercussions on the lives of civilians.
In addition to the tremendous harm inflicted on our
water resources because of such terrorist attacks, the
coercive unilateral economic measures imposed on my
country by the European Union and the United States
of America, among other countries, have increased the
pressure on Syria’s national efforts to provide its citizens
with water. Such illegitimate measures have made it
impossible to provide the necessary fuel and spare parts
to pumping stations in Syria. Those measures have
obstructed the implementation of projects undertaken
by the Government of Syria in cooperation with United
Nations agencies and international non-governmental
organizations. I would cite as an example the inability
of Oxfam recently to provide the fuel needed to operate
the pumping station in Aleppo because of the European
measures imposed on Syria.
The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
is endeavouring to work according to a strategic
vision that is not limited to emergency humanitarian
assistance but includes adopting a strategy for
rebuilding the infrastructure of all facilities as well
as rehabilitating the affected irrigation networks. This
requires the lifting of the unilateral coercive economic
measures, which have had negative repercussions on
all sustainable development fields in Syria, including
64/78

22/11/2016

the sustainability of water resources and the ability to
provide for the needs of citizens.
In addressing the issue of the protection of water
resources, we must all be careful to avoid politicizing this
vital water sector, especially among countries sharing
international river waterways. These countries must
respect international law and the relevant international
resolutions as well as the agreements signed when it
comes to such sharing, and also avoiding undermining
the interests of other countries or decreasing their share
for political reasons.
We also stress the need for concerted international
efforts towards supporting the legitimate rights of people
languishing under the yoke of occupation, including the
right to have access to water, especially because they
are the indigenous heirs of those natural resources.
In that vein, we recall what our people are facing
in the occupied Syrian Golan and the intentional
restriction imposed by the Israeli occupation forces on
natural resources, in particular water, which is provided
only to Israeli settlers, while Syrians are deprived of
that natural resource through discriminatory policies
with regard to prices and limitations on drinking and
agricultural water, in clear violation of international
humanitarian law, human rights law and the relevant
resolutions of the Organization.
In conclusion, the Government of my country is
anxious to do its utmost to provide for the needs of
Syrians and protect them from terrorism, which is
negatively affecting all aspects of their lives, including
water resources. We try to avoid the use of this vital
resource as a tool to exert pressure on Governments
and civilians.
The President (spoke in French): In now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): If this glass contained
all the water on Earth and I drank it in one gulp, it
would disappear. I would like to thank the Senegalese
presidency for focusing in particular on the issue
of water and the nexus between water and security.
We thank the Chair of the Global High-Level Panel
on Water and Peace, Mr. Danilo Türk, and the other
briefers for their valuable insights.
My Armenian colleague cited a wise phrase from
Chinese philosophy, and for my own statement I have
also included a quote from Lao Tzu:
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

“Nothing is softer or more flexible than water. Yet
nothing can resist it.”
We welcome the fact that the Security Council
has increasingly recognized the importance of
natural resource management in connection with
conflict prevention and peacebuilding since the
1990s. As an example — although not singling
out water specifically — in presidential statement
S/PRST/2011/15, the Council expressed concern that
the possible adverse effects of climate change may
in the long-term aggravate certain existing threats to
international peace and security.
Ensuring water security for the world’s population
by 2030 is one of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). Over 2 billion people face a daily struggle to
find clean water to drink. That statistic is expected
to rise in the coming decades owing to the growing
demands on water supplies and the increasing effects
of climate change. There are real links between water
and all phases of conflict. Although water resources
have rarely been the sole cause of armed conflict or
war, there is a long history of water-related tensions and
violence over access to water in the context of economic
and social development. Water resources have been
used as a political, economic or military tool, including
by non-State actors. On the other hand, conflicts often
have a devastating impact on water management,
infrastructure, quality and access. Populations in
conflict-affected countries are twice as likely to lack
clean water as people in other developing countries.
In that context, we welcome the focus that the
Secretary-General-elect has placed on prevention and
mediation. He wrote in his vision statement addressed
to the President of the General Assembly,
“The world spends much more energy and
resources managing crises than preventing them.
Thus the United Nations must uphold a strategic
commitment to a culture of prevention”.
In that context, Natural Resources and Conflict:
A Guide for Mediation Practitioners, produced by the
Department of Political Affairs and the United Nations
Environment Programme, provides an excellent tool to
be used exhaustively in our work. The United Nations
should continue and improve the practice of mediating
disputes over natural resources, including water-related
conflicts, as was highlighted at the Aria Formula
meeting on water, peace and security held at Senegal’s
initiative on 22 April.

S/PV.7818

We are convinced that the work of the Global HighLevel Panel on Water and Peace, which was launched
on 16 November in Geneva, aimed at developing
by autumn 2017 a set of proposals geared towards
preventing and resolving water-related conflicts, will
be a crucial contribution in that respect. The work
of United Nations regional centres could also be
accordingly strengthened in this area. In that regard,
a positive example is the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia,
which plays an important mediation role in promoting
the responsible sharing and management of the region’s
water supply among the five Central Asian States.
One third of world’s population depends entirely
on groundwater. There is broad recognition that
transboundary aquifers are a critical and inseparable
component of the global water resource system. They
are crucial for food production and account for 43 per
cent of the total amount of water used for irrigation.
The UNESCO inventory of 2015 has identified 592
transboundary aquifers in the world. Transboundary
aquifers can be a further source of water-related
tensions. Moreover, in 2008, the International Law
Commission adopted 19 draft articles on the law of
transboundary aquifers to be considered by Member
States when negotiating future arrangements for the
management of their transboundary aquifers. To
promote the issue of groundwater governance, my
delegation organized a seminar with the cooperation of
UNESCO on 17 October, highlighting the importance
of groundwater resources and transboundary aquifers
in the framework of SDG 6.
Finally, I would like to underline the importance
of regional cooperation in transboundary water
management, which can help build mutual respect,
understanding and trust among countries and promote
peace, security and sustainable economic growth.
My country holds the presidency in the European
Union Danube River Strategy, which provides a basis
for improved cooperation among 14 countries along
Europe’s second-longest river. The goal of the Strategy
is to stimulate regional and cross-border cooperation
in numerous areas, including the management of
water resources and a shared procedure for identifying
water deficiencies.
Mikhail Gorbachev once said,
“Water has the power to move millions of
people. Let it move us in the direction of peace”.

16-3968065/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

Our rivers and groundwater are the life blood of the
planet and must be shared and protected from the
effects of conflict and exploitation.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Bouah-Kamon (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I congratulate you, Sir, on the
dynamic manner with which Senegal has presided
over the Security Council this month. I also thank
today’s briefers, whose statements allow for a better
understanding of what is at stake with regard to water
management throughout the world.
As was the case during the most recent open debate
(see S/PV.7816), my delegation is especially pleased
to participate in today’s debate devoted to the issue
of water, peace and security, which provides us an
opportunity to exchange views on this important topic.
Water is a natural resource and, at the same time, it
is a food, a source of energy, a means of communicating
and an essential component of the agricultural cycle.
Simply put, water is the source of life, and some might
even say that water is life. Through its many and essential
functions, water is of a strategic dimension for human,
animal and vegetable life. Human activities linked to
inappropriate or restrictive uses of this natural resource
can sometimes become a source of conflict. The history
of peoples unfortunately shows us that water has been
used for strategic and military purposes and exclusive
and even criminal designs. The link between water,
peace and security is therefore a question of great
relevance because today, as in the past, it continues
to fuel tensions undermining international peace and
security. Experts in the area of the geopolitical role of
water even speculate that future wars will waged over it
and that that war has already been declared.
Faced with the risk of water-related conflicts, people
have been thinking for a long time about the options we
have for peaceably managing our water and settling our
disputes. The mechanisms proposed so far often involve
mediation and cooperation and are based on bilateral,
multilateral and international agreements, as was rightly
pointed out in the concept note (S/2016/969, annex)
underlying our debate. Such agreements have enabled
us to avoid many potential conflicts around the world.
It is therefore important to ensure that the international
community, in particular the United Nations through
the Security Council, continue to encourage Member
States to use such mechanisms, especially in the case
66/78

22/11/2016

of transboundary cooperation. For our part, Côte
d’Ivoire actively participates in the efforts made by the
Mano River Union for political, economic and security
cooperation among Member States.
In the same vein, it would be useful for States to
incorporate in their national legislation international
legal instruments for the prevention and punishment
of criminal acts and war crimes related to the access
or use of water. In that regard, my delegation would
like to refer to article 54 of the Protocol additional
to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and
relating to the protection of victims of international
armed conflicts, known as Protocol I, and to article 14
of Protocol II of 8 June 1977 additional to the Geneva
Conventions; to article 29 of the Convention on the
Law of the Non-navigational Uses of International
Watercourses; and to article 12 of the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. In
conflict areas or post-conflict situations, water issues
should also be taken into account in the mandate of
peacekeeping operations or peacebuilding processes.
Water is the most abundant resource on Earth,
but only a small amount — about 2.53 per cent — is
freshwater that can be used for agriculture, industry
and human consumption. Studies show that, by 2025,
within national borders, close to 4 billion people across
the world could find themselves in a situation of water
stress. A report of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) from 2006 indicated that 90 per
cent of the population of the Middle East and North
Africa will live in countries affected by water shortages
by 2025. In addition to those areas mentioned in the
UNDP report, much of sub-Saharan Africa is also
concerned by this issue, with potential implications for
agriculture, food, health and the economy. In countries
such as mine, where the cycle of life, in particular the
agricultural cycle, is intimately linked to the natural
phenomenon of precipitation, water stress sometimes
can be a source of tension and even open conflict
among farmers, cattle breeders and their communities.
My delegation would like to emphasize the
importance of technology transfers and fighting
climate change as relevant approaches for developing
countries. That includes strengthening the capacities
of those countries in terms of adaptation and the
mitigation of the adverse effects of climate change, but
also to enabling them to acquire innovative irrigation
methods for agriculture and cattle raising, as well
as desalination techniques to ensure greater water
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

availability. Addressing water issues and combating
climate change through Sustainable Development Goals
6 and 13 offer real prospects for the future. United
Nations agencies, such as the Food and Agriculture
Organization and UNDP, for their part, should play a
particularly active role.
As we have been hearing throughout this debate, the
issue of water is of strategic importance for humankind,
and therefore must be given due attention in order
to prevent future wars in the upcoming decades. My
delegation therefore welcomes the fact that the Security
Council has taken on this issue because water wars are
most often those of the poor and the weak, far from our
gaze and the great public debates.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Régis (Haiti) (spoke in French): Allow me,
first of all, on behalf of the Government of Haiti, to
welcome the initiative taken by Senegal and to warmly
congratulate its Government. By inviting the Security
Council and the entire international community
to address the important issue of water in relation
to international peace and security, Senegal once
again has demonstrated its well-known commitment
to the issue of water as an element of peace and
international cooperation.
The Senegalese initiative is all the more timely given
that it takes place in the wake of the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change and the recent Marrakesh Climate
Change Conference. It also responds to growing
concerns that water has become a potential source of
crisis and conflict in a context of growing scarcity
exacerbated by climate change and the abusive use of
and pollution of this raw material.
Water is an essential factor in the global security
environment. Indeed, demand is rising steadily and the
prospect of an overall increase of 30 per cent by 2030
can only have a serious impact on the economies of
many countries, especially in the South. My country,
the Republic of Haiti, is part of those regions already
under water stress, which, according to projections, will
include half of the world’s population by 2025, with all
the negative consequences that involves when it comes
to economic, social and health development, as well as
the unyielding acceleration of migratory movements.
All the more disturbing is the fact that water is and
can be used as a weapon of war. It is the cause of, and has

S/PV.7818

contributed to, the worsening of many local and regional
conflicts in recent decades. In some cases, control over
water resources is itself a strategic issue. In the long
term, the scarcity of this raw material — renewable,
but limited — can only exacerbate the potential for
conflicts related to its availability, access, distribution
and use, at both the domestic level and among States.
Consequently, there is every reason to fear that
the dialectic of the dreaded water shortage and the
continuously growing needs of the global population
could lead to conflicts, which could constitute a threat
to international peace and security. Today’s meeting
of the Council is therefore an opportunity for us to
strategically reflect together on the issue of water as a
factor for peace and security, while recognizing that it
is essential not only to protect water from the effects of
war, but also to safeguard this vital natural resource for
the sustainable development of humankind.
Access to water, just like access to shelter,
food, education and health care, is recognized as a
fundamental right of every human being. It is crucial
for social cohesion, political stability, development and
poverty reduction. In sum, it is essential for peace. In
several regions of the world — whether in the Middle
East, Latin America and the Caribbean, Africa or
Asia — the scarcity of water, its high cost, uneven
distribution and lack of accessibility all dramatically
limit the full enjoyment of that right. Such factors
contribute to exacerbating poverty, suffering and the
vulnerability of populations deprived of it. In some
cases, they are the common denominators of unrest,
civil wars and fratricidal struggles that afflict affected
populations. I would like to underscore the tragic
situation in Haiti, which in recent years has had to face
serious challenges largely due to the lack of access to
reliable water resources and sanitation infrastructure.
In addition to exposure to the traditional infectious
diseases, since 2010, Haiti has endured the painful
experience of a cholera epidemic. In six years, cholera
has already claimed the lives of more than 1,000. It has
intensified since Hurricane Matthew swept through
the country and continues to sow desolation among the
Haitian population. It should be emphasized that, after
having long refused to admit the obvious, the United
Nations recently assumed its moral responsibility in
the outbreak of that health tragedy and the suffering
caused. In addition to being a perfect illustration of
the catastrophic consequences of water pollution in
an already impoverished country, it is clear that that

16-3968067/78

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7818

tragedy has also revealed the unexpected shortcomings
of a peacekeeping mission mandated by the Security
Council. It has undoubtedly taken too long to adopt the
corrective and adaptive measures that were necessary
in view of the serious nature of the challenges and
extent of the consequences.
Ultimately, the cholera epidemic in Haiti was
also the result of a lack of empathy and international
solidarity towards a country struggling with an
unprecedented health disaster. Indeed, it is shameful
that repeated appeals by the United Nations to obtain
the necessary funding that would have considerably
contained the spread of the epidemic did not receive the
desired response. Fortunately, Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, who should be commended, recently launched
a new two-pronged approach, which calls for vigorous
action, both now and over the next two years, to assist
the victims and their families and, above all, to help
Haiti build public health-care infrastructure that will
enable the country to contain the disease and, over the
long term, address the serious challenges of providing
safe drinking water and sanitation. The Haitian people,
in particular the victims, their relatives and the affected
population, are eagerly hoping that international
solidarity will not be lacking this time around.
Before concluding,
three observations.

I

would

like

to

make

First, this discussion at the level of the Security
Council is timely given the multiple possibilities for
future conflicts that could be caused by water scarcity
throughout the world. I firmly believe that concrete
proposals will emerge from today’s meeting that will
underscore water’s essential role as a fundamental
pillar of development and reaffirm the inextricable link
that exists between water and international peace and
security and, as such, grant it all the importance that it
deserves in the Security Council’s work programmes,
including its peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations. In that regard, we believe that it is judicious
to look ahead and put in place appropriate mechanisms
in order to, as needed, minimize or mitigate the
consequences of natural or man-made disasters on
water resources and populations concerned.
Secondly, access to water is a fundamental right
and that will never be emphasized enough. In the light
of the concept note prepared by the Permanent Mission
of Senegal, we hope that today’s discussion will identify
new avenues for action on the most effective means of
68/78

22/11/2016

promoting the enjoyment and respect of the universal
right to reliable water resources that are available
in sufficient quantities. It is up to the international
community to redouble its efforts to ensure that
the enjoyment of that right is made possible for the
1.7 billion people who continue to live without access
to a minimum quality of water or sanitation because of
insufficient investment.
Thirdly, I fervently hope that today’s discussion
will be ongoing and lead to innovative guidelines
that can contribute to the strengthening of the
principles of international water law; the effective
prevention and upstream settlement of inter-State
water resources-related conflicts; national capacitybuilding in developing countries, in particular in the
areas of sustainable water management and resolution
of related conflicts, and better international protection
of this primary resource — water — and significant
improvement in access, which are all indissociable
elements of the triptych of development, peace
and security.
We are confident that the work of today’s meeting
will make a significant contribution to the establishment
of an environment of peace, security and cooperation
that is conducive to sustainable development, in which
the full access to water is guaranteed on the basis of
the cardinal principles of equality, equity and justice
and solidarity.
In conclusion, let me now address the representative
of Senegal. Allow me to quote the late Léon Laleau, a
Haitian author and politician who was also Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Haiti:
“Do you feel the pain and the despair, unlike any
other, that seeks to tame the heart that Senegal gave
me, with words from France?”
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your country’s
presidency of the Security Council this month. I would
also like to thank Senegal for convening today’s open
debate on the theme of water, peace and security.
The world’s growing population, the increasing
water consumption due in part to increased urbanization
all over the world, especially in developing countries,
climate change, drought, desertification and other
factors have resulted in a scarcity of this vital resource
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

and pushed some some States to the brink of water
poverty. That has led to competition over water within
States in some cases and between States in others. Such
competition could develop into conflicts that negatively
affect national, regional and international security.
The Sudan, concerned about water resources
and the role they play in inter-State relations, almost
two decades ago established a department for the
management of water and natural resources at the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs in order to coordinate
regional and international cooperation efforts on
this important issue and lead State efforts in water
diplomacy. Our multidirectional national efforts have
produced very positive results at the regional level,
the most important of which was the conclusion of
an agreement on principles among the three States of
the eastern Nile basin, namely, Ethiopia, Egypt and
the Sudan, on the Ethiopian Great Renaissance Dam,
signed in Khartoum on 23 March 2015 following
eight rounds of negotiations, which also took place in
Khartoum. That resulted in an atmosphere conducive
to cooperation among the three States, within the
framework of this and future projects.
In the light of the growing interest in water issues,
my country’s delegation would like to confirm that the
Sudan is determined to strengthen the role it plays in the
area of water diplomacy. It hopes that the international
community will step up its efforts to assist the Sudan to
overcome the challenges that impede the achievement of
that objective. Among them would be intensified efforts
for peace in the Sudan so as to redirect resources wasted
on conflicts towards efforts to implement sustainable
development programmes, including on water issues, in
addition to helping the Sudan benefit from the Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative, and lift the
unilateral sanctions against it.
Given the recognition by African and Arab countries
of the role of the Sudan in water diplomacy, in October
2015 we chaired the meetings of the countries of the
eastern Nile basin, through a unanimous agreement
among participating countries. We also chair the Arab
Water Council. Internationally, in October 2016 a
Sudanese expert, Professor Seifeldin Hamad Abdallah,
head of the technical body for water resources, received
the UNESCO-IHE Alumni Award for his expertise in
water resources. In the past, the Sudan chaired the
international conference on Arab waters under Israeli
occupation. All this is proof of the acknowledgment of
the positive role played by the Sudan in this vital area.

S/PV.7818

The Sudanese delegation is convinced that the
United Nations can play a pivotal role in guiding
international efforts aimed at implementing sustainable
development programmes on water and ensuring that
this vital resource will be an element of cooperation
among States and not a source of disputes between
them, through broader use of preventive diplomacy.
We are also convinced that there have been a
number of positive developments in today’s world that
could make regional and international cooperation
on matters relating to water into a tangible reality,
freeing this important resource away from the spectre
of conflict. The most important of these developments
is the tremendous scientific and technological progress
made, which has helped humankind to accomplish
things that had been unimaginable in previous
generations. That technological revolution could result
in an increase in water resources and greater efficiency
in the use of water.
In another dimension, the universal trend towards
emphasizing preventive diplomacy, as reflected in the
recommendations of the report (see S/2015/446) of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations and
those in the report the Independent Commission on
Multilateralism, opens wide the door to international
cooperation in the area of water. This trend makes this
vital resource a bridge for cooperation among peoples
and States, rather than a source of disputes and wars.
The goal of ensuring that water serves as a means
of cooperation among States is both possible and
essential, but that will happen only if we show the
necessary determination to avoid any and all conflict
over water in future. That could be achieved through
the following steps.
First, we need to increase the attention accorded to
the issue of water resources in the United Nations and
to promote cooperation among United Nations agencies
and programmes in that regard.
Second, cooperation among developing countries
on water resource management and its sustainable use
should be strengthened.
Third, we need to increase the level of financial
resources spent on research and development in areas
related to greater water production, such as desalination
and increasing the efficiency of use of aquifers.

16-3968069/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

Four, the transfer of technology on water resources
to developing countries should be facilitated on
concessional terms.
Five, the framework for institutional cooperation
on water resources should be supported, especially in
developing countries.
Six, we should support regional climate projects
that contribute to the fight against desertification and
increase level of precipitation —for example, the Great
Green Wall, in which 11 African countries participate,
stretching from Djibouti in the east to Senegal in
the west.
Seven, we should strengthen international
cooperation in scientific research into the effective use
of water — for example developing drought-resistant
crops, reducing the use of water in construction and
industrial applications, minimizing water evaporation,
waste-water treatment and dealing with polluted water.
Eight, we can establish a platform or a mechanism
within the United Nations for those countries suffering
from water scarcity to help them strengthen coordination
and cooperation among themselves and to encourage an
exchange of experiences and expertise.
Nine, we must intensify efforts aimed at helping
those States that suffer from internal conflict to achieve
peace and security and redirect resources consumed
by war towards sustainable development programmes,
including plans related to water.
My delegation is of the view that it is inappropriate
to mention the so-called International Criminal Court
in today’s concept note (S/2016/969, annex). That is
because the Court has no relationship whatsoever to the
issue we are discussing. It is not even a body affiliated
with the United Nations. More than 60 per cent of the
inhabitants of the world are outside its jurisdiction.
There are other mechanisms that are perfectly sufficient
to achieve the desired goals in order to avoid prejudicing
installations and water resources — for example, the
Convention on the Law of the Non-Navigational Uses
of International Watercourses, adopted by the General
Assembly in May 1997.
We noticed a regrettable tendency by States that
support the Court to promote it and to attempt to
forcibly and arbitrarily make it a part of the United
Nations system by inserting paragraphs in United
Nations draft resolutions that have nothing to do with
the Court. Such actions are controversial and have led
70/78

22/11/2016

to profound polarization. Given the growing number
of disputes among States relating to transboundary
watercourses, we could have understood a reference to
the International Court of Justice, since that is a legal
body that is part of the United Nations and is entrusted
with peacefully and legally resolving conflicts
between States.
Finally, my delegation believes that, despite the
current challenges presented by water resources, there
are many opportunities to ensure that water becomes
a positive element in regional and international
cooperation. The ball is now in the court of developed
countries to implement this lofty vision. The United
Nations can play a leading role in guiding meaningful
international efforts in that regard. My delegation
hopes that the international community will make the
right decision here and act within the framework of
preventive diplomacy firmly, before it is too late and
before water becomes a source of conflict in future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Maldives.
Mr. Sareer (Maldives): Let me begin by thanking
the Senegalese presidency for organizing this open
debate on water, peace and security. For small island
developing States such as the Maldives, this is a
particularly important issue that merits discussion.
The briefers who spoke today already painted
a striking picture of the gravity of the increasing
pressures being placed both on limited water supplies
and on national authorities to meet that growing
demand. They highlighted the need for cooperation at
the national, regional and global levels to counter the
potential threats to international peace and security.
For the Maldives, a country made up of 1,192
islands across 26 atolls, at first glance it would seem
that water supply would be the least of our problems.
Indeed, we in the Maldives have long spoken of the
threat posed by too much water — in the form of rising
sea levels — far more than we have of too little. Being
seawater, however, the oceans that surround us are not
suitable for human consumption or agricultural use.
Traditionally, our water needs have been met by
rainwater and the limited amounts of groundwater
accessible by wells, but a growing population and
increased urbanization have meant that those sources
are no longer sufficient to meet demand.Today, much
of the water consumed in the Maldives comes from
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

desalination. Furthermore, while groundwater supplies
are recharged by rainfall, environmental pollution and
waste mean that that water often becomes contaminated
and must be treated before consumption, adding to
already high costs and likewise creating dependence on
water treatment plants.
The vulnerability of small island developing States
in relation to water is immense. In the Maldives, for
example, during the dry season each year, desalinated
water has to be supplied from the capital to far-flung
islands, ramping up costs and logistical difficulties
for the Government. Similarly, in much of the Pacific
this year, drought — largely caused by the naturally
occurring El Niño phenomenon, whose effects and
impacts are exacerbated by climate change — wreaked
havoc on agricultural lands and livelihoods, impacting
water and food security. It is often the case that the
countries that are most affected are the least able to
cope with the impacts and therefore most in need of
support and partnerships.
Those unique constraints, however, have led my
country, the Maldives, to explore compensatory practices
and proactive responses to service interruptions. When
a fire shut down the sole desalination plant in the capital
island, Malé, in 2014, for example, the Government
responded by distributing bottled water, water from
temporary desalination plants and from mobile watercarrying vehicles, with special care taken to address the
needs of vulnerable and at-risk populations. That was a
huge cost to the Government, but we were fortunate to
have the assistance of our international partners.

S/PV.7818

Secondly, international cooperation and the sharing
of best practices can provide much-needed insights and
assistance in dealing with the challenges of meeting
national water needs. The Security Council and the
General Assembly can serve as invaluable forums for
the exchange of relevant knowledge and policy tools.
Water, by nature, is a cross-border, intercontinental
force, and therefore requires truly international
approaches and solutions.
Thirdly, the matter of water supply extends beyond
the immediate issue of water. Climate change threatens
to significantly reduce already strained sources of
fresh water in regions all over the world. If we are to
meet the objectives of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, it is imperative that we effectively slow
the pace of climate change and related water depletion.
On a more local level, small-scale pollution, salinization
and poor sanitary measures can threaten the quality of
existing water supplies and necessitate costly treatment.
Awareness and education in water and sanitation,
including management of services, can therefore have a
larger-than-expected effect on water supply.
By taking those various elements into account,
we may bring our nations closer to meeting the
Sustainable Development Goals’ targets on water and,
in doing so, build more resilient, secure and peaceful
societies. Today, an integrated, coordinated and holistic
approach is required — one that spans the traditional
divide between security and peace, development and
humanitarian needs — in order to meet the changing,
multifaceted nature of the challenges confronting
our time.

In 2014, the Government established the Malé
Water Crisis Management Fund, with a view to dealing
with future crises and strengthening the resilience of
the existing system. Additionally, we found that in that
crisis regional cooperation, as well as support of the
international community at large, was necessary in
helping the Government meet peak demand during the
water shortage and for contributing to the Fund. The
lessons from our experiences are threefold.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.

First, robust national mechanisms should be in
place to meet water needs in times of demand spikes
or supply shortages. The most effective measure in that
regard is to ensure the regular water supply system is
resilient and, where possible, decentralized, and that
it utilizes a variety of sources. Moreover, clear steps
should be in place for times of crisis.

Increasingly, water issues, particularly in the
context of climate change, are recognized as a major
challenge of the twenty-first century with important
security implications. Water has shaped human
civilization. On it depends population settlements
and migration, social and economic development and
political dynamics. Water plays a fundamental role

Mr. Collard-Wexler (Canada) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I wish to commend Senegal for the
leadership it has shown on this important issue — here
in the Security Council, in the United Nations-World
Bank High-Level Panel on Water and in the Global
High-Level Panel on Water and Peace, as well as within
the la Francophonie.

16-3968071/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

in regulating the climate, agriculture and economic
growth. An overabundance of water can lead to
devastating floods, while water scarcity leads to
drought. Both situations have significant implications.
In short, water lies at the heart of sustainable
development. As water is a vital resource for agriculture,
energy and health, it can also be a source of conflict
and an instrument of war. The effective and inclusive
governance of water can therefore contribute to the
establishment of peace.
(spoke in English)
Water-related disputes between States have
historically been resolved through diplomatic channels.
However, the past will not necessarily be a good
predictor of the future, as climate change will amplify
existing water challenges at all levels.
Canada sees this open debate as an opportunity
to shape and advance the water, peace and security
agenda. Greater diplomatic engagement on water,
peace and security is important. Our diplomats should
continue to advance transboundary water agreements
for a world facing future climate-change impacts and
population growth. Our diplomats must be equipped
with the means to monitor and expose the use of water
as a tool of war as a precursor to action by formal
institutions and mechanisms. Member States also need
to work hand in hand with organizations such as the
International Committee of the Red Cross to address
the humanitarian implications of water in active
conflict settings and to bring water into the toolkit of
peacebuilding and mediation efforts.
Finally, water should be a key consideration in
ongoing discussions on climate change adaptation and
the resilience agenda, particularly within fragile States.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to express our appreciation to the
Senegalese presidency for convening this importance
open debate on water, peace and security.
(spoke in English)
Water is an indispensable and strategic resource.
The inclusion of water in our Sustainable Development
Goals demonstrates the broad recognition that water is
essential for the well-being of humankind, food security,
poverty reduction and sustainable development. At the
72/78

22/11/2016

same time, water can be a source of tension, instability
and conflicts. As a result of the disparity between
available water resources and the need for water, as well
as the consequences of climate change, water shortages
may affect half of the world population from now to
2050. Asia is an example, accounting for 61 per cent
of the world’s population but with only 36 per cent of
available water resources. It is now the driest continent
in per capita terms.
Viet Nam shares the common concerns about the
negative impacts of the scarcity of water and unequal
water distribution on economic development and social
cohesion that may lead to domestic conflicts or conflicts
among nations. Nevertheless, water is also a catalyst
for cooperation. Viet Nam believes that transboundary
water cooperation is a good way of addressing waterrelated challenges, as it ensures economic prosperity,
fosters resilience, creates trust and enhances security.
Collaborative water schemes can be a powerful measure
to prevent conflict.
We are of the view that the United Nations can
provide valuable assistance to countries that are facing
challenges in the management of water. The United
Nations can deploy preventive diplomatic efforts aimed
at promoting and supporting regional cooperation on
water management. We call on the Security Council to
play an active role in preventing water-related conflicts
by upholding international law and frameworks that
help protect water security and water infrastructure,
particularly the 1997 Convention on the Law of the
Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses.
It is also our view that developed countries need
to support developing countries in technology transfer,
capacity-building in water management and responding
to the impacts of climate change on water resources.
We support the enhancement of global water
governance. We look forward to the Budapest Water
Summit later this month. We also hope that the Global
High-Level Panel on Water and Peace and the Group
of Friends of Water will continue the discussion on
effective measures to prevent and resolve waterrelated conflicts.
Viet Nam is among the countries most vulnerable to
climate change. We suffer from both floods and severe
droughts. Viet Nam largely depends on transboundary
water resources, as 63 per cent of our water resources
come from neighbouring countries. Therefore, we
highly value international, regional and subregional
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

cooperation frameworks on the management and use of
transboundary water resources.
Viet Nam actively participates in water management
frameworks in our region. It is encouraging that Mekong
cooperation has been strengthened in recent years
with diverse mechanisms such as the Greater Mekong
Subregion Economic Cooperation Program, the Mekong
River Commission, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations Mekong Basin Development Cooperation, the
Lower Mekong Initiative and the Summit Meeting
between Japan and the Mekong River basin countries.
The recent launch of the Lancang-Mekong Cooperation
Framework, which includes China, Cambodia, Laos,
Myanmar, Thailand and Viet Nam, was also a big
step towards deepening cooperation in this field. We
hope that the international community will continue
to support Mekong cooperation for peace, security and
sustainable development in the region, with full respect
for the interests of riparian countries and the balance of
economic, social and environmental dimensions.
The growing scarcity of water and water-related
insecurity worldwide demand an urgent response and
compel all of us to work together to address this issue.
Our discussion today is very timely, as it helps develop
political momentum to advance water cooperation and
prevent water-related conflicts. Only this integrative
approach will make it possible to achieve the objectives
of our transformative 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and transform water from a potential
source of conflict to a source of cooperation and peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Republic of Senegal for convening this
important open debate on water, peace and security,
in connection with the agenda item “Maintenance of
international peace and security”, and for submitting
a concept note (S/2016/969, annex) on the topic. This
issue is equally important for the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The international community, including the Security
Council, has increasingly been paying attention to the
protection of natural resources in conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and post-conflict peacebuilding.
Water is indispensable for the survival of
humankind. Attacks against, and limitations of
access to, water resources during armed conflicts are
frequently used as a method of warfare, including with

S/PV.7818

a view to starving civilian populations or changing the
demographic composition of a territory by displacing
people or preventing them from returning to their
homes and properties.
International humanitarian law provides for the
protection of access to water in the context of the
limitations imposed on military operations during
armed conflicts. It also regulates the use of water
resources and access to water in occupied territories.
The principle of permanent sovereignty over natural
resources also applies to occupied territories.
Furthermore, it is recognized that the right to clean
drinking water and sanitation is a human right,
bringing into operation the relevant international legal
instruments. It is important to consistently stress the
critical need for the implementation by all Member
States of international law applicable to the protection
of the environment in areas affected by armed conflict,
in line with their legal responsibilities.
The continued aggression by Armenia against
Azerbaijan has led to the seizure of almost 20 per cent
of the sovereign territory of my country. It has claimed
the lives of tens of thousands of people, ruined cities
and livelihoods and resulted in the forcible expulsion
of more than 1 million Azerbaijanis from their homes
and properties. It has also had a devastating impact on
the environment, with destroyed forests, burned and
degraded soil and polluted water resources.
Since the beginning of the aggression, the armed
forces of Armenia have deliberately employed methods
and means of warfare to cause widespread, long-term
and severe damage to the environment of Azerbaijan,
including its occupied territories, and to deprive hundreds
of thousands of Azerbaijani citizens of water resources.
The Sarsang reservoir — which was built in 1976 to
supply drinking water to more than 500,000 people in
the Upper and Lower Karabakh areas of Azerbaijan and
irrigation water to more than 100,000 hectares of fertile
land in the six districts of the Republic — has been
under Armenian military occupation since 1993. The
current technical condition of the Sarsang dam poses
a serious threat to approximately 400,000 Azerbaijani
citizens living downstream from it.
In its resolution 2085 (2016), adopted on 26 January
2016, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe described Armenia’s actions as environmental
aggression aimed at creating humanitarian and
environmental problems for the citizens of Azerbaijan.

16-3968073/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Assembly warned of the serious threats of a disaster
and a humanitarian crisis that the state of disrepair
of the Sarsang dam posed to the whole area. In view
of that urgent humanitarian problem, the Assembly
demanded Armenia’s immediate withdrawal from the
occupied territories of Azerbaijan and and that it stop
using water resources as tools of political influence or
instruments of pressure to its benefit. There is evidence
of deliberate transboundary pollution in rivers from
tailings originating in Armenia, which crosses the
international border of Azerbaijan and ends up in its
farmlands and forests.
Armenia bears full responsibility for its breaches
of international law, including those that have caused
damage to the environment of my country. That and
Armenia’s persistent refusal to start meaningful peace
negotiations and its attempts to escalate the situation in
the conflict zone once again confirm the need for urgent
and effective action to invoke Armenia’s responsibility
through targeted efforts by the international community,
which would bring an end to the impunity enjoyed by
the aggressors and ensure the liberation of the Nagorno
Karabakh region and other occupied territories of
Azerbaijan from the Armenian occupation.
There can be no durable peace if the environment
that sustains livelihoods is destroyed, polluted and
barbarically exploited. It is critical to protect the
environment in peacetime and during war and to
cooperate in combating environmental crimes and the
illegal exploitation of natural resources.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): I, too, express our thanks to
you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate, as well
as to the briefers for their contributions.
Water is crucial for basic human needs, economic
growth and sustainable development. The successful
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development is essential for achieving universal access
to safe drinking water and sanitation for all, eradicating
poverty and hunger and improving water quality, while
also protecting ecosystems. In that regard, the United
Nations should focus on achieving the water-related
Sustainable Development Goals and targets in a timely
and effective manner.
Today, limited water resources in many regions are
under pressure of rapidly growing demands from many
74/78

22/11/2016

sectors. They are not evenly distributed and often are
not properly managed. Furthermore, climate change is
affecting the availability of water in spatial and temporal
terms, as well as the frequency of extreme hydrological
events such as floods and droughts. In the coming
decade, more than half of the world’s population could
be under water stress. The majority of those people will
rely on transboundary rivers. The competing interests
and demands on transboundary water resources may
turn into a divisive issue among riparian countries.
However, while water is perceived as a source of
tension, historically countries have tended to cooperate
rather than fight over it. Turkey considers water to be an
important means of cooperation and a bridge-builder.
We support the equitable, reasonable and effective
utilization of transboundary water resources, as well as
the sharing of its benefits, through cooperation among
riparian States. Water must be used in an efficient way
through integrated water resources management at the
basin level, and the benefits should be maximized.
Confidence-building measures should be put in place
in order to dispel mistrust and create an environment
that is conducive to meaningful cooperation. In fact,
each transboundary body of water has its own specific
characteristic and peculiarities, and reflects economic,
social and historical aspects of any particular region.
Therefore, bilateral and riparian-only approaches
are the most appropriate and result-oriented methods
for addressing the issues regarding transboundary
water resources.
Finally, guided also by our contractual obligations,
water resources and infrastructure must be protected
during armed conflicts, taking into account that water
is a source of life. However, engaging in a dialogue on
water as a confidence-building measure with the sole
purpose of addressing political or armed conflicts may
not always yield progress, and water issues that are
pursued with a misplaced political agenda might even
create further complications.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I thank you, Mr. President,
and the presidency of Senegal for convening this very
important debate and for bringing this important issue
to the forefront. My delegation would also like to thank
the briefers for their comments, which, inter alia,
highlight the need for improved water management and
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

conservation, with greater international cooperation
on water.
Due to many factors — global climate change, the
number and scale of natural disasters, the increase in
human population, food shortages and water disputes
within and between some countries — the issues related
to the ownership and use of water are likely to gain
more prominence. But many times it is not, and will not
be, water that caused the disputes, but other unresolved
conflicts and their effects, as pressures of population
displacement lead to water disputes.
Being fundamental to human survival, water
can arouse strong passions. However, it need not be
a source of conflict if water resources and their use
are governed prudently. But for that we must take a
comprehensive approach to water. It is therefore critical
that the milestone agreements forged last year — the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda on Financing for Development,
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change — be
implemented successfully. They will help ensure that
conditions that could turn into conflicts over water
are mitigated. Along with those, Indonesia supports
agreements among States that require them to ensure
that a clear methodology and dispute-resolution
mechanism on watercourses are available.
Given that 70 per cent of global fresh water is used
for agriculture, there should also be greater support
given to developing countries that lack the capacities
for developing their water conservation and agriculture
production abilities.
Indonesia also takes strong exception to any parties
in conflicts attacking water reservoirs and related
infrastructure, which is discussed in the concept note
(S/2016/969, annex). Using water as an instrument of
war is reprehensible. There can never be a defence
for knowingly or unknowingly targeting water, health
services, food or other essential facilities for civilians.
The Security Council must clearly uphold international
humanitarian law. Furthermore, as Indonesia has
stressed before in various United Nations forums, it
is crucial that the Security Council and other relevant
entities of the United Nations system significantly
elevate principled conflict prevention, credible political
solutions, dialogue processes and mediation to help
resolve conflicts peacefully.

S/PV.7818

Sustainability is a key feature of Indonesia’s
medium-term development plan for the period 20152019, with the security of water, food, energy and
maritime resources among its essential components.
In the area of water security, we are pursuing clear
targets in watershed conservation, water availability,
access to drinking water and sanitation. While
South-East Asia is generally self-sufficient in natural
resources, there are varied conditions in the member
States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN). Seasonal scarcity and a rising demand for
freshwater are realities. To ensure equitable access
and sufficient amounts of water of acceptable quality,
ASEAN — through its Socio-Cultural Community
Blueprint 2009-2015, a strategic plan of action and
the ASEAN Working Group on Water Resources
Management — has effectively promoted regional
cooperation and collaboration on integrated water
resources management and will continue to intensify
such efforts.
Indonesia is happy to share its insights and
expertise on water resources management with
interested countries. We also believe that United
Nations agencies, particularly UN-Water, should play a
substantially greater role to assist developing countries
to address the multiple issues related to water.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Tadesse (Ethiopia): I would like to start by
commending you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s
open debate on water, peace and security. I would also
like to thank Mr. Danilo Türk, Chair of the Global
High-Level Panel on Water and Peace; Ms. Christine
Beerli, Vice-President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross; and Mr. Sundeep Waslekar, President
of Strategic Foresight Group, for their briefings this
morning. The concept note (S/2016/969, annex) is also
helpful, but we would like to share some ideas about the
kind of narrative that should be crafted for focusing on
this topic.
The discussion on water, peace and security has
essentially been framed in terms of the threats posed
by water scarcity and the potential for water-related
disputes. The concept note is also anchored in the
premise that “water has always been considered as a
driver of conflict”. Of course, one cannot rule out
the possibility of a dispute or disagreement over the
utilization of shared water resources. That is only

16-3968075/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

22/11/2016

natural, but conflict and violence are not necessarily
inevitable. The lessons of history show that water can
indeed be a source of cooperation rather than conflict.
That is even more relevant to transboundary water
resources, which provide an opportunity for cooperation
in ensuring effective water management at the national
and regional levels. It is that spirit that I believe should
guide our discussion of the topic today.

and development for all countries. Though the adoption
of those universal Goals and indicators is a step in
the right direction, their implementation requires
sustained political commitment, determination, longterm vision and effort on the part of all Governments
and stakeholders. The promotion of cooperation also
demands frank and constructive discussions among
States and regional cooperation frameworks.

For centuries, States have been striving to address
water management challenges through cooperation and
mutual understanding. Contrary to the arguments of
those who ring the alarm bells about water security, it
is a matter of record that no States have gone to war
specifically over water resources. In fact, thousands of
treaties have been signed in the past to manage shared
water resources. That is why we in Ethiopia strongly
believe that cooperation on water is indeed possible
and is the only rational way forward for ensuring
sustained development benefits for all States, based on
the principle of the equitable and reasonable utilization
of transboundary water resources.

The discourse on water security has been dominated
by inflammatory rhetoric, which tends to unnecessarily
politicize the issue and does not foster constructive
dialogue. What will help us address the challenge of
water management in an equitable and sustainable
manner is dialogue and collaboration conducted in a
spirit of mutual understanding and cooperation. We
very much hope that the outcome of our deliberations
today will be geared towards that objective.

It is in that context that Ethiopia has been
participating in the Nile Basin Initiative and its
Cooperative Framework Agreement, which was
negotiated over a decade and has now been signed by six
riparian States and ratified by three of them. Once the
remaining three riparian States ratify it, a permanent
river basin commission will be established. This kind
of regional mechanisms is critical not only to reduce
the risks of potential conflict but also to ensure that
transboundary water resources are equitably shared
among riparian States on a basis of win-win cooperation.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
also recognizes critical role of water in inclusive and
sustainable development, as articulated in Sustainable
Development Goal 6 and in the water-related targets.
The 2030 Agenda emphasizes the importance of water
resource management at all levels, including through
transboundary cooperation.
We, the States Members of the United Nations,
have also agreed, under the 2030 Agenda, to expand
international cooperation and capacity-building for
developing countries in water-related programmes.
In addition, as the United Nations World Water
Development Report 2016 illustrates, sustainable water
management, water infrastructure and access to safe,
reliable and affordable water supplies are fundamental
to eradicating poverty and ensuring sustainable peace
76/78

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): Armenia would
like to express its appreciation to the Senegalese
presidency of the Security Council for initiating today’s
open debate and providing an excellent concept note
(S/2016/969, annex) on the subject. We also thank the
briefers for their thoughtful presentations earlier today.
The wide-ranging negative consequences of climate
change and their significant impact on water resources
have become palpable for societies and their health and
economies and the natural environment. Meteorological
records and climate projections provide abundant
evidence of the vulnerability of water resources and the
high cost for human societies and ecosystems.
Effective adaptation to climate change requires a
cross-sectoral approach, including at the transboundary
level. Transboundary bodies of water create
hydrological, social and economic interdependencies
among communities, societies and nations. They are
vital to economic development, poverty reduction
and the attainment of the Sustainable Development
Goals. Such interdependencies may have the potential
for disputes and conflict, both within and between
countries. Since growing populations, increased
urbanization and economic development all require
more water for agricultural, municipal and industrial
uses, the risks become greater.
However, the recognition of mutual interests
and mutual dependency should serve as the basis for
16-39680

22/11/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7818

cooperation and the promotion of regional peace and
security, as well as economic growth. Through various
initiatives, Member States should be encouraged to
focus on tipping the balance from potential conflict
to cooperation. They should be supported in efforts
to improve the management of transboundary water
resources, including by strengthening joint efforts and
actions. Arrangements for cooperation and joint actions
should take into account the specifics of a given basin and
duly reflect the range of environmental, hydrological,
political, economic and social circumstances of each
case. The recognition of mutual dependency, a strong
political will and a genuine commitment to cooperation
on the part of States are critical prerequisites for
successful transboundary water management.

also serve as a confidence-building measure between
the parties to the conflict.

Armenia has consistently promoted and supported
regional and subregional cooperation, including
on environmental issues and transboundary water
management. Such cooperation is a basis not only for
addressing and advancing mutual interests between
neighbouring nations; it also represents important
confidence-building measures in situations of
unresolved conflict. We would like to emphasize the
potential of such cooperation in the broader context
of promoting regional peace and security, as well as
economic growth.

Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks you, Mr. President, for organizing
this open debate on water, peace and security, and for
bringing this important issue to the attention of the
Security Council. We welcome Ms. Christine Beerli,
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross; Mr. Danilo Türk, Chair of the Global HighLevel Panel on Water and Peace; and Mr. Sundeep
Waslekar, President of Strategic Foresight Group. We
thank them for their contributions.

In that context, it is regrettable that we heard
another exercise of pouring scorn on Armenia and
accusations by the delegation of Azerbaijan. This time,
the usual accusations have been shaped in the context
of water-sharing. I would agree with the Ambassador of
Azerbaijan that indeed the Sarsang reservoir is located
on the Tartar River of the Martakert region of the
Nagorno Karabakh Republic. It was formed by the dam
of the Sarsang hydroelectric power plant built in 1976,
with a capacity of 560 million cubic metres and a height
of 126 metres. The Sarsang reservoir, which is of key
importance for the economy of the Nagorno Karabakh
Republic primarily for the purposes of agricultural and
generating electricity, is under the constant surveillance
and control of the relevant authorities of the Nagorno
Karabakh Republic. All maintenance and repair work is
regularly carried out in a timely manner, and there has
not been a single emergency situation that might pose a
threat to people and the environment.
As a gesture of good will, the Nagorno Karabakh
authorities have repeatedly proposed a water-sharing
mechanism and more efficient use of the water resources
of Nagorno Karabakh with Azerbaijan, which could

That is the situation concerning the Sarsang
reservoir. Although Nagorno Karabakh is proposing
concrete actions, the Azerbaijani side prefers to
promote groundless accusations and dubious evidence
that — as a matter of fact and to put it mildly — represent
misinformation. Instead of promoting caviar diplomacy,
we encourage the delegation of Azerbaijan and its
authorities to do a favour for the region and invest
their diplomatic efforts in the resolution of the conflict
within the agreed framework.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.

To date, water has been linked primarily with
two of the three pillars of the United Nations.
The international community thus recognizes the
fundamental connection between water and sustainable
development and between water and human rights. On
the other hand, the connection between water and the
United Nations peace and security pillar has as yet not
been fully explored and recognized by the Security
Council and the international community. Switzerland
believes that that connection is key and must be
further explored.
On the one hand, competition for access to water can
cause or fuel conflicts at both local and regional levels.
Water-related problems often affect countries that are
already in a fragile state and can exacerbate social
tensions and weaken States. The challenges linked to
water are also compounded by the effects of climate
change and can cause increased regional tensions.
Finally, cutting off the water supplies has become an
instrument of war with disastrous consequences for
civilian populations.
On the other hand, water possesses an important
potential as a source of cooperation and peace. That

16-3968077/78

S/PV.7818

Maintenance of international peace and security

is the case with transboundary cooperation with
regard to water. There are many examples, such as
the transboundary cooperation for the Rhine and the
Senegal River Basin Development Organization.
Collaborative water activities can also be an effective
measure to prevent conflicts. Water can therefore serve
as an entry point when other elements make dialogue
between parties difficult.
A number of efforts to strengthen the link between
water, peace and security are currently being carried
out at the international and regional levels. First, a draft
resolution on water, peace and security is currently
being negotiated within the International Organization
of la Francophonie, based on a proposal put forward
by Senegal and Switzerland. Secondly, a high-level side
event was held on the margins the seventy-first session
of the General Assembly. That event facilitated raising
awareness about the Global High-Level Panel on Water
and Peace, which will publish its preliminary findings
by end of this year and its final recommendations in
2017. Finally, international Geneva hosts several actors
working actively on the connection between water and
peace, such as the Geneva Water Hub, which provides

78/78

22/11/2016

input for the Panel’s work, as well as the Group of
Friends of the High-Level Panel on Water and Peace,
with approximately 40 participating Member States.
Switzerland believes that the issue of water, peace
and security must be included on the United Nations
political agenda in the same manner as the link between
water and development and that between water and
human rights have been. We believe that the United
Nations, in collaboration with regional organizations,
has a major role to play in the area. It is particularly
in the interest of the Council to address water-related
issues from a preventive perspective, that is, when
such issues can lead to conflict and destabilization
threatening international peace and security.
Experience shows us that water offers enormous
potential in terms of peace and cooperation. For those
reasons, we strongly hope that the various activities
launched to address the issue of water, peace and
security will be acknowledged by the Council and
contribute to its work in the future.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

16-39680
