S/2006/726

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 September 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 31 August 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
Further to Security Council resolution 1608 (2005), I have the honour to
convey a letter dated 18 August 2006 from Jean Rénald Clérismé, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Haiti (see annex), confirming the adoption of a
plan for the reform of the Haitian National Police and enclosing a copy of the plan.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter and its annex to the attention
of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-51735 (E) 061006 061006

*0651735*

S/2006/726

Annex
Letter dated 18 August 2006 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Haiti to the Secretary-General
[Original: French]
I have the honour to share with the members of the Security Council, pursuant
to Security Council resolution 1608 (2005), the reform plan of the Haitian National
Police, elaborated in coordination with MINUSTAH, and adopted by the
Government of Haiti on 8 August 2006.
This plan, which now constitutes a component of security sector policy
represents the joint efforts of the Government of Haiti and MINUSTAH to make
progress in the area of reform.
The Government of Haiti undertakes to implement this reform plan for the
Haitian National Police in close cooperation with MINUSTAH and the international
community, but notes that its success depends on the latter’s ongoing support.
I should be grateful if the contents of this letter and its enclosure could be
brought to the attention of the Security Council.
(Signed) Jean Rénald Clérismé
Minister

2

06-51735

S/2006/726

Enclosure
Haitian National Police Reform Plan

I. General considerations
Public security is a key area requiring immediate attention and vigorous
efforts, as it affects the political and democratic institutionalization process and the
establishment of economic recovery programmes. The current situation is alarming
in that a mere 7,000 badly equipped and poorly trained police officers are
responsible for the maintenance of public security. Large numbers of police
facilities have been damaged or destroyed. Most of the police stations (about 200)
must be repaired, built or rebuilt, only 400 Haitian National Police (HNP) vehicles
are operational countrywide.
This dire situation is compounded by problems that affect relations between
the HNP and the public. The only security institution in the country is perceived as
being corrupt and a violator of human rights.
The problem of armed gangs aggravates the insecurity and political and social
instability in the country. The lack of effective coordination between the police and
justice undermines efforts to seek an effective solution to this thorny issue, which
seems to threaten the social fabric itself.
Security will be approached in the context of the reforms and of strengthening
all the institutions that are involved in the conception and execution of public
security policy. Many of the efforts and recommendations already achieved in this
area by the international community will be utilized.
With regard to the police force, Government policy, will focus on
reconstruction through the approval of the HNP Reform Plan comprising short,
medium and long term activities.
To this end, priority is being placed on training, quality of command,
recruitment, actual troop strength, resource management, the discipline essential to
an armed force, intelligence, both judicial and institutional, and development of
community policing. All this will entail a reorganization of the basis of work within
the HNP, with particular emphasis on the Office of the Inspector General of the HNP
(IGPNH) and the Central Directorate of Judicial Police (DCPJ). As a result, the
current staff will be vetted and those who do not meet the standards and criteria
appropriate to a democratic police service will be removed.
Emphasis must therefore be placed on the material and financial means for
such an operation which is crucial to the realization of the reform plan for the plan
requires significant outlays if objectives are to be achieved. It involves making
police facilities and other service buildings operational (construction and
rehabilitation) and providing the officers with suitable equipment. Therefore, the
means must be mobilized immediately.
At the same time, the authorities are endeavouring to reinforce and optimize
coordination between the HNP and MINUSTAH in order to maintain law and order
and prevent violations as effectively as possible until the HNP is able to do so alone.
Maintaining peace on the streets and guaranteeing security for all are dependent on

06-51735

3

S/2006/726

good organization and on cooperation of the security forces present on the ground.
The Government will work tirelessly to achieve this goal. It will endeavour to find
urgent solutions to the violence wreaked by armed gangs.
It is equally important to act decisively to disarm all groups and individuals in
possession of illegal firearms, threatening the security of the people. In this sense,
the programme of Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration must be
re-evaluated to adapt it to Haitian realities.
The steps involved (approval of the HNP Reform Plan, detailed plans for its
implementation, effective coordination to develop a plan for maintaining public
order and the definition of a disarmament strategy ...) are part of a process. The
establishment of a non-political and impartial police institution functioning in the
strict framework of democratic rules and respect for human rights, and enjoying the
people’s respect and trust, requires in-depth reform and the harmonious
development of the HNP. Achieving the most effective solutions and making the
best use of all available resources, requires a participatory process, particularly with
MINUSTAH and the various bilateral partners.
In this context, the contribution of MINUSTAH is a necessary one. Therefore,
it is desirable for MINUSTAH to have a mandate and the appropriate means in the
framework of Government policy and the HNP Reform. It is also desirable for
MINUSTAH forces to have a more sustained engagement.

II. Executive summary
The strong desire of the elected authorities of Haiti to combat insecurity by
setting up a professional police force and a functioning, equitable justice system is
backed up by Security Council resolution 1608 (2005). This resolution requested the
Secretary-General to share with the Security Council the reform plan for the HNP,
formulated by MINUSTAH and the Haitian authorities, that included the anticipated
size, standards, implementation timetable, and resources.
The attached plan was prepared based on findings made by the Interim
Cooperation Framework (ICF) 2004-2006 of July 2004 and includes the elements
required by the Security Council. Key findings are as follows:
Anticipated size: Essential policing functions in Haiti can be discharged by a
service of 14,000 well-trained and -equipped officers, and this target would be
achievable in the next five years, without prejudice to quality, at a rate of 1,500 new
officers per year (9,000 by 2008 and 14,000 by 2011). At the same time, the Plan
reflects a general consensus that 18,000 to 20,000 police and other security officers
would be required to cover the full range of security needs in Haiti. In this regard,
the Plan provides for a supplementary strategy for the development of specific
capabilities such as a Coast Guard, border control and surveillance, fire brigades,
and penal system.
Review of current HNP staff: The target figure of 14,000 police officers for the
HNP will be attained through the recruitment of new personnel, together with a
review of the officers currently employed. A review of the current personnel,
leading to final certification, will remain a priority and will target the disciplinary
and training record of each officer. While the purpose of the disciplinary check and
certification will be aimed at dismissing personnel unfit for police service, training

4

06-51735

S/2006/726

deficiencies will be remedied through additional training. This review process is
expected to be completed within two years.
Budget: According to the estimate for personnel expenditures, the budget could
support the HNP staffing increase. The budget allocation for capital investments,
however, is largely insufficient, indicating that the development of the HNP will
rely heavily on funding from external sources. In this regard, the Bretton Woods
institutions, United Nations agencies and other parties to the ICF have indicated
their readiness to support the reform of the HNP.

Introduction
1.
The need to re-establish law and order in Haiti is a matter of concern for the
Haitian people and authorities. To achieve that end it is now urgent that an
accessible and fair justice system and a professional police force be established. To
this end, Security Council resolution 1608 (2005) of 22 June 2005 requested the
Secretary-General to share with the Council the reform plan for the HNP, formulated
by MINUSTAH and the Haitian authorities, that included the anticipated size,
standards, implementation timetable, and resources. The resolution also requested
that MINUSTAH and the Haitian authorities take all necessary steps to achieve
optimal coordination between MINUSTAH Police and the HNP. In resolution 1658
(2006) of 14 February 2006, the Security Council called upon MINUSTAH to
enhance coordination and to cooperate with other international stakeholders to effect
the reform of the HNP and to finalize the overall reform plan requested in its
resolution 1608 (2005) as soon as possible.
2.
The HNP must be a sustainable and effective police force which respects
democratic values. Using a ratio of one police officer per 500 inhabitants, Haiti
should have a police force of some 20,000. However, the proposed structure will be
the result of a compromise between ideal staffing levels and national resources. The
desired model for the HNP is that of a professional police force staffed with officers
recruited on the basis of defined criteria, and who are, consequently, well trained; a
well-structured police force that has resources adequate to accomplish its mission,
without external interference, and with respect for the law, regulations and human
rights. Furthermore, the force will require the institutional competencies to fulfil all
the roles and responsibilities as assigned to police in the Constitution of Haiti and
the Law governing National Police. Should a lack of resources limit the size of the
service, a proportional reduction in staffing would be necessary in all the main
functions. At the same time, enhanced training would be necessary to increase staff
quality to compensate for the reduction in the number of officers.
3.
Extensive preliminary work has been done, providing a basis for the
development of the required reform plan. Among other priorities, the ICF has
suggested that the transition strategy for the HNP should pursue the following goals:
• Strengthen the organization and administrative capacities of the HNP;
• Strengthen the operational capacity of the HNP through increased staffing
levels; and
• Professionalize the HNP by providing the HNP General Inspectorate with
human and material resources.

06-51735

5

S/2006/726

4.
In February 2005, the “Haiti National Police Strategic Development Plan
2004-2008” provided a detailed account of the operational and administrative
processes for the HNP and provided options for subsequent phases of
implementation.

Reform plan for the HNP
5.
The Reform Plan for the HNP builds on earlier work to provide a
comprehensive strategic management plan for the reform and development of the
HNP while responding to the requests from the Security Council, including:
• the anticipated size of the HNP;
• the standards of quality which HNP officers are to meet;
• an implementation timetable; and
• specification of the resources required for its implementation.
6.
The Reform Plan is structured to ensure the establishment of an effective,
efficient and accountable HNP force based on:
• Democratic policing standards and democratic values;
• respect for human rights and the rule of law;
• an impartial and non-partisan approach to the exercise of its duties;
• the repudiation of corruption;
• the people’s respect and trust; and
• the maintenance and promotion of respect for the rule of law, public safety,
law and order, security and stability in Haiti.

Considerations relating to the development of the HNP
7.
Legal considerations. Article 263 (b) of the Constitution of Haiti (1987)
establishes the Haitian National Police. Articles 269-274 of the Constitution set
forth the basic structures and organs of the HNP, including an Academy, a Police
School and specialized sections, such as the Prison Administration, the Fire
Marshall, the Traffic Police, the Highway Police, Criminal Investigations, the
Narcotics Service and the Anti-Smuggling Service (article 272). An Academy and a
Police School have been established under article 271.
8.
This plan, prepared in response to Security Council resolution 1608 (2005),
focuses on the reform and development of the police within the framework of
principles defined by the Constitution. It should be noted that the Constitution
provides for a second armed force responsible for police-related security functions.
These are surveillance of land, sea and air borders, operational support to police and
assistance to the nation in case of serious events or natural disasters. As of this
writing, political consensus on the establishment of this new public force separate
from the HNP has yet to be achieved.

6

06-51735

S/2006/726

9.
The tasks and responsibilities of the HNP, as defined by the Law governing the
establishment, organization and duties of the Police, are to:
• ensure the protection and respect of freedom, life and property;
• guarantee the safety of Government institutions;
• maintain order, peace, security, harmony and public health;
• prevent security breaches and actively pursue transgressors for prosecution
before competent courts within the timeframes set by law;
• control the ownership and possession of weapons in the national territory;
• conduct arrests in compliance with the law;
• prevent, detect and counter violations of social legislation;
• oversee all activities conducted by private security services;
• control all transit routes (land, sea, port and air);
• execute provisions related to the protection and conservation of the
environment;
• provide members of the judiciary with the necessary means to attain their
goals;
• provide the ombudsman responsible for the defence of human rights with the
necessary support to fulfil his mandate;
• provide data for the elaboration of national crime statistics;
• participate in social, civic, cultural and educational programmes implemented
by the Government of the Republic;
• carry out all other actions or activities stipulated by law.
10. Financial considerations. The decisive factor in determining the size of the
HNP is the capacity of the budget to provide for the police force. Actual funding for
HNP is potentially lower than the indicated budget and depends to a great extent on
Government revenue, priorities in each fiscal year, and the capacity of the HNP to
disburse funds. The annual budget allocation for capital investment is very limited.
For the current year, the investment component of the HNP budget is US$ 655
million. Current budgetary availability indicates that the reform of the HNP will
require a large external non-budgetary source or budget supplementation during this
period.
11. The provisional budget, based on an overall strength of 8,000 members for the
budget year 2006-2007, is approximately US$ 60 million for wages, and
US$ 133 million for the budget year 2010-2011 (with a staffing level of 14,000
members).
12. The overall cost of the HNP reform, including the sectors of training,
transportation, infrastructure, non-lethal police equipment, weapons and
ammunition and communications is about US$ 700 million.
13. There is a general consensus on the importance of placing the initial emphasis
on strengthening the management of human, material and physical resources.

06-51735

7

S/2006/726

Officials serving at the Ministry of Finance have also identified as urgent the need
to develop the budget, finance and procurement capacities of the HNP.

Current situation
14. The situation today is alarming: more than 7,000 Police officers, ill-equipped
and poorly trained, are assigned to maintain public security. Major infrastructure
and police facilities are non-existent, inadequate or have been destroyed. The
majority of these police stations (about 200) must be restored, built or rebuilt.
Nationwide there are only about 400 HNP vehicles that are operational.
15. The HNP Strategic Plan presented and approved in March 2005 characterized
the situation of HNP as follows:
A preliminary estimate indicates that there were approximately 6,300 police
officers, counting all ranks, in 2003, whereas there were in fact barely 4,000
officers in late 2004. Most of the infrastructure was vandalized or destroyed
during the crisis of 2004. In June 2004, an estimated one hundred and twentyfive (125) police stations needed to be restored and seventy-five (75) needed to
be built or rebuilt. Ninety per cent radio-communications facilities were
destroyed or pillaged and the network operated only in the metropolitan area.
The number of motor vehicles was at the bare minimum. From 300 vehicles
distributed to departmental directorates in November 2003, only half were still
available. Only 91 were operational in the metropolitan area. Office supplies
were scarce to non-existent.
16. These conditions highlight the capital and resource difficulties and the need to
remedy them upstream, as an integral part of the HNP Reform Plan. As regards
facilities, in addition to the rebuilding and rehabilitation of the police stations, the
current Division Headquarters in Port-au-Prince offers no suitable facilities for any
of the five principal HNP organizations. This must be addressed as a matter of
priority.
17. Police confidence in the HNP has been shaken by allegations of political
interference, criminal behaviour and police brutality. Hence a major training and
weeding-out process will be essential to strengthen capacity, professionalism and
respect for human rights within the HNP to regain public trust. In general, the
human resource asset of the HNP suffers from the absence of training and
development plans appropriate to the exercise of its police functions. In the early
years of the HNP, officers were trained without defined training standards and this
has never been corrected. Overall there is now a lack of discipline and respect for
the command structure and, at times, an unwillingness, at some levels, to accept the
responsibilities of management and command. The HNP has yet to establish a sense
of self-esteem which is essential to the consolidation of a democratic police force.
In addition there is an urgent need to improve the HNP officers’ conditions of
employment and benefits.
18. The HNP high command has noted that the current institutional difficulties are
in part the result of a system that was created by the international community in the
past when it took over the management of this system, in particular the recruitment
and selection of candidates, design of training programmes and handbooks and the
assignment and reassignment of personnel.

8

06-51735

S/2006/726

19. The structure envisaged in the law establishing the HNP is one based on
minimum policing needs and international norms in force and appears in general to
be adequate. However, the structure, the level of training of the staff and the number
of specialized units will require review as the number of officers increases, and
certain directorates and divisions will need to be strengthened and/or established.
20. The following Directorates within the
Administration have not yet been established:

Central

Division

of

Police

• Directorate of Security for High-level Officials;
• Directorate of Maritime, Air, Border, Migration and Forests and Port and
Airport Police and Border Immigration and Environmental Police;
• Directorate of Civil Defence, Fire Management and Natural and Man-made
Disasters;
• Directorate of Territorial Services.
21. The HNP has very limited capacity within its Central Division of
Administrative and General Services to manage its administrative and support
affairs. The Government administration procedures are clearly defined, but the
internal HNP systems for these processes and procedures require in-depth review.
Also, this Division has yet to establish a Directorate of Legal Affairs.
22. The HNP’s ability to implement the necessary changes will depend upon full
involvement of the highest levels of State and the HNP Command staff. However,
their capacity to be involved in this change will be hampered by the demands on
their time imposed by ongoing HNP activity.

Reform strategy
23. Drawing on discussions with Haitian interlocutors, the following approach to
meet these requirements has been developed:
• Enhance the capacity of the Office of the General Inspectorate by providing
technical and material resources;
• Determine the standards to apply to the HNP personnel and assess all police
officers against those standards. Where the standards are not met, take
appropriate disciplinary and/or training actions;
• Initiate a development planning mechanism within HNP using the technical
expertise and support of MINUSTAH and international partners;
• Develop HNP training plans and build HNP capacity to expedite the basic
training (including field training) of as many cadets as possible and meet the
anticipated staffing targets (to be confirmed);
• Develop HNP administrative and management capacity to implement the
development of HNP, once that has been defined;
• Establish an institutional support programme for HNP to achieve the target
skills, capacities and standards.
24. The HNP does not have the managerial capacity to undertake these various
development phases. The Haitian Government requires technical and material

06-51735

9

S/2006/726

assistance from MINUSTAH, the Bretton Woods institutions, the regional
multilateral institutions and international bilateral cooperation partners.

Support from the international community
25. International assistance must be given in the understanding that the Haitian
State is to be the primary leader of these reforms. This process must benefit from the
support of the Haitian leadership and people. Bearing this factor in mind, the
international assistance partners will provide development planning assistance and
institutional support at the Department and Central levels. The size of the team for
each Division will be determined in consultation with the Government and Police
authorities, taking account of needs in terms of specialized functions. Depending on
the approach adopted by the above-mentioned authorities, technical assistance will
take either the form of a partnership or a team of experts attached to the various
police authorities. A technical advisor for planning and development will assist the
HNP Director General in managing the programmes in accordance with the reform
and in coordinating international assistance.

Needs
26. The proposal regarding size of the HNP will be decided by the Government
but could be reviewed according to budgetary constraints and other factors related to
international assistance. However, increased capacity and performance of the HNP
is a national priority. The HNP should reach a strength of 9,000 within the next two
years and then continue to increase at the same rate for another three years, for a
maximum strength of 14,000 not counting administrative staff. Thus the
Government will be able to review and adjust its goals based on available options.
The anticipated HNP police force increase is as follows:
Department/Division
General Directorate (DGPNH)

225

Office of the Inspector General (IGPNH)

110

Central Division of Administration and General Services

525

Central Division of Police Administration

10

HNP projected staff levels — 2008

2 400

Central Division of Judicial Police

350

Artibonite Department

300

Central Department

260

Grande Anse Department

205

Nord Department

510

Nord-Est Department

170

Nippes Department

125

06-51735

S/2006/726

Department/Division
Nord-Ouest Department

HNP projected staff levels — 2008
240

Ouest Department

3 000

Sud Department

320

Sud-Est Department

260

Total

9 000

27. A target of 20,000 officers for optimum security has been discussed by the
Government. However, this figure is subject to the parameters referred to above. For
the purposes of this plan, the staffing milestones are to increase from the current
strength of 7,600 to 9,000 by 2008 and then to 14,000 by 2011 (after a weeding-out
process).

Standards
28. The development of a democratic police force in Haiti depends heavily on
setting and maintaining high quality standards. In principle, the HNP standards must
be compatible with international norms in the profession in effect in democratic
countries, taking into account Haitian sociocultural realities.
29. Since the mid-1990s, HNP compliance with professional and training
standards has suffered. It is therefore important to establish new standards, in the
area of recruitment, training and career development, as well as the mechanisms to
ensure compliance with these standards as quickly as possible. In this regard, the
HNP has decided to find, by means of conferences, lectures, seminars, etc., the
answer to the crucial question of what police and what type of police Haiti should
have. All sectors of Haitian society will be involved in this effort, supported by
MINUSTAH and other international institutions and partners.
30. Recruitment standards. The present recruitment standards have been
reviewed by the HNP and deemed acceptable for now, pending the outcome of the
workshop with the exception of the need to add a psychological testing component.
In this regard, it would be appropriate for a series of tests to be introduced with the
next intake of recruits. This would require expert support to ensure that the testing is
conducted professionally.
31. The conduct of background checks of HNP applicants requires some
improvement. Establishment of an HNP criminal intelligence database is not only
crucial for effective functioning of the police force, but would also be a valuable
tool for the background check process. International technical expertise is necessary
to establish this system and its related aspects. The plan includes strengthening the
organizational capacity to conduct background checks. One option to achieve this
could be to add a unit to the General Inspectorate to take on these functions.
32. HNP representatives have advocated using a human resource management
model that provides for three grade levels, officer, inspector and commissioner. The
principal difference in recruitment standard between levels would be educational
prerequisites.

06-51735

11

S/2006/726

33. Training standards. The HNP has made progress in the preparation of
training curricula incorporating professional standards. However, the HNP needs to
continue its efforts in this direction and to manage the matter of training standards
effectively. To achieve this, a joint HNP-MINUSTAH board will be established to
review and approve all training programmes and material. Instructors will be
recruited and trained for this purpose.
34. Promotion standards. Over the last 10 years, many different approaches have
been used to provide the HNP rank structure. However, this has not been based on a
common standard but rather on various emergency situations at the time. HNP has
adopted a human resources management model that minimizes the impact on staff
and ensures rapid alignment with the identified standards for promotions and
appointments. This model will be reviewed and adjusted in accordance with the
outcome of the Forum.
35. Review of current personnel. A thorough review of staff and posts, leading to
final certification of the current HNP personnel, is required. It will involve two main
areas:
• Background check;
• Training standards.
36. The background of each HNP officer will be checked in accordance with the
HNP Regulation on General Discipline (Règlement de Discipline Générale) and
other measures determined by the Conseil supérieure de la police nationale (SPN)
(Superior Police Council). This process will be initiated by the General Inspectorate
of the HNP. Based on the results, the strengthened Inspectorate, together with a
number of MINUSTAH police officers, will form a joint team that will be
responsible for the entire selection process within the organization. Once this team
has provided a list of officers deemed capable of being certified, the Director
General, after consultation with the Conseil supérieure de la police nationale, will
issue a new identity card for each officer.
37. A training programme will be put in place for HNP officers who pass the
background check in order to fill in the gaps resulting from changes in training
programmes during the past 10 years. The DGPNH and the IGPNH must work to
ensure that both current and future HNP personnel continue to maintain and apply
high standards.

Implementation considerations
38.

The implementation timetable depends on many considerations, including:
• The availability of suitable candidates for entry into the HNP;
• The need to review the skills of the current HNP personnel against current
HNP entry and training standards;
• The need, when required, to dismiss officers who do not meet background
standards;
• The need for supplementary training for officers whose training standards were
not met in the past;

12

06-51735

S/2006/726

• The capacity to provide basic, advanced and specialized training both in terms
of facilities and instructors;
• The organizational capacity of the HNP to absorb change;
• The level of logistical
communications; and

support

available,

including

facilities

and

• The rate at which the required capital investments can be provided in order to
respond to needs, considering matters such as procurement capacity and
delivery lead times.

Implementation sequence
Office of the General Inspectorate of the HNP
39. The immediate enhancement of the capacity and skills capabilities of the
Office of the General Inspectorate is key to the successful conduct of the review of
the current and incoming HNP personnel. In this regard, the Office of the General
Inspectorate should be immediately staffed with additional investigators, support
staff and necessary materials (vehicles and equipment) based on its responsibilities
and its organizational chart. Furthermore, the Office of the General Inspectorate will
be moving to new facilities by mid-2007.
40. The vetting current process must be fully operational not later than the end of
the third quarter of 2006 to allow for a full review of all current HNP officers by the
second quarter of 2007.
41. In the initial phase, strong international support will be required to conduct
background checks of the current and new personnel who will staff the GI Office.
For this, the skills required are those needed to conduct investigations, background
checks and audits.
Central Division of Administration and general services (phase one)
42. The enhancement of the administrative and general support functions of the
HNP needs to occur in a way that will ensure effective support for the overall
development process. The basic personnel management function is an immediate
priority, in the context of supporting activities of the General Inspectorate. By the
end of the third quarter of 2006, the personnel systems, including the vetted staff,
must be in place to maintain full HNP personnel records. During the same period,
job vacancies must be entirely staffed with vetted personnel, and all personnel
policies and regulations must be updated and approved by the CSPN.
43. By mid-2007, the personnel office must be established and able to submit
proposals to the Director General on the assignment, promotion and appointment
process. During the period 2007-2008, a review of the conditions of employment
and remuneration of HNP officers must be finalized to introduce the necessary
changes in the 2007-2008 budget. Other personnel support and welfare functions
should be fully operational by the same time.
44. A new Directorate of Legal Affairs is another urgently needed function to
provide effective support for the ongoing work of the Office of the Inspector
General. Material and technical assistance is required from the United Nations and

06-51735

13

S/2006/726

other international partners to ensure that this Directorate is operational by the end
of 2006.
45. The procurement and contracting capacity, enabling the HNP to conduct
effective and timely public procurement, is another immediate priority. Within six
months, HNP procurement staff must be capable of fulfilling all the conditions
resulting from the reform activities. Procedures and practices are to be compliant
with procurement and financial laws and auditable by that time. HNP internal
procedures and instructions for logistical support processes are to be updated and
then issued. Throughout the 2006-2007 fiscal year the procurement staff is to put in
place long-term contracts for all routine supplies and services. The supply aspects of
logistics, asset recording and the related receipt and inspection aspect must be
developed in conjunction with procurement capacity to ensure that that aspect of the
management process is complete.
46. The budget and finance systems must be integrated with the new personnel and
procurement systems to provide effective and sound accounting and payments
systems. The first stage should be in place by the start of the 2006-2007 fiscal year
and the complete system should be ready for operation by the start of the 2007-2008
fiscal year. This should happen in full compliance with the financial legislation
currently in effect. The system of linkage between personnel records and salary
payments must be auditable. The linkage to the logistics asset management system
should be in place by early 2008.
47. For a reform or development plan to succeed, priority must be given to the
creation of adequate and appropriate buildings (either by constructing them or
renovating them).
The construction requirements, by financial year, are as follows:
FY 2006-2007 Building for Office of the Director General
Building for Office of the Inspector General
Facility for Police Academy
Construction of three police stations
Refurbishment of 20 police stations
FY 2007-2008 Building for Centre for Intelligence Operations
Building for Central Division of Administration and General
Services
Construction of an additional police school for 500 cadets in the
region
FY 2009-2010 Construction of three regional Judicial Police Offices
Construction of five police stations
Refurbishment of 30 police stations
Regional departments
48. The delivery of democratic policing at the sub-station, station and department
levels must be fully implemented, within staffing constraints, by 2011. A detailed
implementation timetable is to be prepared for the start of FY 2006-2007 that
establishes the phases for making all sub-stations, stations, and departments fully
operational. The success of this programme will be determined principally by the
refurbishment and reconstruction capacity available, the level of logistic support

14

06-51735

S/2006/726

from project start to finish, and the number of trained mid-level and upper-level
officers. This programme will be carried out according to the “model station”
approach, but with standards defined by the HNP for the staffing and equipment
entitlements of each unit, operating and reporting procedures, and mechanisms
established to foster police/community relations. Procedures for reporting incidents
will by necessity be “hard copy” until a database for police information is
established and the data are available. This Department-level programme should be
completed by the end of FY 2010-2011.
49. The building refurbishment and rebuild schedule involves the building of nine
new station facilities and the refurbishment of 50 stations each FY. Initially a radio
communications system will be used for each of these units. A radio
communications system with nationwide coverage for HNP should be installed by
the end of 2007. This network will be augmented with a telephone and data system
to connect Departments, Divisions and HNP headquarters by the end of 2009. Until
FY 2008-2009, the servicing and maintenance of vehicles and equipment will
depend to a great extent on whether capital equipments and vehicles provided before
that time come with servicing and warranty support.
Central Directorate of Judicial Police
50. The enhancement of the judicial police function within HNP depends on other
sectors such as the judicial system and the penal management systems. The training
lead time needed to build professional and technical capacity is much longer than
what is required to build up general policing skills. Thus, a long-term view will be
taken for this division. A new space will be required to accommodate the Central
Directorate of Judicial Police in Port-au-Prince by the end of 2008. Then by 2011
facilities will be required to house regional units of the judicial police.
51. The enhancement of institutional support for the Bureaus of Criminal Affairs
and Trafficking and Drug Control within the Directorate of Judicial Police should
build upon the technical assistance projects already established by the United
Nations and other international partners. Reestablishment of the Forensics
Laboratory needs specific support, including both technical equipment and training
for the forensic technicians and personnel management. Particular attention will be
given to the firearms, toxicology and fingerprint capabilities. The milestone for
completion of these functions is the end of 2009, to coincide with the planned date
for the data links with the Department level that will provide the communications
needed for the fingerprint system. The criminal intelligence system must convert
from a manual system to a computerized system by the end of 2009, and by the end
of 2011 it should be moved to a searchable database linked to all users via HNP data
links.
Central Directorate of the Police Administration
52.

The Division of Police Administration will consist of four new Directorates:
• Directorate of Security for High-level Officials
• Directorate of Maritime, Air, Border, Ports and Airports, Migration and Forest
Police
• Directorate of Civil Defence, Fire Management and Natural and Manmade
Disasters
• Directorate of Territorial Services

06-51735

15

S/2006/726

53. Given the institutional development time necessary to create these
organizations and the associated resource needs, the Directorate of Security for
High-level Officials is expected to be established during 2006 and 2007, becoming
operational in stages. For organizational integrity and operational effectiveness it is
vital for all close protection elements to be under one Directorate and for their
operational tactics and procedures to be standardized. The formation of this
Directorate should be completed by early 2008. However, the Directorate will
require suitable premises.
54. The current HNP responsibility under the Law governing the Police with
regard to border management is to control all transit routes (land, sea, port and air).
Elements of these control forces are currently in place but require strengthening in
terms of institutional support and organizational development to meet this border
responsibility. There are other matters which the Government must decide regarding
integrated border management mechanisms. This category includes Customs
Service, Quarantine, Forestry and border security and surveillance. These
developments within the HNP will take place during the period 2006-2008 for the
border entry point and immigration control function. This will also involve a review
of the roles and organization of the HNP for this overall function once the related
organizational and responsibility issues are resolved.
55. The role of the HNP in terms of civil defence and natural disaster management
is to coordinate police support for the Civil Defence Office in the preparation of
contingency plans, warning communities of approaching storms and maintaining
order when providing emergency assistance. This Directorate could be established
in 2006 or 2007 if international partners provide the technical assistance, as was
done for the establishment of the Civil Defence Office in Port-au-Prince.
The Central Directorate of Administration and general services (phase two)
56. As the HNP reform proceeds, the nature of the administrative and general
service support has to develop as well. In 2008 the service and maintenance support
for the HNP must move from a warranty system to one whereby equipment provided
to HNP is managed either by long-term service contracts organized under the
Government procurement procedures or by developing in-house capacity. The
logistical support facility will need to be constructed in 2007 to be operational by
mid-2008. At that time the inventory system will have to develop into a system that
links to both the receipt and inspection role on one hand and capital expenditure on
the other.
57. The second phase of installation of the HNP communications network must be
in place by the end of 2009. This data link will provide the essential
communications between the regional Departments, the divisions and Headquarters.
At the same time, the personnel management and logistics databases need to be
complete and brought on line to permit better management and flow of policing
information.
Training
58. The reform and development of the HNP are clearly based on training.
Achieving the target quality and rate of expansion of the HNP will require providing
basic training to at least 1,400 cadets per year, plus an additional number to allow
for personnel attrition. For this process to be in keeping with professional standards,

16

06-51735

S/2006/726

the duration of the basic training programme for HNP officers should be 10 months,
including seven months of course work and three months of field training. The
immediate consequence of this is that the current training capacity is inadequate for
both the period of the HNP reform and development, and beyond.
59. The HNP has determined that to achieve the needed training capacity the
following goals must be met:
• Construction of a new Academy near the site of the current HNP School with
an initial capacity of 100 students;
• Eventual construction of a new school in one of the regions, to cater to 500
officer students;
• Construction of an additional school for 500 officer students within Port-auPrince.
60. Once operational, this infrastructure would make it possible to provide the
essential basic, advanced and specialized training to achieve a growth rate of about
1,400 students per year. Ongoing requirements including re-certification and
in-service training would thus be met as well.
61. The priority for the Police Academy is to deal with the mid-level management
deficiency as quickly as possible to provide competent and effective officers at the
stations and other police facilities.

Human resources requirements
62. The number of trainers, technical specialists and advisers to support the
implementation of the HNP reform and development programme is expected to
range between 150 and 200. This number includes technical assistance in all areas.
63. For the development of HNP, the national budget is expected to support the
salary and essential operating costs for the HNP. The national budget, however, does
not have the capacity to meet the capital investment requirements (such as
infrastructure, transport, communications, weapons and training) which must come
from donor contributions or budget supplementation. The initial estimate of the
direct costs of these minimum capital requirements for infrastructure for the next
five-year development period is as follows:
FY 2006-2007

US$ 18.4 million

FY 2007-2008

US$ 26.0 million

FY 2008-2009

US$ 29.5 million

FY 2009-2010

US$ 21.0 million

FY 2010-2011

US$ 13.5 million

However, it is important to determine the investment projections for other sectors
such as transportation, training, communications and weapons.

06-51735

17

S/2006/726

Further actions
64. Once the HNP Reform Plan has been adopted, detailed implementation plans
for each functional area of the HNP will be developed. These plans will describe the
execution modalities as well as the roles and responsibilities of the international
community, in coordination with bilateral and multilateral donors.

18

06-51735
