A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/143
8 March 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 110 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/53/625/Add.2)]
53/143. Respect for the right to universal freedom of travel and the vital
importance of family reunification
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that all human rights and fundamental freedoms are universal, indivisible, interdependent
and interrelated,
Recalling the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1
Stressing that, as stated in the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and
Development,2 family reunification of documented migrants is an important factor in international migration
and that remittances by documented migrants to their countries of origin often constitute a very important
source of foreign exchange and are instrumental in improving the well-being of relatives left behind,
Recalling its resolution 52/121 of 12 December 1997,
1. Once again calls upon all States to guarantee the universally recognized freedom of travel to all
foreign nationals legally residing in their territory;

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
/...

A/RES/53/143
Page 2

2. Reaffirms that all Governments, in particular those of receiving countries, must recognize the vital
importance of family reunification and promote its incorporation into national legislation in order to ensure
protection of the unity of families of documented migrants;
3. Calls upon all States to allow, in conformity with international legislation, the free flow of financial
remittances by foreign nationals residing in their territory to their relatives in the country of origin;
4. Also calls upon all States to refrain from enacting, and to repeal if it already exists, legislation
intended as a coercive measure that discriminates against legal migrants, whether individuals or groups, by
adversely affecting family reunification and the right to send financial remittances to relatives in the country
of origin;
5. Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its fifty-fourth session under the item
entitled “Human rights questions”.
85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
