70

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

means and personnel available, to co-ordinate activities
of the United Nations system in which youth may participate;
6. Expresses its appreciation of the recommendations submitted by the Secretary-General in his report; 38
7. Approves the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral to convene an Ad Hoe Advisory Group on
Youth to advise him on activities that should be undertaken by the United Nations to meet the needs and
aspirations of youth, including the following:
(a) Concrete measures for the implementation of
the proposals contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral;
(b) Assistance to Governments and United Nations
organs, especially the regional economic commissions,
to prepare systematic programmes and series of projects
to increase the involvement of youth in national development and in the promotion of human rights, with
particufar reference to the implementation of the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade;39
( c) Exchanges among bodies having special social
and scientific knowledge of, and competence in, concerns related to youth, with a view to sharing their experience in matters regarding the needs and aspirations
of young people
(d) Elaboration of programmes for seminars and
symposia on youth within the framework of the programme of advisory services of the United Nations;
8. Considers that the United Nations University 40
will serve as one of the important channels of communication with youth and will provide a free forum
for the teaching and for the discussion among young
people of subjects relating to international law, human
dignity and human rights, and also to the role of youth
in promoting economic and social progress, world
peace, understanding and co-operation among peoples;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
conclusions and recommendations of the Ad Hoe
Advisory Group on Youth, with his comments, to the
Economic and Social Council at its fifty-sixth session,
which is to consider, among other things, the continuation of the Group;
10. Decides to re-examine when necessary, but
not later than at its thirtieth session, the question of
channels of communication with youth and youth organizations;
11. Decides to examine at its twenty-eighth session
the report of the Secretary-General on the world social
situation of youth, to be submitted in accordance with
Economic and Social Council resolution 1407 (XLVI)
of 5 June 1969.
21 I 4th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
3023 (XXVII). Implementation of the Dedaration on the Promotion among Youth of the
lclea]s of Peace, Mutual Respect and Understanding between Peoples

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2037 (XX) of 7 December
1965, 2445 (XXIII) and 2447 (XXIII) of 19 De38 Jbid., paras. 35-42.
39 Resolution 2626 (XXV).
40 See resolution 2951 (XXVII).

cember 1968, 2497 (XXIV) of 28 October 1969 and
2770 (XXVI) of 22 November 1971, regarding the
education of youth in the spirit of the ideals of peace,
mutual understanding between peoples and universal
respect for human rights,
Reaffirming the principles inscribed in the Declaration on the Promotion among Youth of the Ideals of
Peace, Mutual Respect and Understanding between
Peoples, 41 and the importance of their universal implementation,
Aware that the education of youth in the spirit of
the ideals of peace, mutual understanding between peoples and universal respect for human rights must be
accomplished by measures to encourage youth to participate actively in all spheres of social life,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General 42 regarding the implementation of
the Declaration on the Promotion among Youth of the
Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect and Understanding
between Peoples;
2. Requests Member States, the United Nations
organs concerned and the specialized agencies to give
greater attention to the implementation of the provisions of the Declaration, especially when establishing
their policy and programmes regarding youth;
3. Addresses a solemn appeal to all States, as well
as to international governmental and non-governmental
organizations having consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, to take appropriate action,
to foster among youth respect for all peoples, irrespective of nationality, race, sex or religion, regard
for human values, and devotion to the ideals of peace,
freedom and progress and to the cause of human
rights;
4. Decides to examine periodically the implementation of the principles of the Declaration on the basis
of further reports submitted by the Secretary-General,
containing such comments and information as he may
receive.
21 I 4th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

3024 (XXVII). Increased employment and mohi1ity of young people in the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2736 (XXV) of 17 December 1970, in which it expressed the need for special
efforts to be made to recruit qualified young men and
women for service with the United Nations through
the development of more objective selection methods,
Noting with appreciation the report of the Secretary-General on channels of communication with
youth and international youth organizations, 43
Noting the reference made in the report to the need
for action to encourage and assist youth to play a
greater role in the analysis and solution of problems
affecting all people, 44
41 Resolution 2037

(XX).

42 A/8782 and Add.1-3.
43 A/8743.

44 Ibid., para.

18.

71

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Noting also the reference made in the report to
the need to open up the Organization to young people
and to ensure their participation in the planning, implementation and evaluation of United Nations policies
and programmes,45
Noting further the reference made in the report
to the fact that only 4.6 per cent of the United Nations professional staff is under 30 years of age, 46
1. Endnrses the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral that the guidelines for the recruitment of young
staff members to the United Nations Secretariat contained in General Assembly resolution 2736 (XXV)
should be fully implemented;47
2. Requests the Secretary-General to broaden effectively by all available means the base of employment for qualified youth, with equitable geographical
distribution and taking into account the need to secure
the highest standards of efficiency, competence and
integrity;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly, not later than at its thirtieth
session, a progress report on the extent of increased
employment and mobility of young people in the
United Nations, particularly by the opening of specific opportunities whereby communication would best be
realized through participation.
2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
3025 (XXVII). Status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights

The General Assembly,
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General
on the status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional
Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, 48
Recalling the recommendation addressed to Member States in its resolution 2788 (XXVI) of 6 December 1971, in particular its belief that the corning
into force of the International Covenants on Human
Rights and the Optional Protocol will greatly enhance
the ability of the United Nations to promote and
encourage respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, without distinction as to race, sex,
language or religion, and will contribute to the attainment of the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations,
Expresses the hope that Member States will find it
possible to take appropriate action with a view to
accelerating the steps that would enable them to deposit
their instrument of ratification or accession if possible
by 10 December 1973.
2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
4 5 fbid., para. 31.

46 A/8743, annex, para. St.
47 A/8743, para. 39 (d).
48 A/8788.

3026 (XXVII). Human rights and scientific and
technological developments
A

The General Assembly,
Considering that mankind has reached a point where
the acceleration of scientific and technological progress may, depending on its use, either be conducive
to the enhancement and dissemination of artistic and
cultural values, constituting part of the heritage of
mankind, or add to the risk of debasing them,
Conscious of the irreplaceable character of the
cultural environment, which will acquire increasing
importance with the progress of economic and social
development,
Fearing that the world may be impoverished by
succumbing to uniformity and monotony in modes of
life,
Considering that now is the time, before the trend
becomes irreversible, for mankind to save the wealth
and diversity of its cultures and to secure the best
possible conditions for their further development,
1. Invites Governments to make provision as far
as possible, in their national development pl~ns and
programmes for the preservation and development of
cultural values;
2. Requests the Director-General of the United
~ations Educati<?nal, Scientific and Cultural Organization to commumcate to the General Assembly, at its
twenty-eighth session, his views on the problem of the
preservation and further development of cultural
values, on the measures already taken by the international community and on further measures that should
be taken;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council and
the Commission on Human Rights to attach to the
above problem the importance it requires.
2114 th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2450 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968 and 2721 (XXV) of 15 December 1970
on human rights and scientific and technological developments,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution
10 (XXVII) of 18 March 1971;19
Ex_pressi_ng_ its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his prehmmary reports on this matter, 50
Noting with appreciation the report of the Seminar
on Human Rights and Scientific and Technological
D~velopments 51 organized by the Government of Austna and held at Vienna in 1'.Inc 1972 which con!ributed considerably to the exploration' of this subJect,
Reaffirming the importance of this matter and the
need to respond urgently to the demand of world public opinion,
49 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council
Fiftieth Session, Supplement No. 4 (E/4949), chap. XIX.
'
r;o E/CN.4/1028 and Add.l and 2, Add.3 and Corr.I,
Add.4-6; E/CN.4/1084.
51 ST/TAO/HR/45.
