A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/124
23 February 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 112 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/52/644/Add.2)]
52/124. Human rights in the administration of justice
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 50/181 of 22 December 1995, and taking note of Commission on Human
Rights resolution 1996/32 of 19 April 19961 and decision 1997/106 of 11 April 19972 on human rights
in the administration of justice, particularly with respect to children and juveniles in detention,
Bearing in mind the principles embodied in articles 3, 5, 9 and 10 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights3 and the relevant provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and
the Optional Protocols thereto,4 in particular article 6 of the Covenant, which explicitly states that no one
shall be arbitrarily deprived of his life and prohibits the imposition of the death penalty for crimes
committed by persons below eighteen years of age,

1

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1996, Supplement No. 3 (E/1996/23),
chap. II, sect. A.
2

Ibid., 1997, Supplement No. 3 (E/1997/23), chap. II, sect. B.

3

Resolution 217 A (III).

4

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex, and resolution 44/128, annex.

98-76891

/...

A/RES/52/124
Page 2

Bearing in mind also the relevant principles embodied in the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,5 the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination6 and the Convention on the Rights of the Child,7
Mindful of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,8 in
particular of the obligation of States to treat men and women equally in all stages of procedures in courts
and tribunals,
Recalling in particular article 37 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, according to which
every child deprived of liberty shall be treated in a manner which takes into account the needs of persons
of his or her age,
Calling attention to the numerous international standards in the field of the administration of justice,
Welcoming the Guidelines for Action on Children in the Criminal Justice System,9 including the
establishment of a coordination panel on technical advice and assistance in juvenile justice,
Welcoming also the important work of the Commission on Human Rights and the Commission on
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice in the field of human rights in the administration of justice, and
emphasizing the importance of coordinating the activities carried out under their responsibility,
Acknowledging the important role of the regional commissions, the specialized agencies and United
Nations institutes in the areas of human rights and crime prevention and criminal justice and of other
organizations of the United Nations system, as well as intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, including national professional associations concerned with promoting United Nations
standards in this field,
Aware of the need for special vigilance with regard to the vulnerable situation of children and
juveniles, as well as women and girls in detention,
1. Reaffirms the importance of the full and effective implementation of all United Nations standards
on human rights in the administration of justice;
2. Reiterates its call to all Member States to spare no effort in providing for effective legislative
and other mechanisms and procedures, as well as adequate resources, to ensure the full implementation
of those standards;

5

Resolution 39/46, annex.

6

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

7

Resolution 44/25, annex.

8

Resolution 34/180, annex.

9

Economic and Social Council resolution 1997/30, annex.
/...

A/RES/52/124
Page 3

3. Invites Governments to provide training, including gender-sensitive training, in human rights in
the administration of justice, including juvenile justice, to all judges, lawyers, prosecutors, social workers
and other professionals concerned, including police and immigration officers;
4. Invites States to make use of technical assistance offered by the United Nations programmes of
technical assistance in order to strengthen national capacities and infrastructures in the field of
administration of justice;
5. Invites the international community to respond favourably to requests for financial and technical
assistance for the enhancement and strengthening of the administration of justice;
6. Calls upon the Secretary-General to strengthen system-wide coordination in the field of
administration of justice, in particular between the United Nations programmes in the fields of human
rights and crime prevention and criminal justice;
7. Calls upon the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as mechanisms
of the Commission on Human Rights and its subsidiary bodies, including special rapporteurs, special
representatives and working groups, to continue to give special attention to questions relating to the
effective promotion of human rights in the administration of justice and to provide, where appropriate,
specific recommendations in this regard, including proposals for measures to provide advisory services
and technical assistance;
8. Invites the Commission on Human Rights and the Commission on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice to coordinate closely their activities relating to the administration of justice;
9. Decides to consider the question of human rights in the administration of justice at its fiftyfourth session under the item entitled "Human rights questions".
70th plenary meeting
12 December 1997
