S/2015/764

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 October 2015
Original: English

Twenty-second semi-annual report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004)
I. Background
1.
The present report is the twenty-second semi-annual report on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004). It provides a review
and an assessment of the process of the implementation of the resolution since my
previous report on the subject, which was issued on 16 April 2015 ( S/2015/258). I
note the continued lack of progress on key provisions of the resolution and highlight
continued concerns about increasing pressure on the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of Lebanon.
2.
The position of President of Lebanon has been vacant for just over 16 months.
Since the end of the previous President’s mandate, the Parliament has been called
into session to elect a president on 28 occasions. Owing to the boycott of the
sessions by parliamentarians from the Free Patriotic Movement and Hizbullah, the
Parliament has failed to elect a new president because the sessions have lacked a
quorum, and the position has consequently remained vacant. The prolonged absence
of a president has undermined the strength and effectiveness of the remaining State
institutions, including the Cabinet and the Parliament, in responding to the needs of
Lebanese citizens. My representatives and I have continued to call for the election
of a president without delay, as I did in my remarks at the Ministerial Meeting of the
International Support Group for Lebanon on 30 September.
3.
The war in the Syrian Arab Republic continues to have a signif icant impact on
Lebanon’s security and stability. Fighting between Hizbullah and violent extremist
groups, including the Al-Nusra Front and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), in the Syrian Arab Republic, including in the border area of Qalamo un and,
most recently, in the town of Zabadani, presents further risks to the security and
stability of Lebanon. The fighting has had a particular impact on the safety of local
communities close to the border area, including through an increase in incident s of
cross-border incursions, shelling and shooting during the reporting period.
4.
The Lebanese Armed Forces have continued to respond to the challenges to
Lebanon’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. Support for the national armed
forces from the international community has been ongoing during the reporting
period, contributing to a strengthening of their ability to protect Lebanon from
multiple security threats. Nonetheless, reports of the regular arrests of alleged
terrorists, extremists or recruiters of terrorists, as well as reports of foiled terrorist
15-17302 (E)

191015

*1517302*

S/2015/764

plots, underline the persistent threat to stability and security that Lebanon continues
to face.
5.
Syrian refugees fleeing violence in their country continue to rely on protection
in a number of countries, including Lebanon. As at 25 August, there were 1,112,064
Syrian refugees and 45,000 Palestinian refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic
registered in Lebanon with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA), respectively. Since 5 January, the criteria for entry into
Lebanon has been revised to exclude asylum-related reasons, except in exceptional
humanitarian cases. In early May, the Government of Lebanon asked the Office to
suspend the registration of new refugees.

II. Implementation of resolution 1559 (2004)
6.
Since the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004) on 2 September 2004, several of
its provisions have been implemented, as I highlighted in my previous reports. The
Syrian Arab Republic withdrew its troops and military assets from Lebanon in April
2005. Presidential and parliamentary elections were conducted freely and fairly in
2008 and 2009. Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic established full diplomatic
relations in 2009.
7.
During the reporting period, the Prime Minister continued to affirm Lebanon’s
respect for all United Nations resolutions. The conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic
and its corresponding impact on Lebanon, however, continued to limit progress in
the implementation of the outstanding provisions of resolution 1559 (2004) and
other resolutions pertaining to Lebanon.
8.
The delineation of the Syrian-Lebanese border, which was strongly
encouraged by the Security Council in its resolution 1680 (2006), remains pending.
Moreover, the existence and activities of Lebanese and non -Lebanese militias along
the border continue to pose a threat to the stability of the country and the region.
The national armed forces continue to deploy three regiments on the eastern border,
maintaining a clear presence of State authority in that vulnerable area. It remains
essential that the State achieve a full monopoly on the possession of weapons and
the use of force throughout Lebanon. Continued support from the international
community in that regard remains a priority.
9.
My representatives and I remained in regular contact with all parties in
Lebanon during the reporting period, as well as with relevant regional and
international leaders. On 30 September, I convened a meeting of the International
Support Group for Lebanon, in conjunction with Prime Minister Tammam Salam, in
the margins of the seventieth session of the General Assembly. The Group called
upon all Lebanese leaders to adhere to the Constitution of Lebanon, the Taif
Accords and the National Pact and to put the country’s interests ahead of partisan
politics.

2/11

15-17302

S/2015/764

A.

Sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence
of Lebanon
10. With the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council aimed at
strengthening the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence
of Lebanon under the sole and exclusive authority of the Government of Lebanon
throughout the country, in line with the Taif Accords of 1989, to which all the
political parties in Lebanon had committed themselves. That objective has remained
the highest priority of my efforts to facilitate the implementation of all resolutions
pertaining to Lebanon.
11. I remain very concerned by the continued failure to elect a new president.
Parliament has been called into session on 28 occasions since 24 May 2014, but has
failed to convene to elect a new president because of the lack of a quorum, which
has been caused by the boycott of the sessions by parliamentarians from the Free
Patriotic Movement and Hizbullah. Boycotting sessions of Parliament undermines
the credibility of Lebanon’s democratic tradition and puts additional pressure on the
State institutions that continue to operate. During the 16 months since the previous
President left office, Lebanon has faced mounting security, economic and
humanitarian challenges. I commend the leadership of Prime Minister Tammam
Salam during these difficult times and note that political differences a mong some of
Lebanon’s leaders have hampered the ability of the Cabinet to function effectively
and respond to the serious national and regional pressures facing the country.
Citizens have been protesting since 20 August, demanding the delivery of basic
public services and the accountability of the Government. Furthermore, in the
absence of a session to elect a new president, Parliament has not been able to
legislate even on urgent issues. The Speaker of Parliament, Nabih Berri, convened a
meeting of Lebanon’s political leaders on 9 September, to address the issue of
electing a new president, but the session was suspended without results. I note the
extension by the Minister of Defence, Samir Moqbel, on 6 August, of the mandates
of the Commander of the Lebanese Armed Forces; the Chief of Staff of the
Lebanese Armed Forces; and the Head of the Higher Defence Council.
12. Representatives of the Future Movement and Hizbullah have continued their
dialogue sessions. On 25 August, the seventeenth dialogue session was held and,
although no solutions to various political issues have emerged from the talks, the
continuation of the dialogue has contributed to a reduction of tensions between
various groups in the country.
13. In its resolution 1680 (2006), the Security Council strongly encouraged the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to respond positively to the request of the
Government of Lebanon to delineate their common border. I continue to call upon
the Syrian Arab Republic and Lebanon to achieve the full delin eation of their
common border. Given the continuing conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic,
however, progress has been even more difficult to achieve and no tangible steps
were taken by either side in that regard during the reporting period.
14. The delineation and demarcation of the boundaries of Lebanon remain
elements essential to guaranteeing national sovereignty and territorial integrity.
They also remain critical to facilitating proper border control. The complex security
situation along the Syrian-Lebanese border in the current circumstances, including
continual reports of cross-border fighting and movements of arms and people,

15-17302

3/11

S/2015/764

further underlines the urgency of demarcating the border. While acknowledging the
bilateral nature of border delineation, progress on the matter remains an obligation
of the two countries, in accordance with Security Council resolutions 1680 (2006)
and 1559 (2004).
15. Violations of Lebanese sovereignty and territorial integrity have continued on
the eastern borders as a direct result of the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
During the reporting period, there has been an increase in the number of security
incidents across the Lebanese-Syrian border and in Lebanese territory close to the
border. There were reports of at least 96 cross-border shooting incidents, nine
incidents of shelling, three rocket attacks from the Syrian side of the border and
eight attempted incursions by militants. The Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic has continued to conduct air raids in Lebanon, in violation of Lebanese
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
16. Security personnel, including members of the national armed forces and
internal security forces, who were kidnapped and taken hostage in August 2014
during an incursion of armed men belonging to the Al-Nusra Front and ISIL, have
still not been released. Efforts to secure the release of the remaining hostages
continue.
17. The continued occupation by Israel of the northern part of the village of
Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line stands in violation of the
sovereignty of Lebanon and resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006). My
representatives and I continue to engage closely with both parties, with a view to
facilitating the withdrawal of the Israel Defense Forces from the area, p ursuant to
resolution 1701 (2006).
18. There was no progress in relation to the issue of the Shab’a Farms area during
the reporting period. Neither the Syrian Arab Republic nor Israel has yet responded
with regard to the provisional definition of the area contained in my report on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), issued on 30 October 2007 ( S/2007/641).
19. Unmanned aerial vehicles and fixed-wing aircraft, including fighter jets, of the
Israel Defense Forces continued to make almost daily overflights of Lebanon during
the reporting period, in violation of Lebanese sovereignty and resolutions 1559
(2004) and 1701 (2006). The Government of Lebanon has regularly and repeatedly
protested against the violations. I have deplored them and demanded that they cease
immediately.

B.

Extension of control of the Government of Lebanon over all
Lebanese territory
20. The Government of Lebanon has reiterated to the United Nations its intention
to extend State authority over all Lebanese territory, as called for in the Taif
Accords and in resolution 1559 (2004). The national armed forces and internal
security forces have played a crucial role in implementing that commitment under
difficult circumstances, and the ability of the Lebanese State to fully exercise its
authority over all its territory continues to be challenged.
21. I remain concerned at the involvement of Lebanese fighters in the conflict in
the Syrian Arab Republic, including members of Hizbullah. Hi zbullah has continued
to publicly acknowledge its participation in the fighting in the Syrian Arab

4/11

15-17302

S/2015/764

Republic, contrary to its commitment to the Baabda Declaration and Lebanon’s
policy of disassociation. Funerals of its members killed in the fighting in the Syrian
Arab Republic have continued to be held in Lebanon. Other Lebanese nationals
have participated in the fighting across the border in the Syrian Arab Republic,
alongside Syrian opposition forces, the Al-Nusra Front and ISIL. There have been
reports of those militants being killed during the fighting in the Syrian Arab
Republic. The involvement of Hizbullah and other Lebanese elements in the
fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic seriously jeopardizes the stability and security
of Lebanon. Reports of Hizbullah involvement in conflict elsewhere in the region,
including allegedly in Iraq and Yemen, is worrisome and could risk further
endangering stability and security in Lebanon.
22. Owing to the efforts of the national armed forces and security agencies, an d
the increased cooperation between them, there has been an overall decrease in the
number of terrorist incidents in the country. The national armed forces have
deployed border regiments on the northern and eastern borders of the country. The
deployment has repelled attempted incursions of armed fighters into Lebanese
territory. Those and other incidents have led to the targeting of national armed
forces personnel, causing injuries in some instances. On 20 May, a vehicle -borne
improvised explosive device detonated close to a checkpoint of the national armed
forces on the outskirts of Aarsal. In a separate incident targeting the national armed
forces in Tripoli, on 27 July, a bomb exploded next to an officer’s vehicle, causing
material damage.
23. Consistent and regular international support of the national armed forces
remains a priority. I encourage bilateral partners and donors to continue their
support to areas in which the national armed forces are most critically in need in
order to give them the necessary operational advantage to effectively address
security threats, including for counter-terrorism and comprehensive deployment
along the country’s borders. I welcome the continued assistance provided by several
Member States aimed at further strengthening the capabilities of the national armed
forces.
24. In view of the continuing cross-border incidents and the reports of arms
smuggling, there remains an urgent need to improve the management and control of
Lebanon’s land borders. Tackling that challenge is also necessary in order to prevent
armed groups and militias in Lebanon from expanding their arsenals of weapons,
given that such expansion outside State control constitutes a threat to national and
regional peace.
25. In my most recent report on the implementation of Security Council resolution
1701 (2006) (S/2015/475), I referred to a letter dated 27 May from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to me regarding actions by Hizbullah in southern
Lebanon (S/2015/382). I also referred to a letter dated 10 June from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon addressed to me, in which he recalled his country’s
letters of complaint about Israel’s “ongoing violations” of resolution 1701 (2006)
and of Lebanese sovereignty (S/2015/428).

C.

Disbanding and disarmament of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias
26. In its resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council ca lled for the disarming
and disbanding of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, a key provision of the

15-17302

5/11

S/2015/764

resolution that has not yet been implemented. It reflects and reaffirms a decision to
which all Lebanese committed themselves in the Taif Accords, which led at the time
to Lebanese militias, with the exception of Hizbullah, relinquishing their weapons.
Given the current national context and the impact of the Syrian crisis on Lebanon, it
is critical that the Accords be preserved and implemented by all, in order to avoid
the spectre of a renewed confrontation among the Lebanese and to strengthen the
institutions of the State.
27. Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias within the country continue to operate
outside the control of the Government, in serious violation of resolution 1559
(2004). Whereas several groups across the political spectrum in Lebanon possess
weapons outside government control, the armed component of Hizbullah is the most
significant and most heavily armed Lebanese militia in the country. On 2 4 May, the
Secretary-General of Hizbullah, Hassan Nasrallah, stated that Hizbullah possessed
the highest military capability since the organization’s creation. The maintenance of
arms by Hizbullah and other groups poses a serious challenge to the State’s a bility
to exercise full sovereignty and authority over its territory. In addition, several
Palestinian armed groups continue to operate in the country inside and outside the
refugee camps.
28. There has been no tangible progress towards the disbanding and disarming of
Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, as called for in the Taif Accords and resolution
1559 (2004). Since the adoption of the resolution, no specific steps have been taken
to tackle that crucial issue, which lies at the heart of the sovereignty and political
independence of Lebanon. Several Lebanese groups and individuals continue to
speak up against the maintenance by Hizbullah of a military arsenal, which they
consider to be a destabilizing factor in the country and a factor that undermines
democracy. Many Lebanese see the continued existence of such arms as an implicit
threat for use within Lebanon for political reasons.
29. I have repeatedly expressed my deep concern to Lebanese leaders about the
serious risks that armed groups pose to the stability of the country and the region. I
have urged them to tackle the matter without further delay, given that it is their
obligation under Security Council resolution 1559 (2004). It is a fundamental
anomaly in a democratic State for a political party to maintain its own militia.
Nonetheless, Hizbullah has continued to openly claim that its military capacity is
separate from that of the Lebanese State and that its arms serve as a deterrent
against potential aggression from Israel.
30. The presence of other armed extremist militants in various parts of the country
is also deeply worrisome. Coordination between the national armed forces and other
State security forces has led to the arrest of a number of suspected terrorists and the
discovery and thwarting of several terrorist plots in the country. On 15 August,
Ahmad al-Assir, a militant formerly based in Sidon and wanted by the authorities
over his involvement in the attacks against the Lebanese army in June 2013, was
arrested at Rafiq Hariri International Airport. His trial, along with those of other
detainees of the Sidon clashes, is ongoing.
31. It is in the national interest of Lebanon to ensure that those behind the
perpetration of terrorist acts, including political assassinations, are held accountable
and that violence is not committed with impunity. I note the 13 May decision of a
Lebanese military court sentencing former Minister, Michel Samaha, to
imprisonment for his part in a plot to foment sectarian violence in Lebanon. I also

6/11

15-17302

S/2015/764

note the continued work of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, which sends a clear
message that impunity will not be tolerated.
32. The issue of the disarmament of armed groups has been discussed previously
in the context of the national dialogue. There have been no sessions of the national
dialogue during the reporting period and no other formal discussion among
Lebanese parties of the disarmament of armed groups. The issue has not been
included in the dialogue between members of the Future Movement and Hizbullah,
nor in the dialogue session convened by the Speaker of Parliament, Nabih Berri.
33. The security situation in the Palestinian refugee camps was relatively calm,
with the exception of Ein el-Hillweh camp, where two people were killed on
18 June when fighting broke out between two groups. On 23 July, a Palestinian was
shot and killed in the camp, followed three days later by the assassination of a
prominent member of the Palestinian joint security force in the camp, Talal
al Ordoni. From 22 to 27 August, intermittent but heavy clashes between various
factions broke out in Ein el-Hillweh camp, leading to at least six deaths and many
injuries. Within that context, I note the relative calm in other Palestinian refugee
camps in Lebanon and welcome the continued commitment of Palestinian leaders to
disassociate the Palestinian camps in Lebanon from the violence in the Syrian Arab
Republic and the region more broadly.
34. The presence of Palestinian armed groups outside the camps continues to
challenge the ability of Lebanon to exercise full sovereignty over its territory. I am
concerned by reports of an explosion that caused material damage at a base
belonging to the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine -General Command,
close to the Lebanese-Syrian border, on 29 July. The presence of that base and other
such bases in Lebanon undermines Lebanese sovereignty and governmental
authority and makes delineation of the border more difficult. It poses a serious
challenge to the effective control of the eastern border between Leb anon and the
Syrian Arab Republic. Whereas the details of the explosion cannot be verified by
the United Nations, the incident serves as a worrisome reminder that,
notwithstanding the decision taken in 2006 by the national dialogue and confirmed
in subsequent sessions, no progress was made during the reporting period with
regard to dismantling the military bases of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada in the country. I have reiterated
my calls upon the Lebanese authorities for the implementation of earlier decisions
of the national dialogue, specifically those relating to the dismantling of the above mentioned military bases, and upon the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to
cooperate with those efforts in good faith.
35. Humanitarian conditions for Palestinian refugees in Lebanon are increasingly
dire, with the influx of 45,000 refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic since the
beginning of the crisis placing tremendous additional pressure on the overall
situation in the camps and gatherings and on the efforts of UNRWA to assist them.
UNRWA has taken measures to reduce the tension between the Palestinian refugees
who have been residing in Lebanon and those arriving from the Syrian Arab
Republic by, for example, including refugee children in regular classes in UNRWA
schools. The United Nations has continued to urge the Lebanese authorities to
improve the living conditions of the refugees. Those efforts should be done without
prejudice to the eventual resolution of the Palestinian refugee question in the
context of a comprehensive peace agreement in the region.

15-17302

7/11

S/2015/764

III. Observations
36. I continue to be disappointed at the lack of further tangible progress made
towards the implementation of the remaining provisions of resolution 1559 (2004).
Lebanon continues to face challenges to its stability and security, both internally and
along its borders with the Syrian Arab Republic, including from terrorist and
extremist groups and arms smuggling. It is important that progress continues to be
made on the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) in order to maintain the
achievements already made and to prevent a further deterioration in the stability and
security of Lebanon. I reiterate my firm conviction that it i s in the best interest of
Lebanon and the Lebanese to make progress towards the full implementation of
resolution 1559 (2004) for the long-term stability of the country and the region.
37. I am increasingly concerned at the impact of the continued vacuum i n the
position of President on the effective functioning of State institutions, including the
Cabinet. I highly commend the efforts of Prime Minister Tammam Salam in leading
Lebanon under such difficult circumstances and promoting effective decision making in the interest of the country. It is vital that Lebanon’s leaders unite, put
aside their partisan and political differences in order to effectively tackle the
mounting security, economic and humanitarian challenges that the country faces. I
note the continuing protests by citizens, making rightful demands for basic public
services and the effective functioning of the Government. Lebanon cannot afford to
delay the election of a new president any longer. I call upon members of Parliament
to perform their duties responsibly, including by attending the sessions of the
Parliament called to elect a new president.
38. I have repeatedly cautioned that the widespread proliferation of weapons
outside the control of the State, combined with the existence of heavily a rmed
militias, undermines the security of Lebanese citizens. The maintenance by
Hizbullah of sizeable and sophisticated military capabilities outside the control of
the Government of Lebanon remains a matter of grave concern, in particular
because it creates an atmosphere of intimidation and represents a key challenge to
the safety of Lebanese civilians and to the Government monopoly on the legitimate
use of force. I reiterate my call upon Hizbullah and all other parties concerned not
to engage in any militant activity inside or outside Lebanon, consistent with the
requirements of the Taif Accords and resolution 1559 (2004).
39. I condemn the continued violation of the sovereignty of Lebanon, including
cross-border incidents in which civilians and members of the national armed forces
have been injured on the Lebanese side of the border because of the actions of
warring parties in the Syrian Arab Republic. The cross -border shelling and rocket
attacks by various groups in the Syrian Arab Republic and the air ra ids by the
Syrian air force on Lebanese territory must cease. Those incidents are a clear
violation of Lebanese sovereignty. I reiterate my call upon all parties, including the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, to respect the sovereignty and territor ial
integrity of Lebanon, in accordance with Security Council resolution 1559 (2004).
40. The participation of Lebanese citizens in the conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic is a breach of the policy of disassociation and the principles of the Baabda
Declaration, which was agreed upon by all Lebanese parties in June 2012. The
involvement of Hizbullah and other Lebanese elements in the fighting in the Syrian
Arab Republic seriously jeopardizes the security and stability of Lebanon. I am

8/11

15-17302

S/2015/764

concerned by reports of the involvement of Hizbullah and other Lebanese elements
in fighting elsewhere in the region, including in Iraq and Yemen. Participating in
conflict elsewhere risks exposing Lebanon to even greater security threats.
41. I strongly commend the diligent and consistent efforts of the national armed
forces in protecting Lebanon’s borders, as well as its security and stability. The
continued deployment of the national armed forces in the eastern border areas has
been essential in repelling repeated attempts by violent, extremist groups, including
the Al-Nusra Front and ISIL, to infiltrate Lebanese territory. The impact of the
deployment of those border regiments continues to be felt positively throughout the
country, especially in the communities located close to the border that are most
vulnerable to attacks from extremist groups. It is important to maintain Lebanese
political unity in support of the national armed forces as the sole legitimate State
institution responsible for defending Lebanon’s sovereignty a nd territorial integrity.
In that context, I note the extension by the Minister of Defence, Samir Moqbel, on
6 August, of the mandates of the Commander of the Lebanese Armed Forces; the
Chief of Staff of the Lebanese Armed Forces; and the Head of the Higher Defence
Council. I condemn the continued detention of Lebanese soldiers and security forces
personnel held captive by the Al-Nusra Front and ISIL in the eastern LebaneseSyrian border area. I call upon those holding the remaining security personnel
hostage to release them without further delay.
42. I welcome the ongoing cooperation between the various State security
agencies and the national armed forces, which has led to further progress in
countering terrorism in the country. The collaboration between the various State
security services has led to the detainment of an increased number of extremists,
who are currently awaiting trial, and a number of terrorist plots have been
uncovered and foiled. During the reporting period, the contributions of the inte rnal
security forces and the General Directorate of General Security have been
significant to preserving Lebanon’s security and stability. Broad political support for
the various security operations, including subsequent judicial processes, also sends
an important message that violence with impunity will not be tolerated.
43. I urge the Government and the national armed forces to take all measures
necessary to prohibit Hizbullah and other armed groups from acquiring weapons and
building paramilitary capacity outside the authority of the State, in violation of
resolution 1559 (2004). The absence of the national dialogue, another casualty of
the failure to elect a new president, means that no progress has been made in that
regard. I note that decisions taken at earlier sessions of the national dialogue have
still not been implemented. I remain convinced that dialogue is the only way
forward and note that the discussion paper on a comprehensive national defence
strategy, developed in the context of the national dialogue, remains a valuable
starting point. I call upon countries in the region that maintain close ties with
Hizbullah to encourage the transformation of the armed group into a solely political
party and its disarmament, in accordance with the requiremen ts of the Taif Accords
and resolution 1559 (2004), which is in the best interests of Lebanon and regional
peace and security.
44. I welcome the continued support provided by the international community to
the national armed forces and the security forces to build up their capabilities to
address the multiple security challenges that the country faces. I encourage donors
to continue that support so that the national armed forces and the security forces can

15-17302

9/11

S/2015/764

ensure their operational superiority in defence of Lebanon’s sovereignty, security
and stability. I note that both the Security Council and the International Support
Group for Lebanon have been consistently unanimous in their support of the
national armed forces.
45. The situation of Palestinian refugees in Lebanon and the limited resources
available to UNRWA to assist them remains of concern, particularly in the light of
the continued presence of Palestinian refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic who
have fled the violence there. I call upon donors to incre ase their support to UNRWA
and its vital work in providing services to Palestinian refugees in Lebanon. I note
the work of the Palestinian joint security force in preventing an even graver
escalation of conflict on several occasions in the Ein el -Hillweh camp and welcome
the renewed commitment of Palestinian leaders to disassociate the Palestinian
camps in Lebanon from the violence in the Syrian Arab Republic and the region
more broadly.
46. I regret the absence of any progress on the delineation and demarc ation of the
border with the Syrian Arab Republic, which has a significant impact on border
control. Integrated border management will, in the longer term, contribute
significantly to better control of the borders of Lebanon and help to prevent the
illegal transfer of weapons and fighters in both directions, which has become even
more pressing in the context of events in the Syrian Arab Republic.
47. The continued violations committed by Israel in respect of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon, including the overflights of Lebanese territory by
Israeli military aircraft, are deplorable. I reiterate my call upon Israel to adhere to its
obligations under relevant Security Council resolutions and to withdraw its forces
from the northern part of the village of Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the
Blue Line, as well as to cease its overflights of Lebanese airspace, which undermine
the credibility of the Lebanese security services and generate anxiety among the
civilian population. Incidents along the Blue Line, as detailed in previous reports on
the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), underscore the importance of
ensuring that the situation along the entirety of the Blue Line remains stable,
including in the Shab’a Farms area. I welcome the resumption of calm and the
recommitment by both Lebanon and Israel to the cessation of hostilities and call
upon all sides to avoid any provocative rhetoric. Full implementation of all
provisions of relevant resolutions remains the best prevention again st the risk of
miscalculation or tensions.
48. Recent security developments, especially in the eastern border region, have
put even greater pressure on the refugees, the host communities that receive them
and the country, necessitating further support from the international community.
Syrian refugees must continue to be protected against forcible return. I commend
the Lebanese authorities for working closely with the United Nations in their efforts
to support the Government in assisting and protecting refugees in accordance with
human rights and humanitarian principles. The Syrian crisis constitutes not only a
major humanitarian and socioeconomic challenge for Lebanon but a challenge to the
country’s stability and must be addressed as such. I strongly encour age Member
States, including regional donors, to fulfil their burden -sharing responsibilities by
contributing generously through the crisis response plan and the other mechanisms
addressed at the Kuwait donor conference held on 31 March 2015.

10/11

15-17302

S/2015/764

49. It is important to maintain Lebanon’s security, stability and unity in the
context of a fragile domestic and regional climate. I remain firmly committed to the
implementation of resolution 1559 (2004). I therefore count on the continued
commitment of the Government to its international obligations and call upon all
parties and actors to fully abide by resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701
(2006). I also call upon Member States to renew efforts to support Lebanon in
ensuring respect for its obligations under those resolutions as the best way to
advance the country’s long-term prosperity and stability as a democratic State. I will
continue my efforts towards the full implementation of those and all other
resolutions pertaining to Lebanon.

15-17302

11/11
