UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/391
7 April 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

The attached letters are hereby circulated pursuant to the understanding
reached at consultations of the whole of the Security Council held on
7 April 1999.

99-09966 (E)

070499

/...

S/1999/391
English
Page 2

Annex I
Letter dated 2 April 1999 from the Secretary-General of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

At its meeting today, the North Atlantic Council discussed the rapidly
worsening humanitarian situation resulting from the continuing violence and
expulsion of civilians from Kosovo by forces of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. We greatly appreciate the tremendous ongoing efforts of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other relief
organizations to cope with the flood of refugees under difficult circumstances.
The Council has reaffirmed its willingness to contribute to these efforts.
Therefore, I have been invited to raise with you, as a matter of urgency,
what possible measures the Alliance could take to assist UNHCR at this time of
great need. In particular, I would be grateful if you could let me know as soon
as possible the most critical requirements now facing UNHCR, in particular in
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Albania, and which could possibly
be supported by the Alliance, including possible use of its civil and military
assets. I understand that our staffs have already been actively discussing
several possibilities in this regard.
I can assure you that the Alliance member States are prepared to make every
possible effort in Albania and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to
assist you in addressing this current humanitarian emergency.

(Signed)

Javier SOLANA

/...

S/1999/391
English
Page 3

Annex II
Letter dated 3 April 1999 from the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees addressed to the Secretary-General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization

Thank you very much for your letter of 2 April 1999.
I very much appreciate your offer of support to assist us in coping with
the heightened humanitarian emergency caused by the mass expulsions of civilians
from Kosovo. In a public statement yesterday, I urged the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to bring an immediate halt to this forcible displacement.
Meanwhile, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and its United Nations and non-governmental organization partners, in
collaboration with the local authorities in the receiving countries in the
region, have been doing whatever possible to meet the most urgent shelter, food
aid and health needs of the refugees. The scale of the crisis is such, however,
that our capacity to respond has indeed been overwhelmed. This is particularly
the case in Albania and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, where over
270,000 people have arrived since 24 March 1999 and where, as you know, arrivals
are continuing on an hourly basis at alarming rates. We will continue to
monitor the situation and provide the necessary support in other neighbouring
areas, and notably in Montenegro.
In these circumstances, any support from the Alliance member States for the
humanitarian operation that would enhance our efforts to save lives would be
most welcome. I should like to suggest that this operation would focus on
Albania and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, where the requirements
are greatest. It should cover the following four areas.
First, we would welcome continued assistance with the management of the
airlift operation that we already established with your support to bring in
relief supplies into the airports in Tirana and Skopje. Second, we would be
grateful for support in off-loading and immediate storage of aid arriving by sea
or air into Albania and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. The United
Nations agencies would retain responsibility for onward distribution to the
beneficiaries. Third, in response to the bilateral requests already made by
Albania and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Alliance member States
could provide logistical help in the setting up of refugee camp sites. UNHCR
would provide the necessary coordination, guidance and technical support. And
fourth, there is an urgent need to relieve the pressure on the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, which otherwise risks destabilization. I would therefore
be grateful for your support to UNHCR in obtaining the agreement of Alliance
member States primarily in the region - and most notably Greece - to accept some
of the refugees currently in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia on a
temporary basis. Logistical support in transporting the refugees and
accommodating them in receiving countries would also be required.

/...

S/1999/391
English
Page 4

I am sure you will appreciate the importance of retaining the civilian and
humanitarian nature of the aid operation in order not to unnecessarily expose
the front-line States, the relief workers on the ground and the refugees
themselves. UNHCR would therefore welcome your proposal that the support be
provided by interested Alliance member States through the Civil Emergency
Department at your Headquarters.
Should you agree, I would propose that further operational discussions take
place on the ground between those responsible on your side and my staff, led by
my Special Envoy, Nicholas Morris, who is currently in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. The focal point for all contacts at UNHCR headquarters
is Neill Wright, under my overall direction.
Let me also mention that I have welcomed the offer of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in Albania and the OSCE/Kosovo
Verification Mission operation in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to
provide support to the humanitarian effort, notably in processing the arrivals
at the border entry points where the situation is right now the most acute and
dramatic.
I should like to thank you most warmly in advance for your support.

(Signed)

-----

Sadako OGATA
