86

(;,•neral Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

--'----------------------

8. Requests the organizations of the United Nations
system to assist in accelerating progress in all sectors
of the national .Jife of those Territories;
9. Calls upon the administering Power concerned,
in view of its responsibility towards the welfare of the
peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the
region, to discontinue any further nuclear atmospheric
testing in the South Pacific area, in order not to endanger the life and environment of the peoples of the
Territories concerned;
10. Invites the Secretary-General, having regard to
the mandate entrusted to him in General Assembly
resolution 2909 (XXVII) of 2 November 1972, to
pay particular regard to the need to intensify widespread dissemination of information on the process of
decolonization in respect of the Territories listed above;
l l. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
give full consideration to this question, including in
particular the dispatch of visiting missions to those
Territories, and to report to the General Assembly at
its twenty-eighth session on the implementation of the
present resolution.
2 lJ 0th plenary meeting
14 December 1972

2985 (XXVII).

Question of the Seychelles

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Seychelles,
Having considered the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 33
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolution 2866 (XXVI) of 20
December 1971 concerning the question,
Reaffirming that the Seychelles should accede to independence without any prejudice to their territorial
integrity,
Expressing its deep regret that it has not been possible to send a special mission of the United Nations
to the Territory, as envisaged under resolution 2866
(XXVI),
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Seychelles to self-determination and independence
in conformity with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV), and calls upon the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as
the administering Power, to take all necessary measures to enable the people to exercise that right without
further delay;
2. Requests the administering Power, in accordance
with the provisions of the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, to receive the special mission of
the United Nations envisaged under resolution 2866
(XXVI) and to make the necessary arrangements, in
consultation with the special mission, for the holding
of a referendum on the future status of the Territory;
3.1 Ibid., cha,ps. IV, VI and XI.

3. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
nn the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to continue its examination of the question, including in particular the dispatch of the special
mission referred to above, and to report thereon to
the General As~embly at its twenty-eighth session.
211 Otiz plenary meeting
14 December 1972

2986 (XXVII). Question of Niue and the
Tokelau falands

The General Assembly.
Having considered the question of Niue and the
Tokelau Island,,
Noting that, at the invitation of the Government of
New Zealand, the administering Power, a United Nations mission visited Niue in June 1972,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 31 including in particular the report of the
United Nations Visiting Mission to Niue, 1972,35
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling its resolution 2868 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971,
Having heard the statements of the representative of
the administering Power, 06
Noting with satisfaction that, following the visit of
the United Nations Visiting Mission to Niue, the Select
Committee on Constitutional Development, established
by the Niue Island Legislative Assembly, concluded
popular consultations on measures for the further constitutional advancement of the Territory of Niue, including the establishment of a time-table for the attainment of self-government,
Stressing the special responsibility of the Government of New Zealand, as the administering Power, to
continue to assist the peoples of Niue and the Tokelau
Islands freely to decide their own future,
Mindful that Niue and the Tokelau Islands require
the continued attention and assistance of the United
Nations in the achievement by their peoples of the
objectives embodied in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of colonial peoples
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Approves the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
nf Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Commend~ the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the United Nations
Visiting Mission to Niue, 1972, to the Government of
,14 Ibid., chaps. TV and XVI.

35 Ibid., chap. XVI, annex I.
3 6 Ibid., Twenty-seventh Session,

meeting; AIC.41757.

Fourth Committee, 2005th
