S/PV.8139

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8139

th meeting
Monday, 18 December 2017, 12.25 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Rosselli Frieri

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-44659 (E)
*1744659*

S/PV.8139

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 12.25 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Israel to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/1060, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Egypt.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the vote.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Today’s
meeting is being held to consider the draft resolution
contained in document S/2017/1060, submitted by
Egypt on behalf of the Group of Arab States, pursuant
to the resolution of the emergency meeting of Arab
Ministers held in Cairo on 9 December.
The draft resolution has been submitted in response
to the emergency situation at the heart of the Palestinian
question and as the Security Council is addressing
the latest developments related to Jerusalem. Bearing
in mind the serious situation in Jerusalem and the
repercussions of the unilateral decision of the United
States to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel,
I recall that many members objected to that unilateral
decision at the open briefing of the Council on
8 December (see S/PV.8128). I stress that there are no
legal justifications for that decision.
Al-Quds Al-Sharif is an issue that is dear to the
hearts of many people around the world, and any
attempt to address the situation in the Middle East
must undoubtedly take that very sensitive topic into
consideration. However, we are well aware that the only
2/15

18/12/2017

path towards addressing the issue is to resort to the one
pillar underlying all international disputes — that is,
international law — as distinct from religious or other
beliefs. Any attempt to do otherwise would have huge
repercussions on the situation and reawaken the chaos
that preceded human development.
Al-Quds Al-Sharif is one of the final-status issues
that must be settled through peaceful negotiations
between the Palestinians and the Israelis. Any attempt
to change the facts on the ground in Jerusalem would
be considered to be an illegal unilateral measures with
no legal merit, since it would violate international
law and the resolutions of international legitimacy,
including General Assembly resolution 181 (II), which
established two States — Palestine and Israel — and
considered Jerusalem to be a corpus separatum as part
of a very particular international system.
Moreover, Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 252 (1968), 383 (1973) recognize no measure
that includes Jerusalem as an Israeli territory, which
would run counter to the Charter of the United Nations,
which does not allow the annexation of territories.
Additionally, it violates resolutions 476 (1980) and 478
(1980), which recognize no measure that would change
the status quo in Jerusalem. Both resolutions reject any
Israeli law seeking to annex Jerusalem and declare it
the capital of Israel. Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterates
that point through very clear legal language rejecting
attempt to alter the demographic or geographic nature
of the territories occupied since 1967, including east
Jerusalem. It also clearly stresses that the Security
Council does not recognize any change to the
demarcation lines of 4 June 1967, including those related
to Al-Quds Al-Sharif, with the exception of alterations
derived from negotiations between the two parties.
The draft resolution stresses that any attempt to
alter the character, status or demographic composition
of the holy city of Jerusalem have no effect, are null
and void and must be rescinded. We therefore object to
any such attempt, in line with relevant Security Council
resolutions. The draft resolution calls on all countries
not to establish diplomatic missions in the holy city of
Jerusalem, in compliance with resolution 478 (1980). It
demands that all States comply with Council resolutions
regarding the holy city of Jerusalem and not recognize
any actions or measures contrary to those resolutions.
It also reiterates its call for the reversal of the negative
trends on the ground that are imperilling the two-State
solution and for the intensification of international
17-44659

18/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and regional efforts in support of achieving a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East on the basis of the relevant United Nations and
Security Council resolutions, in addition to the Madrid
terms of reference, including the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative, the Quartet road map
and an end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967.
Egypt was one of the very first supporters of the
Palestinian people. We have supported them since
1948 and will continue to do so until we achieve a full
and lasting peace. In the light of all this, I call upon
all members of the Security Council to vote for the
draft resolution and to implement international law,
which is our main term of reference related to rights
and duties concerning this critical topic and other
international topics.
Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
We have requested the floor before the vote in order
to make two comments — one procedural and
one substantive.
With regard to the procedural issue, the draft
resolution was shared officially on Saturday.
Yesterday, the President was asked to put it in blue
and to schedule the vote for today, without having held
any negotiations or consultations on the contents of
the draft, with the exception of the meeting that just
concluded (see S/PV.8138), which also did not include
a detailed discussion of its contents. Just as we have
criticized permanent members of the Security Council
on previous occasions for similar practices that reduce
the transparency of the work of this organ and force
the membership to take decisions without being able
to participate in the drafting of the text, we must once
again affirm that this is not the right way to do things
in the Council.
As for the substantive issue, we reaffirm the
special status of the city of Jerusalem, pursuant to
General Assembly resolutions, particularly resolution
181 (II), adopted in 1947, as well as Security Council
resolutions. General Assembly resolution 181 (II),
which Uruguay voted in favour of and still supports to
this day, recommended the partition of Palestine into a
Jewish State and an Arab State, and the establishment
of Jerusalem as a corpus separatum under a special
international regime administered by the United
Nations. That is the basis for the special status of
Jerusalem in United Nations law and international law.

S/PV. 8139

As such, it should have been referenced in the text of
the draft resolution.
In the meeting held earlier today, we welcomed the
recognition extended by many countries today to the
foundational nature of General Assembly resolution
181 (II) by referring to the separation of Palestine into
two States — one Jewish and one Arab — with a special
status for Jerusalem. That is particularly important
because at the time of its adoption, many States did not
support resolution 181 (II).
The final status of Jerusalem is unfinished business.
The sovereignty and boundaries of Jerusalem should be
agreed by Israel and Palestine in bilateral negotiations.
Therefore, any decision, measure or action that the
parties or any third State would take contrary to the
resolution to change the status of Jerusalem would
affect the peace process and the search for a twoState solution — a goal shared by nearly the entire
international community for decades.
For seven decades, Uruguay has sought a fair and
lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict based
on respect for international law. For those reasons,
despite a submission process of the document that
we view as flawed, my delegation supports the draft
resolution contained in document S/2017/1060 before
the Council.
The President: I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
and Uruguay
Against:
United States of America
The President: There were 14 votes in favour and
one vote against. The draft resolution has not been
adopted, owing to the negative vote of a permanent
member of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.

17-446593/15

S/PV.8139

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I have
been the proud representative of the United States at
the United Nations for nearly a year now. This is the
first time I have exercised the American right to veto
a draft resolution in the Security Council. The exercise
of the veto is not something that the United States
does often. We have not done it in more than six years.
We do it with no joy, but we do it with no reluctance.
The fact that this veto has been exercised in defence
of American sovereignty and in defence of America’s
role in the Middle East peace process is not a source of
embarrassment for us. It should be an embarrassment to
the remainder of the Security Council.
As I did when we discussed this topic 10 days ago
(see S/PV.8128), I will once again note the features
of the President’s announcement on Jerusalem that
are most relevant here. The President took great care
not to prejudge final-status negotiations in any way,
including the specific boundaries of Israeli sovereignty
in Jerusalem, which remains a subject to be negotiated
only by the parties. The position is fully in line with
previous Security Council resolutions on this item. The
President was also careful to state that we support the
status quo regarding Jerusalem’s holy sites and that we
support a two-State solution if that is what the parties
agree to. Again, those positions are fully consistent
with previous Security Council resolutions. It is highly
regrettable that some are trying to distort the President’s
position to serve their own agendas.
What is troubling to some people is not that the
United States has harmed the peace process. We have,
in fact, done no such thing. Rather, what is troubling to
some people is that the United States had the courage
and honesty to recognize a fundamental reality.
Jerusalem has been the political, cultural and spiritual
homeland of the Jewish people for thousands of years.
They have had no other capital city, but the United States
recognition of the obvious — that Jerusalem is the
capital and seat of the modern Israeli Government — is
too much for some.
First, some have threatened violence on the street,
as if violence would somehow improve the prospects
for peace. Now today, buried in diplomatic jargon, some
presume to tell America where to put our embassy. The
United States has a sovereign right to determine where
and whether we establish an embassy. I suspect that very
few Member States would welcome Security Council
pronouncements about their sovereign decisions, and I
can think of some that should fear it.
4/15

18/12/2017

It is worth noting that this is not a new American
position. Back in 1980, when Jimmy Carter was the
American President, the Security Council voted on
resolution 478 (1980), which called upon diplomatic
missions to relocate from Jerusalem. The United States
did not support resolution 478 (1980). In his remarks, the
then Secretary of State Ed Muskie said the following:
“The draft resolution before us today is
illustrative of a preoccupation which has produced
this series of unbalanced and unrealistic texts on
Middle East issues” (S/PV.2245, para. 106).
Specifically regarding the provision on diplomatic
missions in Jerusalem, Secretary Muskie said
“In our judgement this provision is not binding. It
is without force. And we reject it as a disruptive
attempt to dictate to other nations. It does nothing
to promote a resolution of the difficult problems
facing Israel and its neighbours. It does nothing to
advance the cause of peace.” (ibid., para. 111)
That was true in 1980, and it is equally true today. The
United States will not be told by any country where we
can put our embassy.
Buried even deeper in the jargon of the draft
resolution is the accusation that the United States
is setting back the prospects of peace in the Middle
East. That is a scandalous charge. Those who are
making it should consider that it only harms the very
Palestinian people they claim to speak for. What does
it gain the Palestinian people for their leaders to throw
up roadblocks to negotiations? A peace process that
is damaged by the simple recognition that Jerusalem
is the capital of Israel is not a peace process; it is a
justification for an endless stalemate. What does it
gain the Palestinian people for some of their leaders to
accuse the United States of being hostile to the cause of
peace? It gains them nothing, but it risks costing them
a great deal.
The United States has done more by far than any
other country to assist the Palestinian people. Since
1994, we have given over $5 billion to the Palestinians
in bilateral economic assistance, security assistance
and humanitarian assistance. The United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) operates schools and medical facilities
throughout the region. It is funded almost entirely by
voluntary contributions. Last year, the United States
voluntarily funded almost 30 per cent of the UNRWA
17-44659

18/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

budget; that is more than the next two largest donors
combined. It is vastly more than some of the members of
the Council that have considerable financial resources
of their own.
I will be blunt. When the American people see
a group of countries whose total contributions to the
Palestinian people is less than 1 per cent of the UNRWA
budget, and when they see those countries accuse the
United States of being insufficiently committed to
peace, the American people lose their patience. I have
been to the Palestinian refugee camps that the United
States supports with its contributions. I have met with
men, women and children there; I have advocated
on their behalf. I can say that their leaders do them
no favours by being more open to abandoning peace
negotiations than to doing the hard work of seeing
them to completion. The United States has never been
more committed to peace in the Middle East. We were
committed to it before the President announced our
recognition of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, and we
are committed to it today.
What we witnessed today in the Security Council is
an insult. It will not be forgotten. It is one more example
of the United Nations doing more harm than good in
addressing the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Today, for
the simple act of deciding where to put its embassy, the
United States was forced to defend its sovereignty. The
record will reflect that we did so proudly. Today, for
acknowledging a basic truth about the capital city of
Israel, we are accused of harming peace. The record
will reflect that we reject that outrageous claim.
For these reasons, and with the best interest of both
the Israeli and the Palestinian people firmly in mind,
the United States voted no on this draft resolution.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom voted in favour of draft resolution S/2017/1060
today because it is in line with previous Security
Council resolutions, including 242 (1967), 476 (1980),
478 (1980) and 2334 (2016), and with our established
position on the status of Jerusalem. That position is
clear and long-standing. The status of Jerusalem should
be determined through a negotiated settlement between
Israelis and the Palestinians and should ultimately be
the shared capital of the Israeli and Palestinian States.
In line with those same resolutions, we regard East
Jerusalem as part of the occupied Palestinian territories.
As we have previously said, we disagree with
the United States decision to unilaterally recognize

S/PV. 8139

Jerusalem as the capital of Israel before a final status
agreement and to move the United States Embassy to
Jerusalem. As recent events in the region have shown,
these decisions are unhelpful to the prospects for peace
in the region, an aim that all of us in the Council remain
committed to. The British Embassy to Israel is based in
Tel Aviv and we have no plans to move it.
Importantly, the draft resolution that has just been
voted on stressew that Jerusalem is a final-status issue
to be resolved through negotiations; affirmed that
decisions and actions that purport to have altered the
character, status or demographic composition of the
Holy City of Jerusalem have no legal effect; demanded
that all States comply with Security Council resolutions
regarding Jerusalem; and called for the intensification
and acceleration of international and regional efforts
to achieve a just and lasting peace in the Middle East
without delay.
Our position since the Security Council met on
8 December (see S/PV.8128) has not changed. We
recognize that Jerusalem holds huge significance and
holiness for Jews, Muslims and Christians. We reiterate
the fundamental necessity of maintaining the status quo
at the holy sites, in particular the Temple Mount/Haram
al-Sharif. We continue to value Jordan’s important
role as custodian of the holy sites, and remain fully
supportive of its efforts to maintain calm.
We must now all look forward. We share President
Trump’s desire to bring an end to this conflict and
welcome his commitment to a two-State solution
negotiated between the parties. This includes his clear
acknowledgement that the final status of Jerusalem,
including the sovereign boundaries within the city,
must be subject to negotiations between the parties.
Our commitment to and position on an IsraeliPalestinian peace agreement has also not changed. It
should be based on the lines as they stood on 4 June 1967
with equal land swaps to reflect the national, security
and religious interests of the Jewish and Palestinian
peoples. Jerusalem should be the shared capital of the
Israeli and Palestinian States, and its status must be
determined through a final status agreement. A just,
fair, agreed and realistic settlement for refugees is
needed that is demographically compatible with the
principle of two States for two peoples. This position is
consistent with the draft resolution before us. We now
strongly encourage the United States Administration

17-446595/15

S/PV.8139

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to bring forward detailed proposals for an IsraeliPalestinian settlement.
We call on all parties to act with restraint, reject
violence and work together to ensure calm and stability.
This will give the peace process the best chance of
success. We remain fully supportive of progress
towards a lasting peace and will do everything we can
to achieve it.
Any peace effort needs to take account of the
people, not just the land and the holy sites. For too
long Israelis have lived in fear of rockets and terror;
this wreaks havoc in people’s daily lives and renders
peace hard to achieve, as do attempts by some to
deny the ancient and legitimate connection of the
Jewish and Palestinian peoples to Jerusalem. Many
Palestinians living outside East Jerusalem, including
the Old City, are effectively cut off from it. Those that
can enter have to wait in long lines to pass through
checkpoints. Within East Jerusalem live more than
320,000 Palestinians. The vast majority are permanent
residents, but their permits can be revoked at any point.
If they apply for Israeli citizenship, and most do not,
a high proportion of applications are rejected. The
lives of Jews and Palestinians — and for both groups
Jerusalem is uniquely holy — must not be forgotten in
any peace effort.
I once again reaffirm our strong support for renewed
peace negotiations between the Israelis and Palestinians
as soon as possible — these should be supported by
the international community — and for realizing the
vision of General Assembly resolution 181 (II), whose
seventieth anniversary we marked last month: a safe
and secure Israel, the homeland for the Jewish people,
living alongside a viable and sovereign Palestinian
state, the homeland for the Palestinian people.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
regrets the outcome of the voting today. We thank
Egypt for the quality of the work it has carried out and
for its balanced approach.
This vote was a foregone conclusion for us for at
least five reasons, which I would like to refer to today.
First of all, draft resolution S/2017/1060 confirms
an international consensus on Jerusalem that has been
built over decades and which is being translated into
international law today. The decisions announced by
the President of the United States, which we regret,
do not in any way modify the common foundation on
6/15

18/12/2017

which all peace agreement must be based. As President
Macron has said, the status of Jerusalem concerns all
of the international community. It has been the subject
of several specific resolutions of the Security Council.
It is therefore normal for the Security Council to be
seized of this issue today and to reaffirm the principles
and framework it defined with regard to Jerusalem,
in particular through resolutions 476 (1980) and 478
(1980). That — no more no less — is what the text on
which we have just voted does.
Jerusalem’s status must be examined by the parties
in the framework of a peace agreement. In the absence
of an agreement, and in accordance with the consensus
that has prevailed for 70 years within the international
community, France does not recognize any sovereignty
over Jerusalem. Also, following the June 1967
conflict, we did not recognize the annexation of East
Jerusalem, which is part of the occupied territories
under international law. Similarly, in 1980 we did not
recognize Israel’s unilateral acts concerning Jerusalem.
Before and after Israel’s Basic Law: Jerusalem, Capital
of Israel, the Council adopted resolutions 476 (1980)
and 478 (1980), which put forth two principles that are
recalled in the draft resolution the Council has just
voted on.
All decisions and actions aimed at altering the status
of Jerusalem, as well as its geographical, demographic
and historical character, are null and void and must be
rescinded. All Member States that have established
diplomatic missions at Jerusalem must withdraw them
from the city. That is what happened following the
adoption of resolution 478 (1980), without exception.
What was at stake then was no less than what is at stake
today — not only the clear Jewish link with Jerusalem,
but also the legal framework and political parameters
for a settlement to the conflict.
The result of today’s voting reflects the desire of
14 members of the Council to reaffirm their collective
commitment to international law, including the
resolutions of the Council, on the key issue of the final
status of Jerusalem. This is decisive for any prospect
for peace. It emphasizes the willingness of a very
large majority of Council members to not recognize
any decision that runs contrary to its resolutions, as
requested in the draft resolution put forward by the
delegation of Egypt.
With regard to the United States, its stance clearly
has a particular impact. It is incumbent upon the United
17-44659

18/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

States to clarify the compatibility of President Trump’s
announcement on 6 December with the international
consensus, without which no credible peace effort
can be made. That is because, and this is my second
point, without an agreement on Jerusalem, there will
be no peace agreement. France and its partners in the
European Union believe that Jerusalem is destined
to become the capital of two States — Israel and
Palestine — by means that must be defined through
negotiations. No unilateral decision can replace that.
We all know that there is no alternative to the
two-State solution. A one-State solution in which two
citizenship systems coexist is a fantasy that would mark
the ruin of the national aspirations of the Palestinians
and the democratic aspirations of the Israelis. Neither
the two parties nor the international community can
resign themselves to that. To go somewhat further,
and to be absolutely clear, there is no alternative to the
two-State solution, or to a two-State solution without
an agreement between the parties on Jerusalem,
or a possible agreement on Jerusalem outside the
internationally recognized parameters. We noted the
willingness expressed on 6 December by the President
of the United States to support the two-State solution.
We hope that that will pave the way for the United
States to return to the consensus framework of the
international community.
Thirdly, the issue of the status of Jerusalem must
take into account the concrete reality of that city,
as experienced on a daily basis by its inhabitants.
That is what the Security Council has done through
the resolutions it has adopted over the decades on
Jerusalem and it is reflected in the draft resolution
that we have voted on today. Jerusalem does not lend
itself to an unambiguous narrative. More than 300,000
Palestinians live there, representing approximately
40 per cent of the city’s population. It is an Israeli city
and a Palestinian city. It will become the future capital
of two States, but it is already a city of two populations
that coexist there.
Fourthly, the historical and religious importance
of Jerusalem is key to resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, but also to regional and international stability.
More than ever before, the need to preserve the status
quo at the holy sites of Jerusalem — specifically the 1967
mosque esplanade — must be reaffirmed. But beyond
that, any approach to the Jerusalem issue as a whole
must avoid crystallizing tensions over the city. The
risk that we must be wary of is transforming a political

S/PV. 8139

conflict, which is itself susceptible to a compromise,
into an intractable religious conflict. Only the radicals
would be set to gain, at the expense of the moderates in
the region.
As to my fifth, and final, point, we are following
the situation on the ground with great concern. Ten
days of localized clashes have already left at least eight
people dead and hundreds wounded in Gaza, the West
Bank and several neighbourhoods in Jerusalem. The
resumption of regular rocket fire from Gaza, which we
strongly condemn, is also a worrying sign.
We must do everything possible to ward off the
escalation of risks existing on the ground. That is
why we continue to call on all parties to restrain
themselves and make every effort to restore calm.
Beyond that are the potentially negative repercussions
throughout the region that must be avoided, following
the announcement made on 6 December and its the
way it has been interpreted. In particular, we call on
all regional actors to contribute to easing the situation.
In the context of tensions on the ground and
regional crises, it is essential to recall our collective
commitment to preserving the agreed parameters on
the status of Jerusalem. Today’s vote has given us that
opportunity, despite its predictable outcome. On the
issue of Jerusalem, both the preservation of the twoState solution and the realization of the aspirations
of both parties are at stake, as well as respect for
international law, the resolutions of the Security
Council and the legitimacy of the Council itself.
Let me conclude by briefly underscoring three
points. Given its unparalleled symbolic significance,
Jerusalem is in many ways the key to peace between
the Israelis and the Palestinians. Without an agreement
on Jerusalem, there will be no peace agreement. That
is why the fate of that spiritual city can be decided only
by the parties, with the support of the international
community, and not by a unilateral decision.
A body of international law and international
consensus on the two-State solution now exists, with
Jerusalem as the capital of both States and based on
the outlines of a peace settlement. The Egyptian draft
resolution was simply intended to recall those different
elements. That is why France voted in favour of the draft
resolution. As a permanent member of the Security
Council and a friend to both Israel and Palestine,
France will spare no effort to bring the parties back

17-446597/15

S/PV.8139

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to the negotiating table and achieve an agreement in
accordance with the Council’s resolutions.
There is no shortcut along this demanding path, and
France will continue to hold its promise to both parties
on this issue, which I once again emphasize is key to
peace and stability throughout the Middle East. That
is why it is essential to not give up and to pursue our
efforts so that the Security Council can come together
again and play its part on this crucial issue. The Council
can rest assured of France’s commitment to that end.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal supported the draft resolution
(S/2017/1060) submitted by the delegation of Egypt, as
we are absolutely certain of the need to underscore the
parameters and principles underpinning the historic
and legal issues on Jerusalem, which are very deeply
held by the parties to the conflict — the Israelis and
the Palestinians — as well as the entire world, given
the symbolic importance of the holy city for the three
monotheistic Abrahamic religions. Senegal therefore
pays tribute to Jordan, in its capacity as custodian of
places holy to Islam, Christianity and Judaism.
It is absolutely imperative to preserve the
international consensus on the status of Jerusalem,
which the Israeli and the Palestinian parties are to
consider as part of final status negotiations, with
the unanimous support of the United Nations, and in
particular of the Security Council. It is necessary to
preserve the legal and historic status of Jerusalem in
order to ensure that the Holy City retains its diverse
identity, as well as its spirit of tolerance, openness and
sharing that have always characterized it. That is why
Senegal once again calls for strict respect for the status
quo regarding Jerusalem, in line with the parameters
that are internationally established and recognized — in
particular through Security Council resolutions 476
(1980), 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016).
Those parameters were previously defined by the
founding resolution of General Assembly resolution
181 (II), which enshrined the two separate States of
Israel and Palestine, with Jerusalem as the capital of
both States. The final status of Jerusalem is qualified
as a corpus separatum in resolution 181(II). I take this
opportunity to launch an appeal to the parties to display
the utmost restraint and to avoid escalation at this very
difficult and impassioned moment.
The outcome of the vote this afternoon should not
lead to desperation or cause us to give up. Quite the
8/15

18/12/2017

contrary is true. We need to strengthen our resolve
by building on the long-standing agreed parameters,
but also on the already existing initiatives, including
the Arab Peace Initiative and, let us say very loudly,
the commendable efforts made by the United States
Administration on the ground.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Ethiopia is a friend to both
Israelis and Palestinians — we are not bashful about
that, and we display it quite openly. Our position on the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict has always been consistent,
and, we believe principled. As much as we support
the right of Israel to exist in peace and security, we
also support the inalienable right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and to exist as a free
and independent State. That is consistent not only
with the relevant United Nations resolutions, but also
with the decisions of our continental organization, the
African Union.
With regard to the recent developments surrounding
the issue of Jerusalem, we had an opportunity to express
our position on the matter during the emergency
meeting of the Security Council held on 8 December
(see S/PV.8128). We believe this is a final status issue
that must be resolved through direct negotiations
between the two parties, on the basis of the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions,
while taking into account the legitimate concerns of
both the Palestinian and the Israeli sides.
The draft resolution (S/2017/1060) put forward
by the delegation of Egypt today reaffirms that longstanding principle on the part of the United Nations,
which is why we supported it. It was a well-balanced
draft resolution. Although the draft resolution could not
be adopted, there is no denying the fact that the latest
developments have once again brought the IsraeliPalestine dispute back to the foreground, thereby
underscoring the urgency of reinvigorating the peace
process without any further delay. In that regard, it is
of the utmost urgency to work towards easing tensions
and restoring calm as a matter of urgency. It is also vital
that the parties tone down the rhetoric and refrain from
taking actions that could further aggravate the already
tense situation.
Above all, however, removing the long-standing
obstacles that have hindered progress so far is
imperative in order to create the necessary conditions
for the resumption of direct negotiations between the
two parties. We believe that should be done on the
17-44659

18/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

basis of the two-State formula, which still remains the
only viable option for peace. That is why we supported
the call for the intensification and acceleration of
international and regional efforts aimed at achieving
a comprehensive, lasting and just solution. Despite the
lack of unity today, it is incumbent upon the Council
to discharge its responsibilities and support such
efforts for the sake of peace between the Israelis and
the Palestinians — and peace in the broader Middle
East region.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I thank the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his substantive briefing.
We fully support the work of Mr. Mladenov as an
objective broker.
We in Moscow we are very carefully following the
development of the situation on the Israeli-Palestinian
track. We are convinced that resolving the Palestinian
question is of fundamental importance for the longstanding normalization of the situation in the Middle
East. No other regional challenges can obscure that fact.
The ongoing stalemate in the political process is of
deep concern to us. Under those conditions, any kind of
unilateral act increases the risk of unleashing a spiral
of conflict and makes it more difficult to relaunch
direct Palestinian-Israeli negotiations. Washington’s
recent decisions on Jerusalem were met with serious
criticism, which turned into mass protests. That is
understandable given that Jerusalem is the cradle of the
three monotheistic religions and is the most sensitive
issue in the peace process architecture — as well as the
fact that the question of the status of the city needs to be
considered on the basis of well-known internationally
recognized parameters, within the framework of
a bilateral dialogue between the Palestinians and
Israelis. We call upon all parties to show restraint and
to refrain from any actions that could be fraught with
dangerous consequences.
We must not forget that precisely such a method
of settlement was approved in many Security Council
resolutions adopted in recent decades. They remain
fully in force today. Against the background of the
settlement activity by Israel, the provocative rhetoric
on both sides, the outbursts of violence and the difficult
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, we continue
to hear about the erosion of a possible realization of
the two-State solution to the Palestinian problem. At

S/PV. 8139

the same time, we remain committed to a resolution
that provides for an independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side
in peace and security with Israel. And West Jerusalem
will be the capital of the State of Israel.
We welcome the further consolidation of the unity
of the Palestinian people with the assistance of the
Egyptian leadership. We consider it a step in the right
direction. For our part, we will continue encouraging all
Palestinian parties to overcome their internal divisions
as quickly as possible.
A just and comprehensive settlement in the Middle
East is something that can be achieved only if there
is a firm international legal basis, which includes the
Security Council’s relevant resolutions, the Madrid
principles and the Arab Peace Initiative. Russia will
continue acting both on a bilateral basis and through
the Middle Eastern Quartet of international mediators
to help to intensify international efforts in the quest to
find a way out of the current impasse in a resolution to
the Middle East question. We think that the energetic
role played by the regional players, in part by Egypt
and Jordan, is important. At the same time, we need
to ensure a fully functional United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
That is the main mechanism for alleviating the burden
of the Palestinian refugees in the Middle East and,
ultimately, it is extending assistance to those Arabs
States where the refugees find themselves.
We believe that, in the current conditions, including
those throughout the whole region, the issue of moving
as quickly as possible to revive direct Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations is becoming increasingly topical. We
therefore reiterate the relevance of our proposal to
convene a summit in Russia between the leaders
of Palestine and Israel. We are ready to be honest
mediators. Russia supports trust-based and friendly
relations with all the peoples in the Middle East without
exception — Israelis, Palestinians and Arabs. Our
relationships are not burdened by the negative heritage of
the past. Russia’s policy has never included colonialism
or interference in the internal affairs, which, let us be
honest, became the reason of the lamentable situation
that we have in the region today. But we cannot give
up. Let us look to the future. The priority tasks remain
the same — pooling our efforts, fighting terrorism and
settling the regional crisis. Implementing the proposal
of Foreign Minister Lavrov to conduct a comprehensive
review in the Security Council on the situation in the

17-446599/15

S/PV.8139

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Middle East would help to resolve this task. We are
ready for such cooperation.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We regret that the Security
Council was unable to adopt draft resolution S/2017/1060
before us. Here in the Council, we recently outlined in
detail the reasons that we disagree with the recognition
by the United States of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel
and with the plan to move the United States Embassy to
that city. We voted in favour of the draft resolution for
a number of reasons.
First, it stresses that Jerusalem is a final-status
issue and can therefore be resolved only through
negotiations, in line with the relevant United Nations
resolutions. Furthermore, it reaffirms that the holy city
of Jerusalem, as a city holy to three religions, has a
specific status. Most important, it reaffirms the view of
the Council, expressed in previous resolutions, that any
decision and actions that purport to alter the character
and status of Jerusalem have no legal effect and must
be rescinded.
We also agree with the call on all States to refrain
from the establishment of diplomatic missions in
Jerusalem, in line with resolution 478 (1980). The
European Union (EU) has a firm position on Jerusalem,
which explains why all EU member States represented
on the Council voted in favour of the draft resolution
today. I would also like to state clearly that today’s vote
does not impact the resolutions adopted by the Council.
The status of Jerusalem remains unchanged under
international law.
Finally, looking forward, we urgently need to
relaunch the peace process. It is high time to show
commitment and to move ahead with a detailed
peace plan that addresses all final-status issues in a
manner consistent with the known parameters. The
Security Council has the responsibility to do that. All
stakeholders, including regional actors, should now
engage more than ever for peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy voted in favour of draft
resolution S/2017/1060, as it reaffirms the wellestablished principles and messages that are already
enshrined in several resolutions on the issue of
Jerusalem. The text is consistent with Italy’s position
on the matter. As we said at the emergency Security
Council meeting on 8 December (see S/PV.8128), we
believe that the status of Jerusalem as the future capital
of two States needs to be negotiated between Israel and
Palestine, within the framework of a peace process that
10/15

18/12/2017

will eventually lead to the establishment of two States
living side by side in peace and security, taking into
account the legitimate concerns and aspirations of
both parties.
We also supported the draft resolution because it
opens up a political horizon rooted in the two-State
solution and in the intensification of international and
regional efforts for a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East. In that regard, we continue to
see a crucial role to be played by the United States. We
look forward to hearing the views of the United States
Administration on possible proposals for an IsraeliPalestinian settlement, while building on the extensive
contacts and intense dialogue developed with all parties
over the past year.
At the same time, we reiterate our deep concern
about the increased tension over the past weeks, and
we reaffirm our firm condemnation of the latest rocket
attack against Israel. An escalation of violence would
be negative for all parties and must be prevented. We
call on all actors in Palestine and in the Middle East to
show responsibility and to exercise restraint. The only
way forward is through negotiations and the rejection
of violence.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Today, the delegation
of Ukraine voted in favour of the draft resolution
(S/2017/1060) proposed by Egypt on the status of
Jerusalem. We are convinced that the issue of Jerusalem
is a final-status issue, which should be resolved only
through negotiations and in strict compliance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolutions 476 (1980), 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016).
The draft resolution also reaffirms the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by force. Ukraine knows
only too well the consequences of the violation of
that principle.
We are strongly convinced that there is no other
viable alternative to the two-State solution. We urge
both sides to engage in a constructive negotiation
process with goodwill and with no preconditions. Given
the highly sensitive nature of the issue of Jerusalem for
all sides involved, we hope that the current escalation
can be contained and that it will not get out of control.
Finally, I would like to add my delegation’s voice
to the procedural point raised by my colleague from
Uruguay. I urge the remaining and incoming members of
the Council to take that point into serious consideration.
17-44659

18/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
voted in favour of the draft resolution (S/2017/1060)
that was just put to the vote.
The question of Palestinian is at the core of the
Middle East issue. It is a fundamental part of the
Middle East peace process, within which the issue of
Jerusalem is particularly complicated and sensitive and
is key to finding a solution to the Palestinian issue. For
many years, a series of Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016), have included
provisions regarding the status of Jerusalem.
The draft resolution submitted by Egypt is a
continuation of the content and spirit of past Security
Council resolutions. We urge the Security Council
and the international community to remain united in
a common effort to ensure a prompt de-escalation of
tension regarding the situation of Jerusalem in order to
maintain regional peace and security in the Middle East
and to preserve the overall Middle East peace process.
China has always firmly supported and promoted
the Middle East peace process. We support the just cause
of the Palestinian people for restoring their legitimate
national rights. We support the establishment of a fully
sovereign and independent State of Palestine, based on
its 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
That position of China will not change.
China will continue to be guided in general
by the four-point proposal put forward by Chinese
President Xi Jinping this past July for the promotion of
the settlement of the question of Palestine by advancing
a political settlement based on the two-State solution
and by promoting peace, stability and development in
the Middle East.
We urge the international community to respect the
relevant Security Council resolutions, the land-for-peace
principle and the Arab Peace Initiative, to strengthen
efforts for the resumption of peace negotiations and
to find a solution to the key issues, including the final
status of Jerusalem, through dialogue and negotiation
in order to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution to the Palestinian issue at an early date.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
Bolivia voted in favour of draft resolution S/2017/1060,
submitted today by the delegation of Egypt, because
the draft resolution reaffirms that the final status
of the city of Jerusalem should be resolved through
negotiations and that any decision or act that seeks to

S/PV. 8139

change the status or the demographic composition of
Jerusalem does not have any legal effect. Such actions
should be null and void and should be revoked in line
with the relevant General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions. Furthermore, we reiterate that it is
essential to reverse the negative trends on the ground,
which are jeopardizing the two-State solution, and to
strengthen the regional and international efforts to
achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East.
In that regard, we once again call on the Government
of the United States of America to reconsider its decision
to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and to
move its diplomatic representation to that city, since
that would only undermine any possibility of dialogue
between the parties and make it even more difficult
to reach a long-term peaceful solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. Moreover, that same decision is
a clear violation of resolution 478 (1980), which refers
to, inter alia, the withdrawal by Member States of their
diplomatic missions from Jerusalem.
We once again wish to recall that it was the United
Nations that established the special international status
for the city of Jerusalem and that the Security Council
decreed that any measure that alters the geographical,
demographic or historical character of the city of
Jerusalem is null and void and has no effect.
Bolivia continues to believe that the sole longterm alternative for settling the conflict is the twoState solution, whereby ultimately a free, sovereign
and independent Palestinian State will be established
within the pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem
as its capital, pursuant to the relevant Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): Our delegation voted
in favour of draft resolution S/2017/1060, which was
introduced by Egypt. Kazakhstan’s position on the
Middle East peace process remains unchanged. My
country urges the parties to maintain the historical status
quo of Jerusalem in accordance with previously reached
international agreements. We support negotiations
aimed at achieving the two-State solution and stand for
their early resumption, especially in a bilateral format
and without preconditions. The ultimate goal should
be the restoration and promotion of the peace process
pursuant to the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Madrid principles, the principle of land for peace,
the road map for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative.

17-4465911/15

S/PV.8139

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

It is also necessary to identify mutually acceptable
principles to advance the peace process, as well as
to develop a concept for future negotiations and the
implementing mechanism. We therefore urge the
leaders of Israel and Palestine to take concrete steps
in their areas that will strengthen prospects for peace
based on the inalienable right of the Palestinians to
statehood and right of Israel to its own durable, longterm security.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
Japan’s position on the Middle East peace process
remains clear and steadfast. Japan supports a two-State
solution and believes that the final status of Jerusalem
is part of a range of issues that should be resolved
through negotiations, based on the relevant Security
Council resolutions and previous agreements between
the parties. With that in mind, Japan voted in favour of
draft resolution S/2017/1060.
Japan listened carefully to Ambassador Haley’s
statement today. Japan appreciates President Trump’s
reaffirmation of his strong commitment to facilitating
a lasting peace agreement and support for a two-State
solution in his recent announcement, and notes well the
importance of the President’s clear acknowledgement
that the final status of Jerusalem, including sovereign
boundaries within the city, must be subject to negotiation
between the parties. We welcome that the United States
will continue to play an important role in advancing the
peace process.
We are concerned about the possibility of the
worsening of the environment surrounding the Middle
East peace process or the deterioration of the situation of
the wider Middle East region. The continuing unrest on
the ground is worrisome. It is important that the parties
commit to making meaningful progress in the peace
process. Japan appreciates the efforts made by Member
States to bringing parties closer to the negotiation
table. Peace can be achieved only through negotiations
between the parties. Japan, too, will continue to remain
constructively engaged in this issue to promote an
environment conducive to meaningful negotiations
with a view to achieving a two-State solution.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
12/15

18/12/2017

Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): First
of all, I thank Japan in its capacity as President of the
Security Council for convening this important meeting.
We also thank the 14 Security Council members who
voted in favour of draft resolution S/2017/1060 and
recognized the urgency of this matter and the need
for serious follow-up and action in the light of the
recent provocative decision announced by the United
States of America, which is contrary to international
law and to United Nations resolutions regarding the
Holy City of Jerusalem. We are grateful to the Arab
Republic of Egypt for its efforts in leading the process
and introducing the draft resolution, as the sole Arab
member of the Council,.
The total rejection of the American decision and
the international consensus on Jerusalem are beyond
clear. The message today has been unequivocal: all
the relevant Security Council resolutions concerning
the status of the Holy City of Jerusalem and other
Palestinian territory occupied by Israel since 1967
are legally binding and must be respected, without
exception. They include resolution 2334 (2016), which
constitutes a road map and an established component of
international law, and which only reflects the reality of
the situation. The latest American decision regarding
Jerusalem lacks that sense of reality, as did its words
earlier this morning and this afternoon. They do not
accord with reality, and we unequivocally reject them
in their entirety.
Resolution 2334 (2016) clearly condemns
settlements, violence, and terror directed against
civilians. It calls for efforts to promote peace. It is
entirely wrong to say that it is the implementation of
international law, not the building of illegal settlements,
that stands in the way of bringing about peace. It is a
farce when the Security Council and its resolutions
and international law, rather than the illegal stance of
the occupying Power and its settlements, become the
problem — as we heard today from the representative
of a permanent member of the Council.
That was firmly reaffirmed in statements
by Governments and civil society organizations
throughout the world, as well as during the emergency
meeting of the Security Council on 8 December (see
S/PV.8128), the resolutions of the Arab Ministeral
Council in Cairo on 9 December and the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation summit meeting in Istanbul on
13 December. It was also reaffirmed by the position
taken by the African Union, among others, and the
17-44659

18/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

overwhelming support demonstrated by Council
members with regard to today’s draft resolution. The
veto stood in the way of the adoption of the latter,
but the will of the international community will find
another framework. The draft resolution reiterates that
any decisions intended to alter the character or status
of Jerusalem have no legal effect, are null and void and
must be rescinded, in compliance with resolutions of
the Security Council.
We appeal to all States to heed the call not to
establish diplomatic missions in the Holy City and not
to recognize any measures or actions in violation of the
relevant resolutions. We also call for the intensification
of international and regional efforts aimed at achieving
a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution,
based on the relevant resolutions, international
legitimacy and the peace principles in order to end the
Israeli occupation of our occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem.
The result of the vote today is a demonstration
of the position of the international community. which
recognizes the sensitivity and specificity of the
situation of Jerusalem, as well as the Palestinian right
to the city. Yet, regrettably, one State has stood today in
opposition to the rest of the world on this long-standing
issue that has been universally respected — including
by the former United States Administration — since
1947. The only exception is Israel, the occupying
Power, which has flagrantly violated international law
and all relevant resolutions day after day and only acted
in total contempt of this Council.
The United States has chosen to disregard
international law and ignore international consensus
to side with Israeli occupation at the expense of our
rights and the just nature of our cause. With this veto,
the United States has missed an opportunity to rectify
its illegal decision with regard to the city of Jerusalem,
remaining on the wrong side of history. Nevertheless,
we reiterate that this American decision has no legal
effect on the character and status of the Holy City of
Jerusalem by any means.
However, this decision affects the status of the
United States as a peace broker and in fact underscores
its bias, undermining its role in any future peace process.
What we have heard today is totally biased in favour
of the occupying Power, rather than a neutral position
between us and the Israelis. It is indeed paradoxical
that, while we were awaiting a peace plan from the

S/PV. 8139

United States, the Administration instead decided to
further obstruct peace and delay its realization. That
underscores yet again the failure of the old formulas.
Going forward, there should be a new mechanism,
apart from the old forumlas and the imperative of a
collective process.
The Security Council’s resolutions are binding
and remain valid until their implementation. A veto
cannot negate adopted resolutions. No veto in the past
has been able to do so, and no veto in this era ever
will, either. It is truly paradoxical that the same State
casting its veto today asserts the Council’s authority in
all other cases, demanding respect for resolutions on
every other issue aside from Palestine. When it comes
to Palestine, there is imbalance. We refuse to accept
that Palestine be the exception to every rule. The
international community has concurred, speaking in
one voice, insisting on respect for the applicable laws
and resolutions that are the core of the peaceful solution
to the Palestinian question.
The United States decision encourages Israel to
persist in its crimes against our Palestinian people
and to continue its occupation of our territory. No
rhetoric will hide that complacency in prolonging the
occupation. No veto can conceal those facts, nor can
it legitimize any provocative, unilateral decisions or
actions in violation of Security Council resolutions.
No one can deny that such provocations fuel
the unending cycle of tensions and ignite religious
sentiment among billions of Muslims and Christians
around the world. Everyone knows those actions
make peace more elusive and threaten to transform
this political and regional conflict into a devastating
religious conflict with grave consequences for regional
and international peace and security, benefiting only
the forces of extremism and terror.
We therefore caution once more against such
recklessness and call for full respect for the historic
status quo at the holy sites, including at the Haram
al-Sharif, and for the special custodial role of Jordan
in the protection of the Muslim and Christian holy
sites. We will continue all efforts and coordination in
that regard to ensure such protection and to rebuff all
provocations and illegal measures undermining the
historic status quo.
This illegal and irresponsible decision will change
nothing for the Palestinians. Jerusalem will always
remain the heart of Palestine. Our history, our culture,

17-4465913/15

S/PV.8139

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

our heritage and our religion as Muslims and Christians
are so attached to this city, so woven into it —the cradle
of civilization and land of the prophets.
East Jerusalem remains occupied and is an integral
part of the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967. It
is the capital of the State of Palestine, as recognized by
the majority of States around the world. However, this
decision has permitted Israel to continue in the plotting
and scheming of its settlers to encroach on Palestinian
rights, rather than deterring Israel and compelling it to
respect international law to achieve peace and security.
Therefore, we once again call on all peace-loving
nations around the world to stand firm in support
for the rule of law and for the steadfast Palestinian
people defending their land, including Jerusalem, their
identity, holy sites and their natural place in history
and geography, and to oppose injustice, oppression
and subjugation.
In the coming days, while the world will be
celebrating Christmas and the birth of Jesus Christ,
lights will remain turned off in the land of Jesus Christ
and celebrations will not take place in Jerusalem,
Bethlehem or Nazareth. Joy has been stolen from us
by a decision that, in the name of realism, has denied
reality and violated the rights of an entire nation and
insulted the feelings of believers around the world.
Protests have erupted against this decision, not
only in Palestine but across the globe, in defence
of justice, freedom and dignity and in rejection of
colonialism and unilateralism. In Palestine, thousands
have demonstrated against the United States decision
and face killing, repression, arrest and oppression by
the Israeli occupying forces. Eleven Palestinians have
been killed, 3,500 wounded and hundreds arrested.
Five hundred of them were shot. Israel has also detained
hundreds of our people, including children.
We pray for the families of the martyrs. We wish
a speedy recovery for the wounded and freedom for
the detained. How many more lives will be sacrificed
before our people can finally enjoy the same rights as
those enjoyed by the rest of the world? We reiterate
that the arrogance of the occupying Power will only
serve to strengthen our determination to liberate our
land, achieve our independence and restore our rights
and dignity.
The time is past due for our people to achieve their
rights, including to self-determination, and to finally
live in freedom, dignity, peace and security in their
14/15

18/12/2017

independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, side by side with all peoples of the region
and the globe. We urge the Council to continue to
firmly stand on the side of right. Those in favour of
peace do not ratify illegal acts and measures; instead,
they uphold the rights of the Palestinian people, as
enshrined in international law and General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions. They also recognize
the State of Palestine and stand in support of freedom,
which is the key to ensuring that peace will finally
prevail in the land.
The President: I now give the floor to representative
of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Today, the United Nations has
taken another step backwards. It has taken another step
away from advocating for truth and justice.
Almost exactly one year ago, in this very Chamber,
the Council adopted the shameful resolution 2334
(2016). It was a resolution that had the audacity to
attempt to designate Israel’s presence at the Western
Wall — Judaism’s holiest site in Jerusalem — as a
flagrant violation of international law. Those words
pierced the hearts of Jews everywhere. They mocked
generations of Jews who prayed towards Jerusalem
for thousands of years. They belittled the ancient
declaration of the Jewish people that states, “next year
in Jerusalem”.
Yet here we are again. We find ourselves fighting
the same battle for truth and morality. Those who voted
for today’s resolution have only reaffirmed the United
Nations decades-long double standard when it comes to
Israel and are guilty of blatant hypocrisy. Every other
country in the world has the right to designate its own
capital city. But when it comes to Israel, somehow this
most basic national right is questioned and condemned.
We thank the United States for staying loyal to the truth
and vetoing today’s absurd draft resolution. President
Trump, Vice-President Pence, Ambassador Haley and
the entire Administration proved that the United States
does not back down from what is right. They continue
to advocate for real dialogue and the hope for peace in
our region.
The Palestinians, however, have once again
displayed a disturbing trend. Every time the prospects
for meaningful negotiations emerge, the Palestinians
run away. Every time there is a chance for hope, the
Palestinians sabotage the effort. All too often, the
international community only makes it worse. In 1947,
17-44659

18/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Palestinians rejected resolution 181 (II). In 2000,
they walked out of the Camp David talks and began
a war of terror against Israelis. In reply to Prime
Minister Netanyahu’s repeated offers to negotiate,
the Palestinians have just one response: give in to our
demands or suffer the consequences of incitement
and violence.
The American Administration is now working
tirelessly to revive negotiations. Like us, it is eager
to spark new hopes for peace. By declaring the
obvious — that Jerusalem is the capital of the State of
Israel — President Trump was simply stating a fact.
He hoped to encourage both sides to move forward at
the negotiating table. But, once again, the Palestinians
respond with endless rockets fired at our civilians.
Let me be clear. We will continue to stand strong.
When it comes to Jerusalem, we do not back down.
Some 3,000 years ago, King David declared the city
of Jerusalem to be the capital of the Jewish people.
Jerusalem has been Israel’s capital for almost 70 years.
Our nation has never given up when faced with an
adversary. We will not allow others, including the
United Nations, to determine our fate, in particular
when it comes to Jerusalem: not then and not now.
This week Jews all over the world are celebrating
the holiday of Hanukkah. We welcome the good
wishes sent from so many nations, many of whom are
represented at the table today. But it seems that some
of those who wish us well have forgotten exactly why
we celebrate Hanukkah. Hannukah is not about gifts.
It is not about food. Hannukah is about the liberation
of Jerusalem. In the year 167 B.C.E., a Hellenist king
attempted to outlaw Jewish practice and desecrate
our Temple in Jerusalem, but he failed. A small group
of brave fighters — the Maccabees — drove out the
Hellenists and reclaimed Jerusalem. That is what we
are celebrating. That is why we light the candles. We
are honouring our brave ancestors who reinstated
Jewish sovereignty over our capital, Jerusalem, more
than 2,000 years ago.
History did not always turn out that way for our
people. Just a hundred years after the miracle of
Hannukah, our Temple in Jerusalem was destroyed.
The Jewish people were exiled from Jerusalem but the
connection between Jerusalem and the Jewish people
was never broken. It will never be broken — not by the
Romans, not by the Babylonians, not by the Ottoman
Turks, not by the British Empire and not by the United

S/PV. 8139

Nations. Today, even as our adversaries once again seek
to delegitimize our presence in Jerusalem, the Jewish
people will prevail, as it always has.
We have heard hateful statements from some
world leaders over the past few days. We have heard
statements from countries that continue to be hostile
to the Jewish people and to Israel, and from leaders
of nations that, throughout history, restricted Jewish
prayer at the Western Wall. Even as late as 50 years
ago, Jews were denied access to the Western Wall. Let
me therefore be very clear. The leaders of countries
that oppress minorities, jail journalists and quash all
opposition have no right to lecture Israel. The leaders
of countries poisoned by violent anti-Semitism cannot
condemn Israel for the so-called lack of tolerance
and acceptance.
Let me repeat what we have said time and again.
Jerusalem, under a sovereign Israel, is more free and
open to people of all religions than at any other time
in history. We pledge to ensure that all people, of all
religions, will continue to be able to freely practice their
faith — in Jerusalem and throughout our entire country.
Last year, as the Security Council voted on
resolution 2334 (2016), I held up a Bible and reminded
members of the thousands of years of Jewish history
and presence in Jerusalem. This year, facing another
resolution attempting to deny the truth, we will fight
back once more. The members of the Council can
vote again and again — hundreds and hundreds more
times — to denounce our presence in Jerusalem, but
they will never succeed in changing the Bible. The
Council cannot rewrite history.
Not long ago, the Lubavitcher Rebbe, a wise Jewish
leader, called the United Nations a house of darkness
and lies. But he also noted that with just one small
candle of truth, one could turn the darkness into light.
We will continue to light the candle of truth.
Tonight, millions of Jews around the world will light
the seventh candle of Hanukkah. They will celebrate
the unbreakable bond between the Jewish people and
our eternal capital, Jerusalem. Now is the time for all
countries to finally recognize that Jerusalem is, always
has been and always will be the capital of the Jewish
people and the State of Israel.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 1.55 p.m.

17-4465915/15
