192

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

their internal and foreign policies by the basic provisions
of the Convention,
Bearing in mind the fact that the Convention is being
implemented in different economic, social and cultural
conditions prevailing in individual States parties,
Mindful of the obligation of all States parties to comply
fully with the provisions of the Convention,
Aware of the importance of the contribution of the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination to
the implementation of the Programme of Action for
the Second Decade to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination,
Taking note of the decisions adopted and the recom­
mendations made by the Committee at its twenty-ninth
and thirtieth sessions,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
on the work of its twenty-ninth and thirtieth sessions;
2. Strongly condemns the policy of apartheid in South
Africa and Namibia as a crime against humanity and urges
all Member States to adopt effective political, economic
and other measures in conformity with the relevant resolu­
tions of the General Assembly, the Security Council and
other United Nations bodies, in order to support the legiti­
mate struggle of the oppressed people of South Africa and
Namibia for their national liberation and human dignity,
and to secure the elimination of the racist apartheid
system;
3. Takes note with appreciation of the report submitted
to the Committee by the United Nations Council for
Namibia37 as the legal Administering Authority for
Namibia until independence and encourages the Council
in its determined endeavours towards the elimination of
apartheid from the Territory and the attainment of inde­
pendence of the people of Namibia;
4. Commends the Committee for its continuous
endeavours towards the elimination of apartheid in South
Africa and Namibia and of all forms of discrimination
based on race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin.
wherever it exists;
5. Takes note with appreciation of the Committee's
decision to participate actively in the implementation of
the Programme of Action for the Second Decade to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination; 38
6. Requests the Secretary-General to explore the possi­
bilities of issuing as United Nations publications the two
studies prepared by the Committee on articles 4 39 and 740
of the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination;
7. Welcomes the efforts of the Committee aimed at the
elimination of all forms of discrimination against national
or ethnic minorities, persons belonging to such minorities
and indigenous populations, wherever such discrimination
exists, and the attainment of the full enjoyment of their
human rights through the implementation of the principles
and provisions of the Convention;
8. Welcomes further the efforts of the Committee
aimed at the elimination of all forms of discrimination
against migrant workers and their families, the promotion
of their rights on a non-discriminatory basis and the
achievement of their full equality, including the freedom
to maintain their cultural characteristics;
3 7 C'ERD/010 I/Add. 7.

38 See Official Records of the General Assembly. Th1rtr-ninth Session, Sup­

plement No. 18 (A/39/18). para. 591
39 A/C'ONF.119/10.

9. Calls upon all Member States to adopt effective leg­
islative, socio-economic and other necessary measures in
order to ensure the prevention or elimination of discrimi­
nation based on race, colour, descent or national f r ethnic
origin:
I 0. Further calls upon States parties to the Convention
to protect fully, by the adoption of the relevant legislative
and other measures, in conformity with the Convention,
the rights of national or ethnic minorities and persons
belonging to such minorities, as well as the rights of indige­
nous populations;
11. Commends States parties to the Convention on
measures taken to ensure, within their jurisdiction, the
availability of appropriate recourse procedures for the vic­
tims of racial discrimination;
12. Reiterates its invitation to the States parties to the
Convention to provide the Committee, in accordance with
its general guidelines, with information on the implemen­
tation of the provisions of the Convention, including
information on the demographic composition of their pop­
ulation and on their relations with the racist regime of
South Africa;
13. Calls upon the United Nations bodies concerned to
ensure that the Committee is supplied with all relevant
information on all the Territories to which General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December I960
applies and urges again the administering Powers to co­
operate with these bodies by providing all the necessary
information in order to enable the Committee to discharge
fully its responsibilities under article 15 of the Convention;
14. Appeals to the States parties to take fully into con­
sideration their obligation under the Convention to submit
their reports in due time;
15. Takes note of the decision of the Committee to
hold its session m one of the African countries at the
appropriate time41 and requests the Secretary-General to
explore the possibilities and financial implications of hold­
ing that session within the context of the Second Decade to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination and to inform
the General Assembly and the Committee on his findings:
16. Requests the Secretary-General to take the neces­
sary steps to ensure wider publicity of the work of the
Committee, which would facilitate its task to implement
effectively its functions under the Convention.

71st plenary meetrng
23 November 1984

39/22. International Youth Year: Participation,
Development, Peace
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/151 of 17 December 1979,

35/126 of 11 December 1980, 36/28 of 13 November
1981, 37/48 of 3 December 1982 and 38/22 of 22
November 1983,
Recognizing the profound importance of the direct par­
ticipation of youth in shaping the future of mankind and
the valuable contribution that youth can make in the
implementation of the new international economic order
based on equity and justice,
Considering it necessary to disseminate among youth
the ideals of peace, respect for human rights and funda40 A/C'ONF. I 19/ 11
41 See Offic1al Records of the General AssemNr. Th1rt1·-ninth Sc.,s1011. Sup
pll'lnent No. 18 (A/39/18). para. 593.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

mental freedoms, human solidarity and dedication to the
objectives of progress and development,
Convinced of the imperative need to harness the ener­
gies, enthusiasms and creative abilities of youth to the
tasks of nation-building, the struggle for self-determina­
tion and national independence, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, against foreign domination
and occupation, and for the economic, social and cultural
advancement of peoples, the implementation of the new
international economic order, the preservation of world
peace and the promotion of international co-operation and
understanding,
Bearing in mind that 1985 is the fortieth anniversary of
the United Nations,
Emphasizing again that the United Nations should pay
more attention to the role of young people in the world of
today and to their demands for the world of tomorrow,
Convinced that the preparation for and observance in
1985 of the International Youth Year with the motto
"Participation, Development, Peace" will offer a useful
and significant opportunity for drawing attention to the
situation and specific needs and aspirations of youth, for
increasing co-operation at all levels in dealing with youth
issues, for undertaking concerted action programmes in
favour of youth and for involving young people in the
study and resolution of major national, regional and inter­
national problems,
Aware that, for the International Youth Year to be suc­
cessful and to maximize its impact and practical efficiency,
adequate preparation and the widespread support of Gov­
ernments, all specialized agencies, international intergov­
ernmental and non-governmental organizations and the
public will be required,
Recalling that the activities of the International Youth
Year at the international level should be primarily sup­
portive of activities undertaken relative to regional,
national and local youth issues,
Recognizing the important role of United Nations
bodies, the specialized agencies and the regional commis­
sions in promoting international co-operation in the field
of youth and the necessity of strengthening their role in the
effective implementation of the Specific Programme of
Measures and Activities to be undertaken prior to and
during the International Youth Year: Participation, Devel­
opment, Peace,42
Aware of the contribution which the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization is
making to the promotion of international co-operation in
the field of youth,
Noting with satisfaction the progress made in the imple­
mentation of the Specific Programme of Measures and
Activities to be undertaken prior to and during the Inter­
national Youth Year,
Also noting with satisfaction that many Governments
have established national committees or other mecha­
nisms to facilitate the planning, implementation and co­
ordination of the activities related to the preparation for
and observance of the International Youth Year.
I. Endorses the recommendations made by the Advi­
sory Committee for the International Youth Year con­
tained in the report on its third session; 43
2. Decides to devote an appropriate number of plenary
meetings at its fortieth session, in 1985, to policies and
programmes relating to youth and to designate these meet­
ings as the United Nations World Conference for the
42A/36/215, annex. sect. IV, decision I (I).

193

International Youth Year which should take place in keep­
ing with the procedures and practices of the General
Assembly;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take all measures
recommended by the Advisory Committee for the Interna­
tional Youth Year with a view to ensuring an appropriate
observance of the International Youth Year within the
United Nations system;
4. Recommends to all Member States that they should
include youth representatives in their delegations to the
fortieth session of the General Assembly;
5. Decides that the fourth session of the Advisory
Committee for the International Youth Year shall be con­
vened, within existing resources, at Vienna. from 25
March to 3 April 1985 with a view to working out, on the
basis of a draft prepared by the Secretary-General, guide­
lines for further planning and suitable follow-up in the
field of youth which will be transmitted for approval to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session;
6. Stresses again the importance of active and direct
participation of youth organizations in the activities
organized at the local, national, regional and international
levels for the preparation for and observance of the Inter­
national Youth Year;
7. Invites all international governmental and non-gov­
ernmental organizations that have planned specific activ­
ities devoted to the International Youth Year, as well as
the organizers of international youth conferences and festi­
vals in 1985, to be inspired, in the process of preparing
and implementing those activities, by the motto of the
International Youth Year: "Participation, Development.
Peace" and by the provisions of the Specific Programme of
Measures and Activities to be undertaken prior to and
during the International Youth Year endorsed by the
General Assembly;
8. Also invites the organizers of international youth
conferences and festivals in 1985 to inform the General
Assembly at its fortieth session, through the Secretary­
General, of the results of those activities and the docu­
ments adopted;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "International Youth
Year: Participation, Development, Peace" and to grant it
high priority.
7 I st plenary meetmg

23 November 1984

39/23. Efforts and measures for securing the imple­
mentation and the enjoyment by youth of
human rights, particularly the right to educa­
tion and to work
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 36/29 of 13 November 1981,
37/49 of 3 December 1982 and 38/23 of 22 November
1983, in which it, inter alia, recognized the need to adopt
appropriate measures for securing the implementation and
the enjoyment by youth of human rights, particularly the
right to education and to work,
Recalling also its resolution 34/ I 51 of l 7 December
1979, by which it decided to designate 1985 as Interna­
tional Youth Year: Participation, Development, Peace.
Convinced that it is necessary to ensure full enjoyment
by youth of the rights stipulated in the Universal Declara43 A/391262, annex
