S/2014/123

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 February 2014
Original: English

Twenty-seventh progress report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Mission in Liberia
I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2116 (2013), the Security Council extended the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) until 30 September 2014 and
requested me to keep it regularly informed of the situation on the ground as UNMIL
continues its reconfiguration, as well as of progress towards achieving transition
benchmarks and of the progressive handover of security responsibilities to national
institutions. The present report provides the requested information, as well as an
update on major developments since my report of 12 August 2013 (S/2013/479).

II. Major developments
A.

Political situation
2.
A dominant feature of the political environment during the period under
review was the continuous public expression of dissatisfaction with national
authorities by different sectors, often accompanied by threats of demonstrations.
Although most such threats were unrealized or resulted in small gatherings, they
were heavily covered by the media. In mid-November, motorcycle taxi drivers,
unhappy with new traffic regulations, threatened to demonstrate, and university
unrest persisted through December and January. In this context, on 9 October, a
pro-government group mobilized a large-scale show of support, which civil servants
were encouraged to attend, to greet the President, Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, when she
returned from a trip abroad. Eleven individuals associated with a smaller
anti-government rally on the same day were detained and later charged with sedition
and other crimes. These developments, along with a decision by the Supreme Court
to disbar the Minister for Justice for six months, contributed to a general public
sense of an unsettled political environment.
3.
Concerns by some political parties and civil society organizations also
coalesced around the 21 August jailing of Rodney Sieh, managing editor of the
newspaper FrontPage Africa, for non-payment of a $1.5 million libel judgement.
The newspaper was also closed. The libel case had been brought against Mr. Sieh by
a former government minister, who alleged that Mr. Sieh had published defamatory
articles, knowing that some of the information therein was false. After Mr. Sieh

14-23864 (E) 060314

*1423864*

S/2014/123

became ill in prison and was hospitalized, the Minister for Justice ordered his
release on 9 October on compassionate grounds. After the parties reached an
amicable settlement, Mr. Sieh was released on 19 November. The Minister asserted
that Liberian law provided the basis for her action in granting compassionate
release. However, on 10 January, the Supreme Court cited the Minister for contempt
in connection with the action and ordered her disbarment for six months; Mr. Sieh’s
lawyer was disbarred for three months for having sought his client’s release on
compassionate grounds. The President stated that she was seeking legal advice about
the implications of the Court’s decision to disbar the Minister.
4.
On 16 October, the President signed the national budget for fiscal year
2013/14, totalling $582.9 million. The increase over the proposed $553 million was
a result of additional revenue that the legislature claimed to have identified during
its review.
5.
In the midst of a revenue shortfall and upcoming senatorial elections,
allocations for county-level projects became a point of contention between the
legislature and the executive. On 21 January, the Minister for Finance appeared
before the House of Representatives and stated that there was a $17.1 million
shortfall in revenue collection and that future revenue collections might be at risk.
In the light of this, he requested that representatives reconsider the allocations they
had added to the budget for county-level projects. On 16 January, the House plenary
requested that its leadership seek $73 million for county-level projects in the next
budget. Subsequently, on 23 January, the Senate discussed a bill that would
guarantee 15 per cent of the budget for county projects. The President, in her annual
address to the legislature on 27 January, cautioned that rural development could be
achieved only through realistic budgeting. In the meantime, structured dialogue
between UNMIL leadership and the legislature continued, with a meeting on
20 January focusing on the transition of UNMIL.
6.
On 10 January, the National Elections Commission announced that it was
postponing its scheduled update of the voters list owing to delays in receiving
allocated government funds. The process started on 29 January, about two weeks
late, and will conclude on 21 March. The update is taking place in preparation for
elections, to be held in October 2014, when 15 of 30 senatorial seats will be
contested. In response to the delay, several parties, including the opposition
Congress for Democratic Change (CDC), publicly expressed concern about the
integrity of the election.
7.
Although the campaign period is scheduled to begin on 12 August, much of the
attention of politicians and political parties is already on the senatorial elections,
which are viewed as an opportunity to gauge and consolidate support before the
2017 legislative and presidential elections. Several political parties, including CDC,
launched membership drives ahead of the voter list update exercise and have
conducted county tours and other activities to consolidate party structures ahead of
the October polls. The lead-up to the elections has also contributed to leadership
struggles within some parties, indicative of the lack of cohesiveness in the political
party system.

2/22

14-23864

S/2014/123

B.

National reconciliation and political reform initiatives
8.
The implementation of the National Reconciliation Road Map has relied
heavily on the Peacebuilding Fund, which is providing $11.2 million between
October 2013 and December 2015 to support the implementation of seven projects,
including peace committees, youth service programmes, women as peacemakers and
conflict management and economic empowerment projects. On 19 October, the
President officially launched the national “Palava Hut” programme. A national
technical forum was convened in November to clarify its mandate, jurisdiction and
methodology, although to date no concrete progress has been made on
implementation, owing in part to major institutional frailties, including gaps in
technical capacity.
9.
Meanwhile, a national history project is under way, following a second
conference in August 2013, and the United Nations country team is discussing
possible support with the Government. On 6 February, the President launched a
project to develop more inclusive national symbols. In addition, the Government is
exploring South-South cooperation with Rwanda and South Africa on reconciliation
initiatives. With the National Reconciliation Road Map continuing to face financial
challenges, the development of a resource mobilization strategy is under way.
Greater operational capacity, as well as added political determination, will be
necessary for the long-term success of reconciliation efforts.
10. Efforts continued towards constitutional reform, although the slow progress
will make the timelines difficult to maintain. The Constitution Review Committee is
working towards completing civic education and public consultations by the end of
March 2014, leading to the validation of proposed amendments at a national
conference proposed for April 2014. Proposals would then be presented to the
President ahead of consideration by the legislature, and a subsequent national
referendum would be held no sooner than one year after legislative action.
11. The Constitution Review Committee held several large consultations with
stakeholders, including political parties, traditional leaders and civil society.
County-level civic education and consultations commenced in February. The
possible formats for a national conference on constitutional reform are still being
discussed and funding has yet to be secured. In January, with UNMIL support, the
Committee and the legislature began to engage in structured discussions aimed at
reaching a common understanding of the process and collaboration among
stakeholders. The Committee also appointed female leaders to mobilize women’s
engagement in the constitutional reform process. UNMIL continued to support the
deployment of technical experts to assist the Committee, while funding from the
Peacebuilding Fund and the United States Agency for International Development,
through a United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) project, supported
sectoral consultations, technical assistance and preparations for county-level
activities.
12. Decentralization is a critical element of plans for inclusive governance.
Preparations are ongoing for the initial deconcentration of selected functions by 12
ministries and two agencies. Following consultations with stakeholders, a local
government act was drafted that provides a legal basis for implementing the national
policy on decentralization and local governance. The Governance Commission, with
support from the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment

14-23864

3/22

S/2014/123

of Women (UN-Women), also completed a study on gender and decentralization in
December 2013. The draft act has been submitted to the President for review and
subsequent submission to the legislature. In the meantime, the Commission and the
Ministry of Internal Affairs have been engaged in awareness-raising campaigns on
both aspects of the policy. In November, in an effort to improve financial
management, the President announced the appointment of assistant superintendents
for fiscal and financial affairs for 12 counties.
13. Progress was also made in establishing legislative and policy frameworks for
land reform. The Land Commission completed and submitted to the President draft
legislation to transform the land rights policy into law. In addition, deficiencies and
duplication in land governance in Liberia will be addressed through the creation of a
land agency, the exact nature of which will be elaborated in forthcoming legislation.
In December, the President signed an executive order imposing a moratorium on all
public land transactions and assembled a nine-member committee to vet all land
deeds.

C.

Security situation
14. The overall security situation remained generally stable, though fragile. Mob
violence was a significant challenge, while reports of sexual violence remained
high, with 15 per cent of reported incidents involving children under the age of 10.
Reports of armed robbery also continued, with approximately one third of incidents
involving firearms.
15. The prevalence of mob violence and vigilantism continued to demonstrate the
weaknesses of and lack of public confidence in the justice institutions of Liberia.
These forms of violence also continued to test the quick response capacity of
security institutions. Since my last report, 37 incidents of mob violence were
reported, with 9 occurring so far in 2014. The police, with limited presence and
mobility, were on some occasions overwhelmed by large crowds and required
intervention by UNMIL to restore order and protect civilians. In a November 2013
study, UNMIL reported a 44 per cent increase in incidents of mob violence over a
five-month period in 2013 compared with the same period in 2012. The study also
indicated that mobs had become more violent and volatile, prompting increased
police intervention with lethal force.
16. Tensions related to concessions continued to provoke violent demonstrations.
Since my last report, nine demonstrations involving workers or affected
communities took place at concessions in Bong, Grand Bassa, Grand Cape Mount,
Margibi, Maryland and Sinoe Counties. In all cases, the mobilization of large
crowds, often armed with crude weapons, required intervention by UNMIL in
support of national authorities.
17. In October and November 2013, demonstrations at the University of Liberia
became violent when students protested against more rigorous testing procedures
and other administrative reforms. During the protests, university property was
damaged, roads were blocked, drivers were harassed and vehicles were stopped,
including two UNMIL vehicles, one of which sustained damage. The violence
prompted university authorities to suspend all activities until 2 February. Smaller
protests, most of them peaceful, were also held in Monrovia and other counties by
teachers and contract workers over wages and working conditions.

4/22

14-23864

S/2014/123

18. UNMIL continued to operationalize its strategy for the protection of civilians,
as mentioned in my previous report. Recognizing that the primary responsibility to
protect civilians lies with the Government, UNMIL continued to reinforce national
security actors in response to a variety of threats, including tensions around
concessions and large-scale mob violence. UNMIL also continued to facilitate
critical early warning throughout the country and engaged in contingency planning
with national and United Nations country team partners in respect of potential
regional security deterioration and/or refugee inflows.

D.

Regional issues
19. The situation along the borders between Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea and
Sierra Leone remained relatively calm. Liberian authorities and UNMIL maintained
regular cross-border engagement with their counterparts across the respective
borders. Although electoral violence in the run-up to the September 2013 legislative
elections in Guinea raised concerns of spillover, prompting contingency planning,
no threats materialized.
20. As indicated in my 24 December report on the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) (S/2013/761), a comprehensive cross-border security
strategy for addressing security threats in the Mano River Union was developed
with support from the United Nations Office for West Africa and United Nations
peace operations in West Africa, including UNMIL. The strategy was subsequently
endorsed by the Heads of State and Government of the Mano River Union and the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) on 25 October.
21. The Governments of Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire continued to follow up on
agreements reached at the June 2012 and April 2013 quadripartite meetings, which
also involved UNMIL and UNOCI. The strengthened bilateral coordination and
information exchange between security agencies on both sides of the border remains
evident. As indicated in my aforementioned report on UNOCI, a joint council of
chiefs and elders met in Liberia in October 2013, bringing together traditional
chiefs, elders, civil authorities, women and youth representatives from both sides of
the border, as well as Ivorian refugees living in Liberia, to discuss reconciliation,
cross-border cooperation and conditions for refugee return. President JohnsonSirleaf and President Alassane Ouattara of Côte d’Ivoire attended. So far, however,
the Governments have not taken concrete steps to implement the agreements
reached, including the organization of a second meeting in Côte d’Ivoire.
22. The Liberia National Police Emergency Response Unit and Bureau of
Immigration and Naturalization, along with other agencies, continued to operate
along the border with Côte d’Ivoire. However, joint security operations planned for
November 2013 and January 2014 with Ivorian security agencies were postponed, as
indicated in my report on UNOCI, owing in part to budgetary constraints in Liberia.
23. Legal proceedings against 18 Liberians charged with mercenarism for their
alleged involvement in cross-border attacks in 2011 and 2012 ended in a mistrial in
October, following allegations of jury tampering. Proceedings were again suspended
by the judge in December after the Liberian defendants disrupted the retrial
proceedings.

14-23864

5/22

S/2014/123

24. Inter-mission cooperation between UNMIL and UNOCI continued through
information-sharing, analysis and coordinated operations with national counterparts
and the United Nations country teams. The Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations led a programme to assess the links between food insecurity and
political instability. Under the leadership of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, $2.5 million has been approved under the United Nations
Trust Fund for Human Security for projects in border counties.

E.

Humanitarian situation
25. A total of 18,373 Ivorian refugees voluntarily repatriated to Côte d’Ivoire in
2013 with assistance from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), exceeding the UNHCR target of 16,000 and leaving a total of
52,786 Ivorian refugees in Liberia. The planned closure by the end of 2013 of the
Solo refugee camp in Grand Gedeh County, which hosts 6,000 Ivorian refugees, was
postponed until March owing to construction delays. UNHCR, with the support of
UNMIL and the United Nations country team, worked to find durable solutions for
Ivorian refugees in Liberia and hopes to resume the activities of the Tripartite
Commission, comprising the two Governments and UNHCR, to facilitate further
voluntary return.
26. The Government of Liberia and the United Nations, including the
humanitarian country team, developed and strengthened planning, advocacy and
resource mobilization strategies to address the needs of communities hosting Ivorian
refugees and residual humanitarian challenges, and mobilized $3 million from the
Central Emergency Response Fund.

F.

Human rights situation
27. Notwithstanding some progress, limitations persisted in gaining access to
justice and basic services, and efforts have been slow to create a protective
environment for civilians. In December, the Ministry of Justice launched a five-year
national human rights action plan to promote compliance with human rights
standards, incorporating a national strategy for implementing the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which had been validated in September. A
national strategy for fulfilling the human rights obligations of Liberia, including
treaty ratification, is being validated by the Ministry of Justice.
28. In November 2013, former Supreme Court Associate Justice Gladys Johnson
was nominated as Chair of the Independent National Commission on Human Rights,
pending Senate confirmation. The Commission continued to extend its outreach
nationwide through county visits and has undertaken a prison monitoring project in
cooperation with civil society partners, while also leading efforts to implement the
Palava Hut programme. However, the Commission still needs to develop internal
governance procedures so that it can perform its mandated role to engage on critical
processes, such as constitutional reform, and establish a nationwide mechanism for
handling public complaints.
29. Although the Government has continued to raise awareness on harmful
traditional practices, relevant United Nations partners are commencing a review of

6/22

14-23864

S/2014/123

current initiatives to support the Government in formulating more concrete
prevention and response measures.

G.

Economic situation
30. Real gross domestic product growth in 2013 was estimated at 8.1 per cent,
mainly due to strong mining activity, while construction and services also
accelerated. Average inflation was projected at close to 7.8 per cent at the end of
2013, up from 6.8 per cent in 2012. There were challenges to budget execution, with
core revenues coming in below target, while spending exceeded targets, owing in
part to the absorption of teacher and health worker salaries, previously funded by
donors. Capital spending fell, reflecting capacity constraints and delays in securing
external financing.
31. Trade and current-account deficits are projected to have widened in 2013 as
public investment scaled up. The Liberian dollar depreciated by 10 per cent in 2013,
reflecting in part a large net injection of local currency into the economy. Higher
intervention in the foreign exchange market by the Central Bank resulted in a
decline in reserves to about 2.7 months of imports.
32. High unemployment among young people and associated socioeconomic and
security risks continued to be a concern. Government efforts had minimal effect,
with the Government-funded Liberia Youth Empowerment Programme employing
only 3,219 young people since March 2013, falling short of its targeted 10,000 jobs.

III. Development of national security and justice capacities
A.

Security transition
33. Drawing on lessons from the first phase of the military drawdown of UNMIL,
joint planning with the Government for the second phase began in August 2013. The
second phase will include the withdrawal of UNMIL military from an additional 3
counties by June 2014, leaving 7 of the 15 counties of Liberia without a fixed
military presence. In addition, UNMIL handed over several important security
responsibilities, including the protection of banks and port installations in Monrovia
and the provision of cash escorts in some counties.
34. Collaboration with the Government has been maintained through the
UNMIL/Government joint transition working group. However, the Government
continued to face significant challenges in assuming greater security
responsibilities. Deployments of security personnel have not been significantly
increased, nor have the facilities handed over been sufficiently equipped. Although
the Government had committed to allocating $10 million to transition activities in
the 2013/14 national budget, this was reduced to $6 million. As this figure also
includes $1.75 million for regional justice and security hubs, only $4.25 million has
been earmarked specifically for the security transition. It has yet to be ascertained if
the earmarked funds have been disbursed.

14-23864

7/22

S/2014/123

B.

National security strategy and architecture
35. In September 2013, the Government, with the support of the United Nations
and the Swedish embassy, organized a security sector reform retreat to identify
priorities for an updated national security strategy. Recommendations included the
need to professionalize the sector by appointing senior officials from within the
ranks and institutionalizing increased transparency in tenure and promotion systems.
Legislative reform and the importance of strengthening oversight institutions were
also identified as priorities. However, the 2013/14 national budget included reduced
security sector spending compared with 2012/13, presenting challenges for the
further development of the sector, especially in the context of transition.
36. In September 2013, the President vetoed an amendment to the 2011 National
Security Reform and Intelligence Act that would have rescinded the abolition of two
security agencies, namely, the National Bureau of Investigation and the Ministry of
National Security. The Government has a plan for a nationwide rollout of county
security councils. Currently, such councils exist in seven counties, while district
security councils exist in only two, and not all are fully functional. Both types of
council are intended to serve as local coordination bodies providing early warning
information to the National Security Council.
37. In September 2013, the President appointed a chair to the Liberia National
Commission on Small Arms, which is undertaking a needs assessment in border
areas ahead of a weapons collection programme, while promoting awareness of the
Arms Trade Treaty. A draft firearms act was finalized and approved by the Minister
for Justice and is awaiting the President’s consideration. A basic gender training
manual for security sector institutions was also developed by UN-Women.

C.

National police
38. In September 2013, the Liberia National Police completed a baseline
assessment, conducted with UNMIL. It provided a comprehensive assessment of
police capacity, including integrity and effectiveness. It also provided a baseline
with benchmarks and indicators to track progress. The findings of the assessment
included progress in institutional, administrative and operational effectiveness, as
well as improved police capacity to undertake some operations with reduced
UNMIL support. However, underdeveloped and underperforming management and
administrative capacities, a continuing reliance on external political appointments
and limitations in mobility, communications and infrastructure were identified as
critical gaps, compounded by continuing challenges such as an outdated legal
framework, weak accountability and inconsistent budgetary support.
39. Recommendations included reviewing the organizational structure of the
police, improving conditions of service, decentralizing training, management and
administration, strengthening a public complaints mechanism and expediting a legal
framework to address senior appointments, promotions and rank structure. Feedback
from the Ministry of Justice and police leadership has been positive. A joint steering
committee, comprising the police, UNMIL and UNDP, was established to prepare a
new strategic plan and development framework for the police. A draft of a new legal
framework for the police was finalized in August 2013 and submitted to the

8/22

14-23864

S/2014/123

Ministry of Justice, but remains stalled owing to a lack of clarity about Ministry
leadership.
40. Efforts to increase the professionalism of the police continued, with 19 senior
officers completing leadership and management training at the Ghana Institute of
Management and Public Administration, supported by Irish Aid, part of the
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade of Ireland. The United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland also supported the middle management training of 17
police officers at the same institution. The United Nations Mine Action Service
trained nine instructors from the police training academy on recognition and
awareness of explosive remnants of war. In December 2013, the Ministry of Justice,
with support from the Ministry of Gender and Development and UN-Women,
launched a basic gender training manual as part of the curriculum of the police
academy. However, in-service training at the academy was suspended in September
2013 owing to budgetary constraints.
41. Current police strength is 4,573, just slightly over its strength of 4,566 at
1 August. The first special class of college-graduate police recruits graduated in
December 2013. The next class, totalling 291 recruits, will graduate in February,
increasing police strength to 4,864. However, basic training for new recruits at the
police training academy is severely behind schedule, owing to funding shortfalls and
capacity constraints, with a reported backlog of over 1,000 recruits awaiting
training. Efforts continued to be made to increase female representation, which
currently stands at 17.9 per cent, short of the 20 per cent target. These efforts are
being conducted jointly by the Ministry of Gender and Development, UN-Women
and UNMIL, and have included national outreach programmes to increase female
recruitment. The Police Support Unit target of 1,000 officers was reached in
November 2013 and its current strength is 1,005, including 119 women. The
recruitment process for a new class of 100 recruits has been initiated and the United
States of America has committed to providing funds for training, uniforms and
equipment for the trainees.
42. The police and other national law enforcement agencies, along with UNMIL
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, continued to support the
Transnational Crime Unit. A joint operation to dismantle money-laundering
networks was conducted with support from Ghana and the United Kingdom.
Proposed legislation with respect to illegal drugs is before the legislature, while an
initiative to combat drug trafficking, including surveillance and intelligence
operations, is being conducted at Roberts International Airport. In mid-January, the
Unit, in a joint operation with the Liberia Airport Authority and the Drug
Enforcement Agency, arrested a foreign national attempting to smuggle 795 grams
of heroin. However, greater collaboration among Liberian security agencies in
intelligence-gathering, investigations, operations and prosecution is still needed.

D.

Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization
43. In August 2013, the President dismissed the Commissioner, the Deputy
Commissioner for Operations (who was subsequently reinstated) and the Director of
Border Operations of the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization for implication
in a human trafficking case. The Deputy Commissioner for Naturalization, who was
appointed Commissioner of the Bureau in January 2014, has been working to restore

14-23864

9/22

S/2014/123

its integrity. An internal promotion mechanism was established and accountability
measures enhanced. While funding constraints continued to be a challenge, 13 new
projects were approved as part of the strategic plan of the Bureau aimed at
enhancing skills and operational capabilities.
44. In November 2013, 234 new recruits completed their training, including 98
women, of which 209 were deployed to strategic border checkpoints. Plans to
develop the former UNMIL camp in Foya, Lofa County, as a training centre also
progressed, with the Ministry of Justice committing funds for infrastructure
development and support provided by UNMIL and UNDP. A new training centre
would help to relieve demands on the police academy and complement efforts to
decentralize its services.
45. A national migration policy was developed in partnership with the
International Organization for Migration and the Bureau of Immigration and
Naturalization to enhance the national migration policy framework and migration
management capacities of the Government.

E.

Judicial, legal and corrections institutions
46. The judiciary has developed a framework for the restructuring of the Office of
the Court Administrator, established a Court Inspectorate Unit and broadened
oversight bodies of the judiciary and the legal profession to include civil society.
The Ministry of Justice also initiated the recruitment and training of 25 lawyers to
serve as prosecutors at magisterial courts in place of non-lawyer practitioners and
has, with the support of the World Bank, begun nationwide consultations on the
development of a national alternative dispute resolution policy that will provide a
framework for addressing some civil disputes and minor criminal matters.
47. Efforts to improve justice and security sector service delivery continued
through the justice and security hubs initiative. Construction has been completed of
the court at the first hub, in Gbarnga, Bong County, although the judiciary has not
yet held its inauguration. Personnel are expected to be deployed in February at the
second and third hubs, to be located in the south-east, including prosecutors, public
defenders, human rights monitors and sexual- and gender-based violence personnel.
The Peacebuilding Fund continued to support the implementation of the hubs, and
the Government is also contributing. A workshop was held on 4 and 5 February
2014 to reflect on lessons learned from the operationalization of the first hub. Final
outcomes will guide the continued development of future hubs once funding has
been mobilized.
48. As mentioned in paragraph 14 above, high rates of rape and other forms of
sexual violence continue, with most reported cases involving victims under the age
of 18. While the Government/United Nations joint programme on sexual- and
gender-based violence is increasing its focus on prevention, efforts continue to
improve response to sexual offences, including the launch in August 2013 of a pilot
project to enhance forensics capacity. The project, a joint initiative by the Ministries
of Health and Justice, included the training of police officers, nurses and laboratory
technicians, and the creation of a database to track investigations. The Ministry of
Gender and Development, with United Nations support, is training traditional
leaders on preventing gender-based violence.

10/22

14-23864

S/2014/123

49. Pre-trial detention dropped to 74 per cent from an average of 80 per cent.
Through the magisterial sitting programme, 908 detainees were released from
Monrovia Central Prison, up from 515 in the previous reporting period. UNMIL is
also supporting the judiciary and the Ministry of Justice to prioritize implementation
of the jury law and legislation to expand the jurisdiction of magistrate’s courts,
which would help to reduce the backlog of cases.
50. Insecurity at corrections facilities continued, with 10 prison escapes during the
reporting period and 7 disturbances by prisoners protesting prolonged pretrial
detention and poor food quality. Searches of facilities have increased and postincident training has been introduced. Security was affected by delays in the
payment of corrections officers’ salaries and the delivery of food supplements.
UNMIL continued to provide security for the two largest prisons, in Monrovia and
Zwedru.
51. The Bureau of Corrections and Rehabilitation comprised 259 corrections
officers, including 53 women. While it had completed the recruitment of 70 new
corrections officers, including 18 women, their training was delayed owing to
budgetary constraints. Recruitment and training are critical for the Bureau as it
prepares for the transition of UNMIL, including the development of sufficient
ownership and capacity to assume security and management responsibilities.
52. Implementation of the 10-year national health policy, which incorporates
prison health services, has improved prisoner health care. Visits by county health
teams to corrections facilities continue and the Ministry of Health has deployed
nurses to manage prison clinics.

F.

Armed forces
53. On 4 February, the President announced the nomination of a Liberian national
to become Chief of Staff of the armed forces of Liberia. If confirmed by the Senate,
the nominee will take over from the incumbent from Nigeria, placing the armed
forces under full Liberian command. While the armed forces are now fully
operational, the institution still faces significant financial, operational and logistical
challenges. It does not control its own budget, as the Ministry of Defence is required
to request specific funding for its training, equipment and operations. A recent
recruitment campaign yielded 140 vetted recruits, who began training in December
2013. The armed forces comprised 1,900 soldiers as at 5 February, with plans to
reach 2,200 by 2015. The draft national defence strategy and code of military
discipline have, however, yet to be signed by the Minister for Defence.
54. In November 2013, the United Nations Mine Action Service, in coordination
with the Ministry of Defence, began a programme to train army engineers and
establish centralized explosive ordnance disposal response teams. By December
2013, the armed forces had 16 engineers trained to level 2 certification. UNMIL also
provided a course in intelligence analysis and reporting for army personnel, while
supporting training to develop heavy road construction capability within the
engineering company.
55. In January, Liberia expressed its intention to enhance its current contribution
of a platoon to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, by adding an additional company.

14-23864

11/22

S/2014/123

56. The coast guard, which is now considered operationally independent,
comprises 51 active personnel, with 20 to 30 additional recruits expected to become
operational within six months. It continues to patrol intercoastal waterways, having
increased its patrol range to 150 miles from port, up from 75 miles in 2012.

IV. Extension of State authority throughout the country
A.

State authority
57. Gradual progress continued in the consolidation of State authority throughout
the country. The absence of fully functional State institutions and limited
infrastructure and communications hampered service delivery in rural and border
regions, particularly during the rainy season. The Government committed to
improving transport and energy infrastructure. On 25 January, the President led a
ceremony to break ground for the Mount Coffee hydroelectric plant, a major source
of electricity until it was damaged during the conflict. It is expected to begin
supplying electricity in December 2015. The Government also reached an agreement
with the African Development Bank to finance a new paved road along the border
between Maryland and River Gee Counties.
58. Decentralization is one government strategy for extending State authority, as
indicated in paragraph 12, above. However, governance at the local level continued
to face challenges, including the absence of clear county development agendas,
weak coordination, high levels of absenteeism, continuous misapplication of and
disputes over county and social development funds, and weak logistical support. On
16 December, the Ministry of Internal Affairs imposed a temporary freeze on new
transfers and disbursements from county and social development funds, pending a
review to ensure alignment with county development agendas. While the freeze will
affect the 2013/14 budget, which devolves accounting powers to county councils,
the counties will continue to operate with funds already transferred from the
Ministry of Finance.

B.

Governance
59. Some measures were taken to improve transparency and accountability,
although follow-through on identified cases of possible corruption or
maladministration remained weak. In October 2013, the Liberia Anti-Corruption
Commission released its second report on the verification of assets of presidential
appointees. Of the 77 officials audited, 25 were found to have made truthful
declarations, 22 were judged uncooperative and 30 were found to have
misrepresented their assets or did not complete the exercise. However, as with the
first report, the sanctions recommended by the Commission against uncooperative
senior officials have not been addressed and the next steps are unclear. The
President appointed a new Chair for the Commission in November 2013. The
General Auditing Commission completed audits of county development funds in 10
counties, although the reports have yet to be completed.
60. From August to December 2013, the legislature held public hearings with five
State institutions on reports submitted in 2010 or earlier by the General Auditing
Commission, out of a total of 125 audits received. On 18 September, the President

12/22

14-23864

S/2014/123

nominated a new Auditor General to replace the former office holder, who was
dismissed for conflict of interest on 8 July. The nomination is still awaiting Senate
confirmation.

C.

Natural resources
61. Challenges persisted in the management of natural resources, including in
managing the relationship between concessionaires and affected communities. In
November 2013, the Liberia Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative endorsed
a post award process audit report on concessions, contracts, licences and other rights
awarded by the Government from mid-July 2009 to the end of December 2011. The
audit concluded that, out of 68 contracts, only 2 were fully compliant with
regulatory frameworks. The Initiative also fined and warned 26 extractive
companies and 2 government entities for non-compliance with the July 2010 to June
2011 fourth reconciliation report. In mid-January, the Initiative publicly named 28
companies for failing to submit information on payments to the Government in time
for its fifth reconciliation report, covering July 2011 to June 2012. The proposed
Government allocation to the Initiative under the 2013/14 national budget has been
reduced by 22 per cent from 2012/13. Meanwhile, the Peacebuilding Commission
has engaged with international financial institutions to strengthen support for natural
resource management.
62. By 2 February, the Forestry Development Authority had revoked 29 private
use permits that were non-compliant with applicable regulations, while a further 34
were under review. However, it is not clear that the revocation of those permits
ended non-compliant logging operations. The moratorium on new permits remains
in place, while other licensing modalities, such as timber sale contracts and forest
management contracts, operated normally. Underfunding and the dismissal of
technical staff for alleged misconduct continued to hamper the management by the
Authority of the sector. On 2 January, the President nominated new board members,
including civil society and business sector representatives. A special independent
investigative body had recommended the dissolution of the previous board for not
providing sufficient oversight. On 1 November 2013, the President signed a
voluntary partnership agreement regulating the export of timber to the European
Union.
63. From 4 November to 10 December, the House of Representatives conducted
nationwide public consultations on a draft petroleum act and draft act on the
National Oil Company of Liberia, which would provide a legal framework for
petroleum exploration, development and production. During legislative hearings and
consultations, recommendations were made with a view to ensuring transparency in
the awarding of oil block contracts, establishing mechanisms to prevent revenue
leakages and putting in place environmental safeguards.
64. A new mining act covering all types of mining was drafted following
consultations with civil society and the private sector and a review of new mining
policies. The draft act, which would cover all mining activities, is expected to
guarantee a fair share of benefits for affected communities, safeguard the
environment and community livelihoods and provide a conducive investment
environment. It could also help to mitigate clashes connected to illegal mining, as
occurred in January in Grand Kru County.

14-23864

13/22

S/2014/123

65. In 2013, the Government reported exports of nearly 50,000 carats of rough
diamonds, valued at $17.23 million and yielding about $500,000 in royalties.
Liberia’s compliance with the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme remained a
challenge, owing to technical and budgetary constraints, and there remained a need
for a comprehensive survey and database of artisanal mining locations to improve
oversight and regulation.

V. Cross-cutting issues
A.

Integration of the United Nations system
66. While “Delivering as one”, the United Nations undertook the first year of
“One programme” implementation that will continue until 2017. The programme is
aligned with the Government agenda for transformation and has four pillars: peace,
security and rule of law; sustainable economic transformation; human development;
and inclusive governance and public institutions. UNMIL and the United Nations
country team implemented integrated annual workplans for the four programme
pillars to strengthen joint programming and delivery of “One programme” results,
while UN-Women is leading the development of a “One gender framework” for
gender equality and women’s empowerment.

B.

Public information
67. UNMIL provided support to the Constitution Review Committee, including
through UNMIL radio programmes and mass production of the text of the current
Constitution. In January 2014, the Ministry of Justice and UNMIL launched a joint
campaign to address mob violence, which will be rolled out in all counties
throughout 2014. UNMIL also continued to broadcast programmes in French on
security, development and peace initiatives for the benefit of Ivorian refugees in
Liberia.

C.

Gender
68. National focus on strengthening the protection of the rights of women and girls
continued to expand in the face of the continually high incidence of rape. The
Government conducted validation exercises to review draft domestic violence
legislation and prepared a draft periodic report on the implementation of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. In
December 2013, the President launched the “16 Days of Activism Against Gender
Violence” campaign, for which UNMIL supported public information efforts.

D.

HIV/AIDS
69. UNMIL provided advanced training of trainers for 20 officers, including
8 women, from various Liberian security agencies, who had previously been trained
to conduct HIV sensitization, in line with Security Council resolution 1983 (2011).
It also provided HIV/AIDS awareness training to 3,182 peacekeepers, while
4,511 peacekeepers were tested voluntarily.

14/22

14-23864

S/2014/123

E.

Conduct and discipline
70. Outreach was conducted to community and religious leaders through
community radio stations to engage young people in discussions on the United
Nations policy of zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse and to raise
awareness about reporting misconduct. Between 1 August 2013 and 2 February
2014, four allegations of serious misconduct were reported, including three
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse.

F.

Security and safety of United Nations personnel
71. United Nations personnel continued to face a number of threats, including mob
violence, criminal activity, traffic accidents and infectious disease. A serious
incident took place on 27 December, when a group of national staff forcibly took
over the entrance to the UNMIL logistics base and staged a demonstration. The
police, together with UNMIL formed police unit personnel, intervened to restore
order. An investigation is ongoing.
72. During the reporting period, one international staff member was the victim of
an assault causing serious injury, while an additional 30 were victims of
non-weapons-related crimes, including burglary and assault. There were three
incidents of arrest and detention of United Nations national staff recorded. Three
national staff members and three military personnel died as a result of illness during
the period under review.

VI. Deployment of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
A.

Military component
73. As at 2 February, UNMIL military strength stood at 5,869 personnel, including
203 women, against an authorized strength of 5,915. The military component
includes a force headquarters in Monrovia, four infantry battalions deployed in two
sectors, a battalion-sized quick reaction force based in Monrovia, with two forward
operating bases, and enablers.
74. Pursuant to resolution 2116 (2013), the UNMIL force began in February to
execute the second phase of a three-phase drawdown, which will include
repatriating a battalion (750 troops) and the two sector headquarters of the force
(119 personnel). In November 2013, the military aviation unit repatriated
20 personnel and will repatriate two MI-8 helicopters in February. By June 2014, the
UNMIL force will no longer have a fixed presence in Bomi, Gbarpolu or Grand
Cape Mount Counties, in addition to the four counties vacated in the first phase.
Following completion of the second phase in July 2014, the UNMIL force will
comprise two battalions deployed along the border with Côte d’Ivoire and Guinea,
one battalion in Monrovia, a quick reaction force, with forward deployed
companies, and enablers.
75. UNOCI and UNMIL military components continued their mutual support
through inter-mission cooperation arrangements. As indicated in previous reports on
UNOCI, planning continued in order to develop options for the establishment,

14-23864

15/22

S/2014/123

within its authorized military strength, of a quick reaction force configured and
equipped to respond to incidents in Côte d’Ivoire, while also able to provide
reinforcement in the event of a serious deterioration of security in Liberia as
UNMIL continues to draw down.

B.

Police component
76. As at 2 February, UNMIL police strength stood at 1,612 personnel, including
209 women, out of an authorized strength of 1,795 personnel, comprising 472 police
advisers, 26 immigration advisers, 1,265 personnel in 10 formed police units and
32 corrections officers. Two of the three additional formed police units authorized
by the Security Council in its resolution 2066 (2012) have been deployed, including
one that arrived in October 2013, with the final unit scheduled to deploy in May
2014. Three police units are deployed in Monrovia, and one each deployed in the
cities of Buchanan, Gbarnga, Tubmanburg, Voinjama and Zwedru, though the
Buchanan unit was temporarily deployed to the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan in January.

C.

Civilian component
77. As at 5 February, 1,518 civilian personnel, including United Nations
Volunteers, were serving in the Mission, out of a budgeted total of 1,677. In total,
24.37 per cent of the civilian personnel were women, including 24.84 per cent of the
467 substantive staff and 24.17 per cent of the 1,051 administrative staff.

VII. Observations
78. In August 2013, Liberia celebrated the tenth anniversary of the signing of the
2003 Comprehensive Peace Agreement, a reminder of steady progress towards
consolidating peace, security and democratic governance. Addressing the General
Assembly in September, the President underlined that, in the past 10 years, Liberia
had restored its pride and allowed itself to rejoin the global community as a
“respectable and responsible partner”. Its progress in consolidating democratic
governance, economic recovery and institutional reform has been remarkable.
However, as the President observed in remarks commemorating a decade of peace,
its journey has not been easy and is not over. Further consolidation will require
focused Liberian commitment and resources, as well as continued international
engagement.
79. The continued success of the security transition will require ever stronger
political and financial commitment, in particular to strengthening and
professionalizing the police. The Ministry of Justice and police leadership are
charting a way towards renewed police strategic planning and the design of
development frameworks, to be drawn from the conclusions of the police baseline
assessment. Greater efforts will be needed to reach and sustain the stronger
operational and administrative capacities of other security agencies. Justice and
corrections institutions also require more attention, and efforts to decentralize
services need to be expedited, including through the hubs.

16/22

14-23864

S/2014/123

80. I am encouraged by the continued joint planning between UNMIL and the
Government of Liberia for the second phase of the mission’s military drawdown,
which has proceeded in a constructive manner. The four counties that no longer have
a permanent UNMIL military presence have remained peaceful, in some cases for
over a year, which is a positive indication. However, as UNMIL continues its
reconfiguration and the military vacates an additional three counties by May 2014, it
will be important that the Government clarify the budget allocations for transition
activities and that funds are disbursed promptly to enable the required national
security scale-up.
81. Important issues are at stake in the process of constitutional review, including
the extent of executive power, the management of natural resources and community
participation in policymaking. The closer engagement initiated by the legislature
and the Constitution Review Committee is particularly important, given the need for
legislative approval of proposed amendments before they go to referendum. In that
regard, I am encouraged that the Committee has engaged a wide spectrum of
society, including the media, traditional leaders and civil society organizations. The
Committee is facing ambitious timelines for public consultations and its success will
require continued Government commitment to the process, as well as financial
support from national and international partners. The United Nations will continue
to support this important process.
82. I remain concerned at the limited progress in taking forward national
reconciliation and major political reform processes. There are serious questions
about whether the modest momentum so far could have been achieved without the
substantial engagement of the international community, which has implications for
national ownership and sustainability.
83. It has been almost five years since the Truth and Reconciliation Commission
released its final report, containing important recommendations reflecting the shared
aspirations of the Liberian people. A number of those recommendations have been
incorporated into the National Reconciliation Road Map, including the Palava Hut
programme. I welcome efforts to establish modalities for the programme, but stress
the importance of strengthening the Independent National Commission on Human
Rights, which is charged with its implementation. Building social cohesion will also
require progress in developing a shared history and agreeing on national symbols
that honour all Liberians. I welcome Government initiatives in this regard. It is
important to continue to track progress in the reconciliation process. It is therefore
regrettable that three years have passed since the last progress report was submitted
to the legislature on implementation of the recommendations of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission.
84. Senatorial elections scheduled for October are already generating considerable
interest from political stakeholders and the public. I welcome the efforts being made
by the National Elections Commission to prepare for those elections in a manner
that will help to make them inclusive, fair, transparent and credible, and would urge
the Government to make funds available for electoral processes in a timely manner.
85. The forthcoming elections will be an important exercise in publicly holding
elected officials accountable and strengthening an inclusive democratic process. In
connection with maintaining an environment in which all issues can be openly
debated, many sectors of the public have raised concerns that some Liberian laws
are outdated remnants of past oppressive regimes. This includes the application of

14-23864

17/22

S/2014/123

sedition laws against anti-government groups and laws of criminal and civil libel
that allow seemingly excessive damage amounts to be awarded. Reforming laws that
allow imprisonment for debt would also be consistent with the commitments of the
Government under the Table Mountain Declaration of July 2012. I welcome the
President’s statement in her speech of 27 January recalling the signing by the
Government of the Declaration and recognizing its call to decriminalize freedom of
expression.
86. Equitable distribution of benefits from the rich natural resources of Liberia
remains a significant element in consolidating peace and social cohesion. I am
pleased that steps have been taken to improve natural resources management,
including the revocation of some private use permits and the voluntary partnership
agreement on timber exports to the European Union. The coming petroleum and
mining legislation offers further opportunities to strengthen the management,
transparency and responsible exploitation of resources.
87. In the coming months, the legislature expects to receive draft laws on land
reform and decentralization. I welcome reforms that will give citizens more input
into decisions affecting their daily lives, and that can contribute to addressing
long-standing grievances and underlying causes of conflict.
88. More can be done to improve governance, accountability and oversight,
particularly in the follow-up to allegations of corruption. I welcome the report of the
Liberia Anti-Corruption Commission on the verification of assets of presidential
appointees, which has enhanced transparency, though there has been limited
accountability in the absence of sanctions for non-compliance.
89. Notwithstanding some progress, I remain concerned about the human rights
situation in Liberia, particularly with respect to sexual- and gender-based violence,
especially against children. This is further compounded by a weak national human
rights protection system. I welcome the anti-rape campaign launched by the
President and underscore the importance of efforts to address impunity and
strengthen the rule of law.
90. The porous borders of Liberia put the country at serious risk from
transnational organized crime. The Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization,
which is undergoing an important institutional reform process, has a critical role to
play in mitigating that threat, as does the Transnational Crime Unit and the Drug
Enforcement Agency. The United Nations will continue to work closely with its
national partners in building capacity to address cross-border threats.
91. I remain deeply troubled by delays in investigating the killing in June 2012 of
seven United Nations peacekeepers across the border in Côte d’Ivoire, and wish to
reiterate the responsibility of the Governments of Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire to
swiftly bring the perpetrators to justice in accordance with due process and
international human rights standards.
92. I welcome improvements over the past year along the border with Côte
d’Ivoire, with the active cooperation of the Governments of Côte d’Ivoire and
Liberia, including within the framework of the Mano River Union and ECOWAS,
and with the support of UNMIL and UNOCI and the two United Nations country
teams. The voluntary return of over 18,000 Ivorians to Côte d’Ivoire is also a
welcome development. I remain concerned, however, about persistent and latent
threats to stability on both sides of the border. These issues should be addressed

18/22

14-23864

S/2014/123

holistically so that they do not trigger deterioration of the security situation. I
encourage the Government to continue its cooperation and welcome the elaboration
of the Mano River Union cross-border security strategy.
93. Every precaution must be taken to prevent any reversal of the hard-won gains
made by peace operations in West Africa over the past decade. Careful and prudent
planning is required to keep our missions adequately equipped to fulfil their
mandated tasks. In my next report, I intend to provide recommendations on the
appropriateness of proceeding to the final stage of the UNMIL military drawdown to
bring it to its residual military strength, which will remain until the withdrawal of
the Mission. Those recommendations will be based on the security situation and a
strategic review of the core political and security tasks of the Mission, to be
conducted in February.
94. In conclusion, I wish to thank my Special Representative for Liberia, Karin
Landgren, as well as all United Nations personnel, for their dedication towards
sustaining peace and stability in Liberia. I would also like to thank all troop- and
police-contributing countries, the African Union, ECOWAS, the Mano River Union,
other regional and subregional organizations, multilateral and bilateral development
partners, the Peacebuilding Commission, United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, and Liberian and international civil society organizations for their
commitment and contributions to peace and development in Liberia.

14-23864

19/22

S/2014/123

Annex I
United Nations Mission in Liberia: military and police
strength as at 31 January 2014
Military component

20/22

Formed
police units

Military
observers

Staff
officers

Argentina

0

0

0

0

7

Bangladesh

13

7

509

529

15

Benin

2

1

0

3

0

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

2

1

0

3

0

Bosnia and Herzegovina

0

0

0

0

9

Brazil

2

2

0

4

0

Country

Troops

Total

Bulgaria

2

0

0

2

China

2

6

558

566

Police

0
140

18

Croatia

0

2

0

2

0

Czech Republic

0

0

0

0

0

Denmark

3

2

0

5

0

Ecuador

2

1

0

3

0

Egypt

7

0

0

7

5

El Salvador

2

0

0

2

3

Ethiopia

9

4

0

13

0

Fiji

0

0

0

0

31

Finland

1

3

0

4

0

France

0

1

0

1

0

Gambia

2

0

0

2

19

Germany

0

0

0

0

5

Ghana

9

7

700

716

27

India

0

0

0

0

Indonesia

1

0

0

1

0

Jamaica

0

0

0

0

0

Jordan

4

5

115

124

Kenya

0

2

0

2

25

Kyrgyzstan

2

0

0

2

3

242

240

6

9

Lithuania

0

0

0

0

1

Malaysia

6

0

0

6

0

Mali

0

0

0

0

0

Mongolia

0

0

0

0

0

Montenegro

2

0

0

2

0

Namibia

1

3

0

4

Nepal

2

3

15

20

4
260*

16

14-23864

S/2014/123

Military component

Country

Military
observers

Staff
officers

Troops

Total

Niger

2

0

0

2

Nigeria

14

9

1 460

1 482

Formed
police units

Police

120

16

0

Norway

0

0

0

0

12

Pakistan

9

9

1 980

1 998

10

Paraguay

2

1

0

3

0

Peru

2

2

0

4

0

Philippines

1

1

115

118

33

Poland

1

0

0

1

3

Republic of Korea

1

1

0

2

0

Republic of Moldova

2

0

0

2

0

Romania

2

0

0

2

0

Russian Federation

3

0

0

3

11

Rwanda

0

0

0

0

10

Samoa

0

0

0

0

0

Senegal

0

2

0

3

0

Serbia

4

0

0

4

6

Sri Lanka

0

0

0

0

15

Sweden

0

0

0

0

16

Switzerland

0

0

0

0

3

Thailand

0

0

0

0

2

Togo

2

1

0

3

0

Turkey

0

0

0

0

20

Uganda

0

0

0

0

14

Ukraine

2

2

236

240

14

United States of America

4

5

0

9

13

Uruguay

0

0

0

0

5

Yemen

0

1

0

1

7

Zambia

3

0

0

3

16

Zimbabwe

2

0

0

2

31

Total

132

83

5 688

5 876

1 002*

458

* On 31 January 2014, a Nepalese formed police unit comprising 120 police personnel was
temporarily redeployed to South Sudan to reinforce the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan.

14-23864

21/22

United Nations Mission in Liberia: deployment as at February 2014

S/2014/123

22/22

Annex II

14-23864
