S/2011/639

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 October 2011
Original: English

Letter dated 14 October 2011 from the President of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I am pleased to provide my report as President of the Governing Council on
the results of the Governing Council’s seventy-second session, which was held at
Geneva from 11 to 13 October 2011. The full text of the conclusions adopted by the
Governing Council is attached.* I would however like to highlight a few of the
issues discussed during the session.
At the opening plenary meeting, South Africa was elected as one of the two
Vice-Presidents of the Council. It is recalled that the other Vice-President is Brazil.
The delegations of the Governments of Kuwait and Iraq addressed the Council.
copies of their statements are being sent by mail with the original of this letter. The
Council also considered a report of the Executive Head on the activities of the
Commission since the last session.
On the level of Iraq’s contribution to the Compensation Fund, the Council
noted that almost $2 billion was paid to Kuwait in the last two payments and that
the next payment, scheduled for 27 October 2011, will be in excess of $1 billion.
The Council also noted that, assuming that income to the Fund continues at its
current level, it would take approximately 4.5 years to pay the outstanding balance
in full. With regard to the consultations between Iraq and Kuwait under the auspices
of the Compensation Commission on the unpaid balance of approximately
$19 billion that remains owing to Kuwait, the Council took note of the briefing and
the efforts of the Executive Head of the Compensation Commission, and also took
note of the statements made by the delegations of the Governments of Iraq and
Kuwait at the opening plenary meeting regarding this issue. The Council encouraged
the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait to meet under Compensation Commission
auspices as soon as possible in order to come to a financial resolution acceptable to
both Iraq and Kuwait, and requested that the Executive Head continue his efforts.
On the issue of the arrangements for ensuring that payments are made to the
Compensation Fund, the Council noted that, at a meeting with the Iraq Committee
of Financial Experts early in July 2011, the Committee repeated earlier assurances
to the Executive Head that the mechanism for the payment of 5 per cent of revenues
from the sale of Iraqi petroleum and petroleum products into the Compensation
Fund would remain in place. In this regard, the Council noted with satisfaction that,
* Not included in the present document.

11-54844 (E) 181011

*1154844*

S/2011/639

since the transfer to the Committee, there has been no change in the mechanism and
payments continue to be transferred through the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
With respect to the issue of in kind transactions, the Council noted that the
secretariat had advised the Committee of Financial Experts that they are not
contrary to applicable Security Council resolutions provided that a proper
accounting mechanism is in place to ensure that 5 per cent of the value of such
transactions is recorded and paid into the Compensation Fund. In this regard, the
Council requested that the Executive Head write to the Committee reiterating the
request for a letter setting out the details of the accounting mechanism that the
Committee had agreed to provide and highlighting the urgent need for this
mechanism to be in place, reaffirming that the value of 5 per cent of any such
transactions must be paid to the Fund in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1956 (2010). The Executive Head was also requested to continue to
regularly engage with the Committee regarding all payment and accounting
mechanisms. Iraq’s continued commitment to comply with its payment obligations
under relevant Security Council resolutions was affirmed in the statement made by
the delegation of Iraq at the opening plenary meeting.
With respect to the Follow-up Programme for Environmental Awards, the
Council considered the status of implementation of Governing Council decisions
258 (2005) and 269 (2011). On decision 269, the Council noted the progress made
by the participating Governments of Jordan, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia towards
establishing the required systems and controls. The Council reiterated the continued
target date of 2012 and the importance of meeting the criteria under decision 269,
and recalled paragraph 7 of decision 269, wherein the Council decided that, at its
seventy-fourth session in November 2012, the Council shall assess the adequacy of
the systems and controls established to decide whether, in respect of each
participating Government, the mandate of the Programme is fulfilled and the
Programme can be closed.
On decision 258, the Council took note of briefings by the secretariat on Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Jordan, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, and of information notes
from the secretariat and the biannual reports of the national focal points and
independent reviewers of Jordan, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia. The Council noted
phasing plans, authorized the release of funds from their respective special accounts
as appropriate, and noted technical modifications in the case of Kuwait.
The Council adopted a report of the Committee on Administrative Matters
regarding the interim expenditure report for the biennium 2010-2011 and approving
the budget for 2012. With the adoption of decision 269 (2011) under which the
Governing Council seeks to be in a position to conclude the Follow-up Programme
by the end of 2012, the budget has been prepared on an annual basis rather than on a
biennial basis. The secretariat of the Compensation Commission was directed to
prepare the budget for 2013 when the needs of the Programme are better known and
to present it to the Committee on Administrative Matters for consideration.

2

11-54844

S/2011/639

With the recent payment made in July 2011, there are now eight remaining
successful compensation awards (in the corporate and government claim categories),
all from Kuwait. The overall amount of compensation made available to date by the
Commission is approximately US$ 33.3 billion, and a total outstanding balance of
$19 billion remains to be paid. As indicated above, the next payment is scheduled to
be made on 27 October 2011.
The next Council session will be held from 1 to 3 May 2012.
(Signed) Reinhard Schweppe
President of the Governing Council

11-54844

3
