United Nations

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
SEVENTEENTH SESSION

1146th

(9)

Official Records

PLENARY MEETING
Monday, 8 October 1962,
at3 p.m.

NEW YORK
CONTENTS

Nations on behalf of France. On 30 September 1959
[814th meeting], I described the manner in which my.
Government intended to ensure the development and
the future of the African territories for which in various ways it was still responsible. The countries concerned were, of course, on the one hand, those African
and Malagasy countries situated south of the Sahara
whose transformation into national states had just been
organized and recognized by France, and, on the other
hand, Algeria.

Page

Agenda item 20:
Admission of new Members to the
United Nations (0 on tin ued). . . . . . . . .

381

President: Mr. Muhammad ZAFRULLA KHAN
(Paki stan).

7. One year later, on 20 September 1960 [864th
meeting], I came to this rostrum to express our joy
and pride when, on a proposal by France and its
friend Tunisia, the Malagasy RepUblic and ten African
States-Cameroon, Togo, Ivory Coast, Dahomey, Upper
Volta. Niger, Chad, Gabon, the Central African Republic and the Republic of the Congo (Brazzaville)were admitted to membership of the United Nations,
following Guinea, which had been welcomed some time
earlier I and preceding Senegal and Mali and, lastly,
Mauritania.

AGENDA ITEM 20
Adm ission of new Members to the United Nations (continued)*
1. The PRESIDENT: The General Assembly has before it document A/L.394 and Add. 1 containing a draft
resolution sponsored by thirty-five Member States on
the admission of the Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria to membership ofthe United Nations,
and document A/5251. which is a letter from the President of the Security Council on the matter.

8. Today, 8 October 1962, the admission of the Republic of Algeria to our Organization has been unanimously acclaimed by your delegations. Once again
I address this Assembly to voice our satisfaction and
to express my good wishes to the new partner that will
henceforth sit with us together with the two other
States of the Maghreb, the Kingdom of Morocco and
the Republic of Tunisia, with which we also have so
many ties.
9. Algeria is the twentieth of the States in Asia and
Africa which, after having lived under French sovereignty, protectorate or trusteeship, have achieved
independence and been admitted to the United Nations.
The event which we are celebrating is therefore one
of intrinsic importance. It is the more important for us
Frenchmen because it marks the final stage ofthe task
of emancipation carried out by our country since the
end of the Second World War and initiated with the
Brazzaville Conference of 1944, held at a time when
the world was still a prey to confusion and anxiety.
France has now completed its task. It believes that in
doing so it has provided the countries which it has led
to independence, that is to say in particular to ,fUll
responsibility in international life, with all the aSSIstance that was in its power to give them in the fields
of economy, of cultural and social development and of
political and humanitarian t~aining. It has, thus m~de
a contribution to the internatlOnal commumty ofwhlCh
it is entitled to be proud. Today, its work done, it can
merely express the wish that a twenty-first State
which ought also to be included among the Members of
the United Nations-I refer to Viet-Nam-may join us
as soon as the present tragic divisions in the world
have ceased to impede the realization of its national
unity.
10. During this period of seventeen years which is
ending today, France's actions have been consistently

2. In the absence of any request for a vote. I shall
consider that the General Assembly decides byacclamation to admit the Democratic and Popular Republic
of Algeria to membership of the United Nations.
The draft resolution was adopted by acclamation.

3. The PRESIDENT: I now declare the Democratic
and Popular Republic of Algeria admitted to membership of the United Nations.
The delegation of the Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria was escorted to its place in the
General Assembly hall.

4. The PRESIDENT: It is with great joy and deep
satisfaction that I welcome the Democratic and Popular
Republic of Algeria to membership of the United
Nations. If I were to give expression to a fraction of
what we all feel on this occasion of deep emotion, of
joy, of' satisfaction, I would take up an undue portion
of the Assembly's time and yet not have finished. I
shall therefore content myself with these few words,
more especiaUy as I am sure that some of you are
yourselves going to give expression to that very feeling
in your own words.
5. Before calling upon the first speaker, I would wish
to say, as I have said concerning myself, that if we let
our feelings be expressed in detail we shall be occupied
here for several sittings. I trust, therefore, that
speakers will confine themselves to saying, whatever
they have in mind as briefly as they can.

6. M. COUVE DE MURVILLE (France) (translated
from French): This is the third time since 1959, that
is to say within three years, that Ihave had the honour
of addressing the General Assembly of the United
• Resumed from the 1123rd meeting.

381

A/PV.1l46

382

General Assembly - .Seventeenth Session - Plenary Meetings

based on a cardinal principle which is embodied in
Article 1 of the United Nations Charter, the right of
peoples to self-determination. As far as Algeria is
concerned, this principle was solemnly proclaimed
on 16 September 1959 by General de Gaulle, President
of the French Republic, as constituting the basis for
any possible settlement of the problem. I said at the
time from this rostrum:
"The rt:Jgime it [Algeria] is to have can only be
the result of the freely expressed wishes of the
Algerians themselves. Fighting, violence and terror
are not the way to find a solution. Let them be
brought to an end and let the men and women of
Algeria, all of them, without distinction of race,
religion or political conviction, be allowed to
decide for themselves in peace and liberty." [814th
meeting, para. 111.]
11. Unfortunately so much blood has been shed, so
much emotion aroused and above all so much distrust entertained that the solemn appeal of the Head
of the French State was not immediately heededor its
implied consequences carried to their logical conclusion. Two and a half years, from 16 September
1959 to 18 March 1962, were to elapse before, as the
result of lengthy negotiations, the conclusion of the
Evian Agreements was to lead to a cease-fire and to
lay down the main lines of the political rtlgime which
the erstwhile adversaries proposed jointly to submit,
for ratification, to the free decision of the Algerian
people•.!!
12. Succeeding events followed swiftly. On 8 April,
the French people, in a solemn referendum, endorsed
the agreements that had been reached and empowered
their Government to take the necessary steps for
putting them into effect. After that, on ·1 July, the
Algerian people in their turn gave their almost una.nimous ratification. They accepted the future that
was proposed to them, a future of independence in
friendly co-operation with France. On the same day,
France recognized the new State. The Republic of
Algeria was born and was immediately recognized
by the entire community of nations, this recognition
having been merely confirmed by today's vote.
13. This was the happy outcome of a long tragedy
and the solution of a problem whose exceptional difficulty had for years been admitted by all men of good
faith.
14. France was far from regarding Algeria as a colony
in the sense in which that word is generally used. Because of a long history experienced in common-132
years of joint existence-because of the geographical
situation and because of an extraordinary interpenetration of peoples and economies, this came to be
a question which, as I said here in 1959, was unique
in the world. One million Europeans, very many of
them French, had settled in successive waves on
Algerian territory. They had introduced modern
agriculture and developed craft, commercial and industrial enterprises which formed the basis of the
countryl S economic activity. Above all, as the generations passed they had founded families in Algeria
and had taken root there. They had become Algerians
by the soil and by blood, even while remaining deeply
attached to France and hence clinging desperately to
the idea that their two countries could still be only
one. The Moslem Algerians, during their struggle for

JJ Agreements concluded at Evian on 18 March 1962 between the
representatives of France and those of the Front de liberation nationale.

independence,. never accepted that, and in fact could
not accept it. Another way had therefore to be found,
and that was done by the Evian Agreements.
15. They provided a series of guarantees for the
European minority community, which alone could
enable it to remain in the country and to co-operate
with the Moslem community. The democratic principle
is that the majority should rule. It also requires that
a minority should not be oppressed and, in this particular case, that it should be able to preserve its language,
its culture and its religion. That is what was promised
by the General Declaration of Evian, particularly in the
following proclamation:
~IThe Algerian State will subscribe unreservedly to
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and will
base its institutions on democratic principles and on
equality of political rights between all citizens without discrimination of race, origin or religion. It will,
in particular, apply guarantees recognized for
citizens of French civil status. ny

16. The Evian Agreements thus brought a reasonable
settlement to a problem which, humanly speaking, was
essential for us and which in fact was also of crucial
importance for the future of Algeria, since the inception of the new State and of its administration and
economy was at stake.
17. The Agreements contained a number of other
provisions, also essential since they laid the foundations for co-operation between France and Algeria and
thus constituted a charter of the future relations between the two countries.
18. Following the statement made by General de
Gaulle on 16 September 1959, which proclaimed the
right of the Algerians to self-determination, or in
other words recognized in advance their achievement
of independence, two possible courses of action were
proposed. We referred to the first as secessionindependence accompanied by the breaking of all ties
with our country. The other was co-operation, that is
to say, independence accompanied by respect for our
economic, cultural and human bonds and the active
co-operation of France in the development of the new
Algeria. We for our part had always declared that if
Algeria wished to choose the second way, that of cooperation, we should welcome its decision with
pleasure and would be ready to shoulder the burden of
the resulting financial and technical assistance, however heavy that burden might be. The Evian Agreements embodied that undertaking and laid down the
broad principles of such co-operation, which were subsequently submitted for the approval of the Algerian
people.
19. The Algerians when choosing independence opted
by an overwhelming majority for the way thus open to
them, that of friendship and development. Hencetoday
the representative of France can say that Algeria,
which you have just decided to admit to the United
Nations, takes its place here with the agreement
and full support of my country, which, as I have said,
intends to maintain close and confident relations
with Algeria in the future for the greater advantage
of both nations.
20. UndOUbtedly the first steps of the new State will
not be easy. Such first steps never are. You here know
that better than anyone, for over half the States Mem-

Y See Journal officlel de la Rllpublique fran<;aise of 20 March 1962.

~~-~~-----~-----------------------------------1146th meeting - 8 October 1962
bers of the United Nations have come to independence
and international sovereignty since the signing of the
Charter at San Francisco. Algeria's task in particular
will undoubtedly be more arduous than has been that of
any other country because it must at the same time
repair the consequences of seven years of violence,
restore confidence between the two communities, reinvigorate an economy which has been paralysed by
what has happened, and construct a modern State able
to cope with the strenuous conditions of the presentday world.
21. France has bequeathed to Algeria an economic
and administrative infrastructure comparable to those
of the most highly developed countries. The new
Algeria will benefit from the assistance of French
teachers and technicians and from economic and
financial aid as arranged between the two Governments. Clearly, however, Algeria itself, its people and
the Government they have just chosen to lead them,
must shoulder the final responsibility and hence furnish the main effort. We have no doubt that the people
and the Government will valiantly undertake the great
task before them. To succeed they will need all their
courage, their energy and their perseverance. They
will need not only the assistance of France, which has
already been pledged, but the friendship and support
of all free countries, which will undoubtedly be forthcoming. Hence we look forward with confidence to the
futux:e of independent Algeria, which has today made
its appearance on the international scene. The tragedy
in which France and Algeria have been involved for
seven years has now ended for all time. The memory
of the dark days will fade away if we turn our eyes
towards the future and together contemplate the great
task of co-operation which lies before our two countries. May our hopes not be frustrated through the
fault of men. The French Republic offers the Republic
of Algeria its whole-hearted good wishes for stability
and prosperity in independence, fraternity and freedom.
22. Mr. Mongi SLIM (Tunisia) (translated from
French): In February 1957, very shortly after Tunisia
became a Member of the United Nations, I had the
privilege, at the General Assembly's eleventh regular
session, of opening the "case" with regartl to Algeria.
I tried, with other delegations, to draw the attention of
our Organization to the extent of the drama which was
then unfolding in Algeria and to the importance, for
peace and for stability throughout the Maghreb, of
recommending a negotiated solution between the two
parties in accordance with law and justice. At the end
of the discussion, after the adoption of a compromise
resolution, I made a statement. I said, in the course
of it:

I
;

"I would also express the hope that the Algerian
people, haVing regained its freedom and being the
master of its fate, will soon rejoin the free world
in maintaining and defending the international peace
and security and the principles for which it has
fought so long. 11 [654th meeting, para. 93.]
23. You will therefore understand the emotion I experience, today, at seeing the fulfilment of the hope
which I expressed from this rostrum nearly seven
years ago. As soon as independence was proclaimed on
1 July 1962, following a freely organized plebiscite,
Algeria elected a National Constituent Assembly and
formed a regular Government, which lost no time in re'questing the admission of the Democratic and Popular
Republic of Algeria to the United Nations, undertaking,

383

in accordance with the Charter, to respect theobligations incumbent upon a Member State.
24. The Tunis ian delegation is happy to note today that
by a unanimous vote the General Assembly has now, at
its seventeenth session, decided to admit the RepUblic
of Algeria, a brother country linked to Tunisia by partiCUlarly close ties. I am therefore very happy to be able
to present, on my own personal behalf and on behalfof
the Tunisian Government and people, our fraternal
congratulations to the Head of the Government of the
Algerian Republic, His Excellency Admed Ben Bella,
who is present here, as well as to the valiant Algerian
people which, thanks to its tenacious faith and great
courage, has been able to unite its efforts and sacrifices in order to carry on its fight for freedom and to
recover its dignity and independence, so as to be able
to assume in full, from now onwards, its responsibilities as a Member of the United Nations.
25. On this occasion, I should like to offer my warm
congratulations to General de Gaulle, who has at last
triumphed over hesitations, warlike tendencies , and the
most outdated notions of supremacy and domination of
one people over another.
26. For the Tunisian Government and people, this is
a day of joy and satisfaction-the day when the seal has
been seton the freedom and independence ofthe brother
Algerian people and we have thus been enabled to catch
a clearer glimpse of the outlines of the great Arab
Maghreb which previously lay in the realm of dreams.
I am happy to quote, in this connexion, the concluding
lines of a telegram which the President of the Republic
of Tunisia, Mr. Bourguiba, sent to President Ben Bella
after the first Government of independent Algeria had
been constituted:
"I am convinced that the consolidation of the
Algerian State's foundations, of which the establishment of its first legitimate Governmentis a sign, will
strengthen co-operation and solidarity between all
the peoples of the great Arab Maghreb and will fulfil that region's aspirations to dignity and rehabilitation. n
27. The sufferings which the Algerian people as well
as the Europeans of Algeria have endured permit us
to hope that they will succeed in overcoming the
rancour and resentment which seven and a half years
of war have undoubtedly engendered. I should also like
to hope that the French of Algeria will succeed in
ridding themselves of the old notions of supremacy and
domination. Let them both bear in mind that they belong to one and the same country, that they share the
same interests and have acquired the same habits and
customs there; that their future is the same and that
it would be easy to work together, in friendship regained and in mutual respect, for a free and independent Algeria.

28. I am convinced that the victory of the Algerian
people lies essentially in the unity which it has displayed during seven and a half years of struggle, and
in its attachment to its liberty and dignity. It will re!I}ember that the safeguarding of independence and
sovereignty depends essentially, andparticularly, upon
national cohesion and concord, democra:tically built
up within the frontiers. I am sure that, like us, the
people and leaders of Algeria cannot forget that it was
dissension and discord which lay at the root of our loss
of sovereignty during the nineteenth century.
29. For six consecutive years the General Assembly
has had to concern itself with the question of Algeria
kil

,t,
~,:J

384

General Assembly - Seventeenth Session - Plenary Meetings

and the absurd war going on in the heart of North
Africa, with an the sufferings which the Algerian
people has endured. I do not wish to revive, today, a
discussion now fortunately closed. On the contrary,
it is eminently desirable that those painful years
should fall into oblivion and that reconciliation should
reopen the paths of friendship. I am cOl}vinced, however, that the magnitude of the Algerian people's
sacrifices will have enabled that people to assess the
magnitude of the responsibilities which it must assume
in order to build up a prosperous and flourishing
Algeria, in stability and independence regained. History, it is perhaps worth emphas izing, has proved to us
that it is those who have struggled hardest for their
liberty who have the clearest idea of reality and what
it demands. It is they who will be the greatest realists
in international life, shunning all exaggerated extremism and instinctively steering clear of all sickly
or masked moderation.
30. I know that the Algerian people's accession to
independence cannot but have considerable repercussions in various fields, both in Africa and in the
world as a whole.
31. In Africa, the independence of Algeria, gained
after seven and a half years of struggle, with all that
the struggle cost in the grief, tears, sacrifice and
devotion, is of considerable importance for stability
and peace in our continent. It proved beyond question
the futility of the idea that effective opposition can be
maintained against a people which aspires to freedom
and is determined to recover its dignity and sovereignty. It demonstrates in striking fashion the absurdity of certain fictions which have no relation to
facts and cannot be reconciled with modern ideas on
the right of peoples to self-determination.
32. May the Algerian example help to bring wisdom
to those who, in Africa, continue to avert their eyes
from this evidence, disregarding law and the essential
requirements of brotherhood between peoples and
concord among nations. The independence of the
Algerian people will have put an end to a nightmare
which for six years has troubled the international
conscience here, and also, let it be said, the conscience
of all free men among the French people.
33. Therefore, in congratulating the Algerianpeople,
I could not fail in my duty of also congratulating the
French people on the victory which, despite grief,
tears and suffering, both peoples have managed to win
over war itself, by resorting to the only reasonable
and possible course-that of negotiation, discussion
and peaceful accommodation.
34. I shall end with the conclusion which I think I
should draw for our Organization. The admission of
free and independent Algeria to membership in the
United Nations is a source of hope for us all. Having
known war, the Republic of Algeria will certainly
endeavour to give our Organization valuable assistance
in the search for the most suitable means of rapidly
bringing about general and peaceful decolonization and
of consolidating international peace and security.
35. Mr. CHAKRAVARTY (India): It is an honour and
privilege for the delegation of India to join others in
felicitating Algeria and welcoming it to its rightful
place in the comity of nations. The Government and the
people of India have all these years followed events in
Algeria with deep concern and brotherly sympathy. In
recent times Algeria has become a symbol of heroism,
and the magnificent struggle, the untold sufferings and

40

sacrifices of the sons and daughters of Algeria have
moved the hearts of millions of people the world over.
The valour, the discipline and the tenacity of purpose
displayed by the Algerian people will always inspire
and encourage others who are still struggling for their
freedom.

co:

po:

thE

it:

>41.

sa,

36. On this happy day my mind goes back to those
early years when I recall what an uphill task it was to
secure even the inscription of the item relating to
Algeria in the agenda of this Assembly. The history of
the post-war world is replete with instances ofthe reemergence into freedom and independence of many
peoples who, for a variety of reasons, had passed under
alien rule. Happily, the majority ofthese peoples could
achieve their independence without much bloodshed.
But Algeria was not so fortunate and had to go through
a bloodbath. In fact, Algeria had to carry on one of the
most sanguinary wars of independence in history. The
sacrifices of the Algerian people over alongperiod of
eight years have been really astonishing. There are
indeed hardly any parallels in history for a country
carrying on such a war of independence year after
year at enormous cost to life and property. Let us
respectfully pay our tributes to the hundreds of
thousands of Algerians who laid down their lives for
the freedom of their country.
37. This is a momentous occasion and a day of rejoicing for all of us who cherish national independence.
Today we rejoice that this epic story of Algeria's
struggle for freedom has been brought to a happy end.
Here I can do no better than to quote some extracts
from the statement my Prime Minister made on the
occasion of Algeria's attaining independence:
"Surely history gives us few examples of such a
valiant struggle against great odds and involving
tremendous suffering and sacrifice. In a world where
almost every day brings some news which distresses
us, news from Algeria has come as a blessing and
a tonic.
"Everyone who believes in freedom will rejoice at
this happy consummation of a long struggle. We in
the Indian Government and the people of India are
particularly happy and would like to convey our warm
and fraternal greetings to the people of Algeria and
their brave leaders, who have for so long guided and
inspired its heroic struggle. We rejoice to find that
the ideals which they have set before them of social
justice, secularism and non-discrimination on the
basis of race, religion or creed are ones which we
have ourselves enshrined in our Constitution. We
look upon them as partners in a common endeavour.
"We would also like to congratulate President de
Gaulle and his Government for bringing to an end this
long drawn-out struggle in a manner befitting the
best traditions of France in the cause of human
liberty, equality and fraternity. "
38. A few days ago, Prime Minister Nehru also sent El
message conveying the warm good wishes and con~
gratulations of the people and Government of India to
Prime Minister Ben Bella on the completion of the
constitutional processes and the formation of a new
Government under him.
39. Algeria has today again taken its rightful place in
the United Nations. It is an occasion of great signifi~
cance not only to Algeria but to us all. My delegation
is convinced that Algeria, with all its experience, will
bring fresh ideas to our deliberations and will play a
vital role in the United Nations and the world outside.

da:

to
re,

ye:
of
tio

le~

pr,
an,

Ah

So

Li'

be
Sp

no

1

1

I

1146th meeting - 8 October 1962
40. We wish Algeria every success in its efforts to
consolidate and strengthen its independence, both
politic al and economic, and we look forward to having
the friendliest and the most fruitful co-operation with
it both in this Assembly and outside.
41. Mr. RIFA'I (Jordan): This roaringadventfromthe
sacred hills and valleys of Algeria, through dusk,
darkness and sacrifice, up to the summit of glory and
to the seat of sovereignty, should indeed allow the
records of this Assembly to include in their pages a
verse of poetry. I have the honour to offer, on behalf
of my delegation, such a verse. However, the reflections emanating from the horizons of Algeria did not
leave me alone with my expressions. It was due to the
profound responsiveness of my distinguished friends
and colleagues, Ambassadors Omar Adeel of Sudan,
Ahmed Benhima of Morocco, Platon Morozov of the
Soviet Union, Ruben Ramirez Pane of Paraguay, and
Liu Chieh of China, that my Arabic text has been embellished by translation into English, French, Russian,
Spanish and Chinese, respectively. in what you shall
now hear simUltaneously in the five officiallanguages,:U
Oh that great desert, is there a spot on thy thirsty
sands that has not been quenched by the tears and
blood of generous sacrifice?
The offerings whose long shadows God has perpetuated have studded your wilderness and your
valleys.
Whenever a warrior shook his weapons, the Earth
shook open the gates of Heaven;
And in Heaven were the Free, felled in the battle of
honour, so joyously acclaimed.
Elated was the East by the scent of the budding
roses whose fragrance was enhanced by the enraptured rains.
Cry no more, ye sister of Glory: and dry thy tears
with the healing palms of the Prophets,
For that fearful darkness of the grave has now given
way to the eternal glowofthytriumphant resurrection.
.Oh great homeland! It was for thee that Glory has
carried the torch of eternityand waved the banners
of immortality.
Listen: How thine advent is world wide applauded,
and how thy determined march is greeted with the
reasonance of heart-felt cheers;
And how thy roaring revolution has echoed so far,
and how the banners ofvic tory have flown all overand for ever-so high.
The stars above have pierced the darkness of night
to greet Africa tearing its victorious way into the
realm of light.
Ye, Maiden of the desert, if it was because of thee
that I have been so often wounded, it is because of
thee that my wounds now repose in the comfort of
thy healing.
This bouquet is a confession of my age-old thraldam and the love that has always run deep within
my soul.
At the very mention of glory, thy unmistakable reflections adorn my horizons, and thine image submerges my very being.
How many a sleepless night have I counted, and how
many cups have I drtitlk from the jugs of sorrow.
Has the time come, then, when, to redeem a dear
desire, we are forced to lose Our dearer one?

'ij Mr. Rifa'i quoted in Arabic. The English version was supplied by
his delegation.

May this mad world of ours, battlingthroughits own
fury, soon emerge into that sunshine of hope, with
no lingering doubts, but with peace and love for
ever reigning supreme.

42. Mr. BALAFREJ (Morocco) (transfated from
French): We have already, from this rostrum, had
occasion to salute with pride the independence of
Algeria because Morocco has always regarded Algeria's fight as its own and has shared all Algeria's
anxieties and hopes.

43. Today we wish to express our joy at seeing the
representatives of the new Algeria, including some of
its outstanding sons, seated in this As sembly.
44. For mo:re than 130 years the Algerian people
suffered under a rigorous colonial r~gime which was
entirely absorbed in exploiting the country's wealth
and paid little attention to the human problems arising
mor'e dramatically with every day that passed. The
Algerian people, more than any other, has shown its
marked preference for peacefUl solutions, since for
years it hoped to find, in various legal formulae, a
way of ensuring its dignity and freedom.
45. Unfortunately, its attitude did not always meet with
the response which it had a right to expect. That was
why Algeria in order to remove an intolerable r~gime
and regain its sovereignty, had to resign itself to a
merciless war with everything that such a war implied in misery and mourning.

46. The fight for freedom in Algeria has now been
justified internationally in the effective participation
of representatives of independent Algeria in the work
of the United Nations, at a time when the struggle
against coloniaJism, that r~gime of exploitation and
enslavement of man, has entered its final phase. We
all know that the Algerian people has accepted
sacrifices beyond all imagining in order to achieve
the recognition of its rights and prerogatives, At this
moment, when we express our joy and pride at the
rebirth of the Algerian State, we should bow our heads
in tribute to the countless martyrs who fell in Algeria,
and salute their memory with admiration and respect.
Neither those sacrifices, nor the sufferings which the
Algerian people has endured for more than seven
years, have been able to quell that people's courage,
faith and determination. Its determination was all the
stronger in that Algeria's struggle for justice and
freedom had the value of a symbol and an example for
every other people. For that reason it was followed
with exceptional interest by all countries fighting for
their independence. The Algerian people knew that in
its fight the destiny of a large number of countries was
involved. Its courage and sacrifices measured up to
the historic role which it had thus been called upon to
play.
47. We are happy to say to the French leaders nuw
pleased we are to Bee that peaceful solutions, recognizing the right of peoples to choose their own destiny,
have finally prevailed, and we express the hope that
fruitful and honest co-operation will be established in
the future between their country and Algeria, between
two equal and sovereign nations.
48. In conclusion, we would express to the Algerian
representatives our conviction that their participation
in the work of the United Nations will make a valuable
and effective contribution to the introduction ofthe era
of peace and broad co-operation which we all wish to
bring about.

386

General Assembly - Seventeenth Session - Plenary Meetings

---------------

49. Warmly congratulating them once again, we should
like them to know the full measure of our faith and confidence in the new Algeria, whose destiny is so closely
linked with our own and with that of the united, free
and prosperous Maghreb that we all, together, hope to
build.

57. The Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria
is confronted by many problems, but we are convinced
that, having won the struggle for independence with
weapons in its hands, the Algerian people will also
triumph in the struggle to build a peaceful and happy
life.

50. Mr. MENSHIKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian). The delegations of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and of Romania,
Bulgaria, Hungary, Mongolia, the Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic and the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic have entrusted me with the pleasant and
honourable task of greeting the Democratic and
Popular Republic of Algeria from this rostrum on its
admission to membership in the United Nations.

58. The instructive lesson of Algeria's struggle shows
that when peoples fight resolutely for their liberation
they achieve their aim. History cannot be turned back.
Every year the great gathering of the United Nations
is swelled by the admission of countries which have
freed themselves from colonial oppression.

51. Today is a happy and a festive day for the United
Nations. The birth of a new State on the African continent, the Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria,
is an event which people all over the world are discussing with excitement, for it is in fact a major
historical event. The United Nations is joined today by
Algeria, a nation whose fate has troubled the hearts and
occupied the thoughts of hundreds of millions of people
ip- our countries through all these long years of its
heroic struggle for national independence.

52. No freedom-loving people on our planet could remain indifferent to this struggle. Both inside and outside the United Nations the Soviet Union and the other
socialist countries always and everywhere took
the side of the Algerian people. In their struggle, we
saw a symbol of the struggle of the entire African
continent against enslavement and the yoke of
colonialism, a symbol of the triumph of a just cause
over the dark forces of reaction and imperialism.
53. The courageous Algerian people has triumphed,
and indeed could not have failed, in its fight for national
freedom and independence, but the victory was won at a
heavy price. For more than 130 years, the cnlonizers
tried to break and fetter the Algerian people so that it
could not rise against its enslavers, who grew rich on
the cruel exploitation of the Algerian people.
54. They tried to impose their will on Algeria by fire
and the sword. For eight years the flames of war raged
on Algerian soil and the Algerian people lost more than
a million of its finest sons and daughters.
55. Against the Algerian people were arrayed all the
forces of colonialism and the whole aggressive NATO
bloc, which detached from its military machine a
colonial army unprecedented in its size and level of
equipment to wage war with the Algerian people. The
war in Algeria was for all practical purposes a NATO
war. Created as an organization against the socialist
countries, the NATO bloc also became a bloc directed
against colonial peoples fighting for their independence. The Algerian people held out heroically in this
unequal struggle and emerged victorious.

56. It is impossible to measure the sacrifices and
sufferings borne by the Algerian people. It is impossible fully to measure the losses inflicted on it
by the bloody colonial war. The indigenous population
of the country was driven from its lands. The natural
resources of Algeria were ruthlessly exploited in
the interests of foreign capital. The hardworking and
proud Algerian people was compelled to live in
poverty. The war further disorganized Algeria's
national economy, many of its branches being destroyed.

59. What is the significance of the appearance in this
hall of more and more new representatives of independent States? Their appearance signifies above all
that history moves inexorably forward and cannot be
halted by quick-firing cannons, rocket-firing airoraft,
napalm bombs, or blockades.
60. Algeria's victory and the tenacity shown by its
people in achieving its goal set an inspiring example
for peoples still under the yoke of colonial domination
today. The long-awaited day will soon dawn when the
peoples of our entire planet will finally free themselves from the burden of the colonial yoke, which
has brought them so much misery, humiliation and
suffering.

61. The birth of the Democratic and Popular Republic
of Algeria is an event of great international significance. A young country has joined the ranks of the
independent African States, a country tempered in
fierce warfare and fired by the determination to build
its life on new foundations.
62. The Soviet people and all the peoples of the
socialist countries, which have consistently supported
the people of Algeria in its long and heroic struggle,
warmly welcomed the news of the triumph of the just
cause for which the Algerian patriots fought.
63. On behalf of the people and Government of the
Soviet Union, the Head of the Soviet Government,
Nikita Sergeevich Khrushchev, warmly congratulated
the heroic Algerian people and Mr. Ben Bellapersonally on the establishment of the first Government of
the independent Democratic and Popular Republic of
Algeria. In this message of 29 september 1962 to the
Prime Minister of the Democratic and PopUlar Republic of Algeria, the Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of the USSR, Nikita Sergeevich Khrushchev,
wrote:

"The Soviet people well knows at what price in
sacrifices and sufferings the people of Algeria
attained its national freedom. We also appreciate the
serious difficulties which remain to be overcome by
the Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria in
order to maintain and strengthen the freedom it
has won and fully to eliminate the dire consequences
of the prolonged domination of the country by foreign
enslavers. We know from our experience in setting
up and forming our Soviet State in the early years
after the Great October Socialist Revolution thac the
enemies of an independent and united Algeria, the
imperialists and colonizers, will try in every
possible way to hamper its advance along the path
of political and economic independence. However, the
Soviet people, like all true friends of independent
Algeria, are firmly convinced that the Algerian
people, displaying solidarity and watchfulness, will
successfully overcome all difficulties and obstacles

6~

n

ht

w
hE

st
li

61
U
gl

cc

in
N

61
A

A

in

w

al
fi
dE
th

Cl

bl

6~

SE

01

al

hI

61
S1
yl

01

sl
H

al

01

e'

01

ir

6!

re
cl
cc

oc

p:

al

it
ti

71
rl

0:

s:

W
01

IV

g:

tI

Cl

0:

SI

h

n

1146th meeting - 8 October 1962
in the way of strengthening the sovereignty of its
State and settling the important social and economic
problems confronting it."Y
64. I should like to express my conviction that the
Democratic and- PopUlar Republic of Algeria, which
has now taken its rightful place among sovereign States,
will make a contribution worthy of its militant and
heroic past to the cause of the preservation and
strengthening of international peace and the final
liquidation of the colonial system.

I
I

65. On behalf of the above-mentioned group of delegations of socialist States, the Soviet delegation takes
great pleasure today in again extending heart-felt
congratulations to the Algerian people on winning its
independence and on becoming a Member ofthe United
Nations.
66. Mr. SHUKAIRY (Saudi Arabia): Here comes
Algeria. Here comes the Republic of Algeria-the
African, the Maghrebian and the Arab State, fully
independent and fully sovereign. Here comes Algeria
with its proclaimed policy of neutrality and nonalignment. Here comes Ben Bella, national hero and
first Prime Minister of Algeria. And here comes the
delegation of the Government of Algeria presenting to
this august body, to this General Assembly, its
credentials enveloped with the heat and dllst of the
battlefield.
67. On behalf of my Government and my people I
seize this solemn occasion to extend the warmest of
our brotherly greetings to Algeria, to its Government
and to its gallant people. We admire their victory, we
hail their heroism and we glorify their glory.
68. At long last Algeria is now with us, a Member
State of this Organization. Thus far, and for eight
years past, the question of Algeria has been an item
on our agenda. How often we have argued whether it
should be included in or excluded from our agenda.
How often we have elucidated the equities of the case,
and how often we have argued and debated the merits
of the facts of the case. The chapter now is closed for
ever. The question of Algeria will no more be an item
on our agenda. Algeria occupies its distinguished seat
in this august body.
69. The ceremony at this moment is not, however, a
routine affair; it is not a function of an ordinary
character. Nor is it the performance of a mere act of
courtesy. The significance of this most inspiring
occasion is more-and much more. This is a day of
prayers of thanksgiving for the triumph of liberty
and freedom. We take it to be a thanksgiving day for
the whole of the United Nations in gratitude for the
time of liberty and freedom all over the world.
70. Let me assure you, gentlemen, that this is no
rhetorical exercise on my part. This is a recognition
of the whole truth, of the whole truism. We are not
simply celebrating the admission of a new Member,
with all its gravity and with all its solemnity. This
occasion is something beyond the investiture of a new
Member State. What has been admitted to this Organization is not simply a Member State but a concentration of vibrant ideas, a mass of living ideals, a
collection of profound recollections, an accumulation
of staggering trials and ordeals, a drama of racking
suffering and, indeed, the most telling example in the
history of mankind of the achievement of self-fulfilment in self-determination.
Y-~. 30 September 1962.

387

71. The Statue of Liberty stands on the shores of
this continent. So does Algeria tower among us in this
Organization as a statue of many valuable human
things. Algeria, a promising land with a proud people,
stands as the expression of heroism, the embodiment
of bravery, the symbol of perseverance and the incarnation of the will of man to live as a free man in a
free world-a free and real world but a world free from
oppression.
72. At this historic moment our minds and hearts go
to the heroic struggle of'the people of Algeria. It was a
battle too bitter to be recalled here andnow. We shall
not recall the martyrdom of thousands upon thousands
of the flower and bud of the generations of Algeria in
the course of 132 years of bloodshed, war, human conflict and human suffering. We shall not recall the lossand I would say the sad loss-of thousands upon thousands of French soldiers who died in innocence but
passed in vain. We shall not recall the untold sufferings and the inconceivable sorrows of a whole nation
in its battle for liberation. Nor shall we recall the campaign of destruction carried out recently by the French
ultras as testimony that imperialism, in the last
analysis, is destroyed at the hands of the forces of
~e~~mthe~~~.~~ill~roo~llliMe

hair-raising events of this human drama.
73. This is a moment of joy and jubilation. While still
thr illed by the tragedy of this long and bloody war, we
are bound to rejoice. We are compelled to rejoice
and to give oursel ves up to joy and jUbilation, and we
assemble here today to rejoice. With offence to no one,
and with discourtesy to none, let me say from this
rostrum, lOUdly and without any reservation, that no
other nation has endured so long, no other nation has
paid so highly and no other nation has paid so dearly.
I stand at this rostrum to salute the people of Algeria
for their exemplary heroism and indomitable determination.

74. In the meantime, I feel that it is my duty to address myself to France, and to President de Gaulle in
particular. In past sessions I referred to France in no
kind words and in no gentle tones. At times my expressions, I admit, were harsh and brutal, although
they were true and factual. That was an understandable
act of necessity for the situation itself was indeed very
harsh and indeed very brutal.
75. Now we are face to face with a different situation.
Friendship with Algeria is friendship with all the Arab
peoples. We are one with Algeria. The friends of
Algeria are our friends, and the enemies of Algeria
are our enemies. We are behind Algeria in war and in
peace, in amity and in enmity, in easy times and in
adversity. France may therefore rest assured that a
new chapter of Arab-French relations can be inaugurated, in the best interests of the Arab people, on the
one hand, and of France, on the other.
76. President de Gaulle's contribution in this field
can be as great as President de Gaulle himself. On the
issue of liberty, on the issue of freedom, I should place
on record the fact that General de Gaulle has played a
great role worthy of praise and admiration. Twice-and
I -stress twice-did General de Gaulle bring about the
freedom of France. Emancipation from the Nazi
occupation was one occasion, and the liberation of
France from colonialism in Algeria was the second.
77. I submit that I would rank the second occasion as
the first; for, to free oneself is great, but to free oneself from dominating others is more sublime. And it

--,..........,.'-----------------""-----------..._---------,--......--....-sss

----------------

General Assembly - seventeonth Session - Plenary MeeMngs

~s thus that President de Gaulle should be judged and
his great stature measured.
'78. Through sweat, through blood and through tears,
Algeria ha::; i'orceu open the gates of the United Nations
which had been closed to it. It has forced the gates
wide open. and I trust that the gates of the United
Nations will remain wide open sr that all peoples may
enter in freedom, sovereignty and independence. Then
will our United Nations be a free and united Organiza...
tion.

Mr. Nussibeh (Jordan). Vice-President, took the
Ohair.
79. Mr. STEVENSON (United States of America): On
behalf of my Government and the people of the Unite:l
States. I want to express to His Excellency Ahrned Ben
Bella, the Prime Minister of Algeria. to his distinguished fellow representatives and to the new
Republic of Algeria which they represent, our congratulations and our best wishes at this historic
moment.
80. We are happy that Algeria is taking its place at
last as a Member of the United Nations and contributing its independent weight in the councils of the
world. The sufferings of nearly eight years of civil
conflict are ended at last. A new nation has emerged
determined to reconcile with harmony and with justice
the diverse cultures of that land and to achieve the
greatness to which its resources and its talents enable
it to as:pire. This consummation is a cause for universal rejoicing. in which my country joins.
81. The leaders of Algeria who, through their fortitude and their statesmanship. have brought their
courtry to this goal of independence, commandour admiration. No less does France and. above all, its
President, that brave soldier and even braver statesman, General de Gal111e, whose vision and leadership
made it possible to cut the chains which held the people
of Algeria, European and Moslem alike, in the frightful bondage of ha.tred and war.
82. The parties on both sides who achieved the Evian
AgreementEJ and thereby laid the foundl!tions for
Algeria's self-determination were working well and
truly, we believe. for the Principles and Purposes of
the Charter of the United Nations. Theirs should be the
glory today, for they have finally struck the question
of Algeria from our agenda and added the Republic of
Algeria to our rolls.
83. Algeria faces many difficulties. In dealing with
some of them, especially the economic and technical
ones, it can draw on the skills and the resources of
the United Nations and its related agencies andon help
from oany nations. of which the United States is happy
to be one. But far more decisive for Algeria's future
will be the relationships between the new Republic and
France and between the European and Moslem communities. How tragically <:iasyitwouldbeforthose who
have suffered so much to look back in anger and in
hatred. But if Algeria is to fulfil its promise all concerned must work together in forbearance and
brotherhood to bury the past and to build for the future
a new community of peace in Algeria.
84. The sufferings of Algeria are now, mercifully,
past. If we remember them at an, let it be in sorrow
for the fallen and i.n determination that this mass
tragedy· shall not be re-enacted elsewhere. Remembering Algeria. let us resolve again, in all of our conflicts and dispute:>, to a.bandon extremism, to reject

fanatical counsel and to seek the honourable and
compassionate peace which alone has a chance to endure.
85. Mr. FEKINI (Libya) (translated from French): In
the history of mankind. few and far between are the
days when the dreams, prayers and hopes of peoples
come true and assume tangible forl!!..
86. It therefore seems to us that this day of prayers
finally answered will go down in history as a fateful
and unforgettable occasion. The admission of independent and sovereign Algeria to membership in the
United ~ations fills us with such satisfaction and
happiness beyond words that our emotion will. I am
certain, be understood and our transports of joy. will,
I hope. be excused.

promises of an e
based on 80vereig

94. In conclusio
Government and h
ings on this hap
Algeria every SU
nb-tion in whioh it
prosperity and pr(

95. Delivered at
longer encumberE
the Arab countrie:
friendship I bl'othe
their energies t
ahead, in the inte]
in the service

87. On behalf of Libya, which from the outset espoused
the Algerian people's cause and supported its deter-mination to fulfil its national aspirations in freedom
and independence, I have the great pleasure and signal
honour of conveying to the Algerian delegation our
warmest and most heart-felt congratulations on independent Algeria's entry into the family of free and
sovereign nations.

96. Mr. DAVID
(translated from I
of the Czechoslo
people, I welcome
Popular Republic
sinoerely congra
Algerian Gavel'
Mr. Ben Bella, 0

88. The Algerian people's heroic struggle has thus
reached its triumphant conclusion in the General
Assembly's unanimous decision-a decision by acclamation-which enables! Algeria to sit as an equal
among the free nations.

97. At the same
Algerian people,
determination an
many years of bit
Algerian people
evidence of the fa
the people~' desi
resolute people w
struggle. There
Algerian people .
the decaying co101

89. At this solemn time it is our duty to pay a
respectful, humble and admiring tribute to the memory
of all the Algerians, men and women, who made the
supreme sacrifice oflaying down their lives f0r the just
cause of their glorious country. We must, however, look
beyond the tragic conflict in which the parties had
been locked for so long, the peaceful settlement of the
Algerian problem which is a signal victory for reason,
common sense and wisdom; and Libya is particularly
happy to see that. by an agreement reached between the
two sides, the brave fight has been crowned with the
fulfilment of the legitimate aspirations of a courageous
people.
. 90. We are convinced i...:n.t indepeI'.dent Algeria's con-

tripution to the Organi2 .. -:~ •s activities. and that
country's policy in the world at large, will promote
the cnuse of peace and co-operation which the United
Nations serves. Our Organization can derive legitimate pride and gratification from the fact that, thanks
to its understanding, support and moral influence, it
has contributed to the triumph of a just cause based
precisely on respect for the noble ideals and lofty
principles of the Charter.
91. We are certain that the settlement of the conflict
in which France and the Algerian nationaUst revolution
had so long been locked is an important milestone on
the road to the permanent elimination of colonialism.
We all know that, by its many and great sacrifices, the
Algerian people has given a strong impetus to the
movement for the peoples' liberation.
92. While we are paying anew our whole-hearted
tribute to the courage and determination of the
Algerian people, we shall not fail to convey our most
sincere appreciation to the French people, which
brought to General de Gaulle its massive and sustained
support in his realistic and praiseworthy policy of
decolonization and peace.
93. We are certain that the end of this painful act has
cleared the stage for the fulfilment of the alluring

98. The Czecho
often had to wage
the value of that
joices at the corn
Popular Republic
99. For many y
the tenacious stru
which we consist
the fundamental
policy during th
in the United Nat'
a position fully i
of the Algerian p
Nations Charter.

100. Thus, in tl
freedom, relatio
confidence have
friendly Algeria
success in the bu
of the national e
elimination of th
of blatant colonia
101. The Gover

Republic, in full
people, will expa
relations in ev
operation in the
l!rogress and pe
102. The admis

RepUblic of Alg
tremely signific
for the United N

---_._--------,.",,.....------------- "---

.

• •_ _

--

_

__

_ . .~""".llI'I!II
. ••III'III!IIO

1146th meeting - 8 Ootober 1962
promises of an era of sincere and loyal co"'Operation
based on sovereign equality and mutual respeot.
94. In conclusion, may I assure Mr. Ben Bella, his
Government and his people of our most fraternal feel..
ings on this happy occasion, and wish independent
Algeria every success in the task of building up the
n~~ion in which it is now engaged, as well as happiness,
pl'osperity and progress.
95. Delivered at last from the scourge of war and no
longer encumbered by the heavy burdens it imposes,
the Arab countries of the Maghreb will now be able in
friendship, bl'otherhood and collaboration to devote all
their energies to the constructive tasks which lie
ahead, in the intel'ests of their respective peoples and
in the service of worl-' peace and co-operation.
96. Mr. DA VID (Czechoslovak Socialist Repub!ic)
(translated from Russian): On behalfof the Government
of the Czechoslovak Sooialist Republic and all our
people, I welcome the admission of the Democratic and
Popular Republic of Algeria to the United Nations and
sincerely congratulate the representatives of the
Algerian Government, headed by its Prime Minister,
Mr. Ben Bella, on this memorable event.
97. At the same time we warmly salute the heroic
Algerian people, which has vindicated its right to selfdetermination and to independent development after
many years of bitter fighting against colonialism. The
Algerian people has thereby given further striking
evidence of the fact that no force can break or weaken
the people&' desire for freedom and that a united and
resolute people will inevitably be victorious in its just
struggle. There is no doubt that the victory of the
Algerian people is II particularly heave blow against
the decaying colonial system.
98. The Czechoslovak people, which in the past has
often had to wage long struggles for its freedom, knows
the value of that freedom and therefore sincerely rejoices at the coming into being of the DemoC~'atic and
Popular Republic of Algeria.
99. For many years we followed with deep sympathy
the tenacious struggle of the Algerian people, a struggle
which we consistently supported. Steadfastly observing
the fundamental principles of Czechoslovak foreign
policy during the discussion of the Algerian question
in the United Nations throughout these years, wetupheld
a position fully in accordance with the vital interests
of the Algerian people and the principles of the United
Nations Charter.
lOO, Thus, in the course of Algeria's struggle for
freedom, relations of sincere friendship and complete
confidence have been built up between us. We wish the
friendly Algerian people and its Government every
success in the building of a new life, in the development
of the national economy and culture, and the speedy
elimination of the disastrous consequences of war and
of blatant colonial oppression and exploitation.

101. The Government of the Czechoslovak Socialist

Republic, in full conformity with the wishes of our
people, will expand and develop Czechoslovak-Algerian
relations in every field and develop a fruitful cooperation in the interests of both countries, and of
progress and peace throughout the world.
102. The admission of the Democratic and Popular

Republic of Algeria to the United Nations is an extremely significant event not only for Algeria but also
for the United Nations. For' our Organization has been

_

__

_

889

joined by a country whose people, by its long and
heroic struggle, has done much to faoUitatethe ex6CU"
tion of the task w!lich the United Nations has made one
of its first priorities-the liquidation of colonialism.
103. Algeria's membership in the UnttedNat10nswill
greatly assist. efforts aimed at speedily completingthis
task, ensuring a durable peace and developing friendly
oo-operation among peoples. We wish the Democratic
and Popular Republic of Algeria every success in this
constructive work.
104. Mr. ZOPPI (Italy) (translated from French): The
Italian delegation, which on this occasionhas the honour
to speak likewise for the delegations of the West
European countries and of Australia, is delighted to
see the delegation of the Republic of Algeria take its
seat among the Members of the United Nations. 'l'he
presence of the Algerian people's representatives in
this Hall testifies to the happy outcome of the Alge::L'ian
nation's march towards independence and to its desire
to contribute, from th\:. outset, to international friend..
ship in the interests ofpe9,oe and the progress of civilization.
105. The Algerian people's history in recent years
has, unfort\mately, been one of bloodshed; but we know
that the path ofhistory is never free of thorns, and that
the creative process is always accompanied by birth
pangs.
106. However, the very fact that after alongperiod of
struggle the Algerian nation stands erect, active and
confident alongside its national leaders and its Government furnishes the best proof of the Algerianpeople's
deep-rooted qualities and provides what is perhaps the
most reliable guarantee for its future. I would recall
in this connexion that Ital y itself achieved it~ unity a
century ago after a ve'l.'Y long and difficult struggle,
and that it embarked upon its existence as an independent country amid difficulties which at the time
seemed almost insuperable.
107. The happy consummation of Algeria's independence should also be viewed against the background of
the clear-sighted policy of General de Gaulle, who, in
circumstances of great difficulty, was able to cause
his country to recognize the inevitable trend of history•
108. As a Mediterrlmean country, Italy is particularly happy to see the emergence, on Mediterranean
shores, of an important State which will constitute an
essential factor of stability and peace in North Africa.
Relations between Algerians and Italians have always
been excellent. I am. certain that the friendship of the
two countries, in all fields of activjty, will be a factor
of capital importance for the hapFiness ofboth of them
and of all the countries bordering the Mediterranean
Sea.
109. It is therefore in a spirit of very warm friendship that, on behalf of my delegation, the delegations
of Western Europe and the delegation of Australia,
I welcome Algeria's admission to the United Nations
and express the very best wishes for its future.
110. Mr. GRIMES (Liberia): For my delegation and for
myself it is a great honour and a historic privilege to
welcome heartily the Government of Algeria, headed
by its Prime Minister, His Excellency Ahtned Ben
Bella, into membership of the United Nations. I congratulate Algeria, OR bel1alf of the Liberian Government and people, on this milestone in its history. Over
seven years of bitter strife have been happily ended
with another victory in the hardano. cruel struggle for

390

General Assembly - Seventeenth Session - Plenary Meeting"

self-dettlrmination and independenoe. This struggle
has been a courageous and a heroic one for the
Algerians, who, in spite ofheavy odds, kept their hopes
firmly fixed cm their ultimate aim and never faltered.
This is a great lesson to all those who believe that by
the stl'Oke of a pen. a portion of another continent can
become an integral part of theIr country; to all those
who believe that the tmquenchable urge for freedom can
be blotted out by cruel and repressive measures; and to
all those who believe that there can be any outcome
save victory in man's desire for, and climbto, human
di ity d
li
gn an equa ty.
111. I feel gratified by :ohe united positiCm which the
African States have taken over the years on behalf of
our Algerian brothers. To demonstrate our solidarity
with Algeria, Liberia was host to the Conference of
Independent African States which convened in Monrovia
in 1959, the principal purpose of which was to study
and 1'\~Qommend means of arriving at a peaceful
SOlUti01) to the Algerian question; and in 1980 we
extendled de facto recognition to the Provisional
Gover~m'J.ei1t of Algeria. That Conference had a great
'impact \.'PO~1 all successive aotions and oreated a
spirit that characterized subsequent efforts.
112. Today we offer thanks to those men and nations

which, in concert with us, worked for the success of
the Algerian cause, and we also congratulate General
de Gaulle and the present Government of France for
their bold decision and action which consummated
successful negotiations with the Algerian Provisional
Government.
113. We pay a special tribute to the gallant and brave
Algerian people, who, after so much misery and
suffering, after so much loss of precious lives, have
now achieved their lung-sought goal. All Africans are
happy and proud of their valour and victory, which I
believe will imbue all of us with a stronger determination to pursue the struggle until freedom has been won
not only for the entire continent of Africa but for all
the world.
114. In extendiug again, Mr. Prime Minister, a warm
welcome to your Government and people" into this
world Organization, I wish to express the hope that a
new (IRy will da.wn in the relations between the people
of Algeria and the people of France. I feel certain that
the experience yO<l have gained will be used towards
furthering the cause of African unity and the cause of
international peace and security for which we are all
working.
115. Mr. RAPACKI (Poland) (translated fror'.French):
Mr. President, fellow-representatives, M:r. Prime
Minister and all our dear Algerian friends: This is
the eighth time that AIg0ria has been mentioned in
the agenda of the General Assembly. At the last seven
sessiOns the Polish delegation, together with the delegations of so many other oountries. spoke outfor peaoe
and for the Algerian people 's independence. In doing
so, we were putting into words the feelings of the Polish
people which had had experience of bondage and had
strnggled for its freedom for over a oentury. the
feelings of a people which had achieved final liberation at the oost of millions killed, assassinated or
tortured to death in the war against nazism. That was
why all news from Algeria stirred our people to such
depths. and why remembrance of our own still recent
struggle, sacrifice and liberation further reinforoed
our solidarity with the Algerian people and intensified
our pra;»ers for its victory.
j

116. Today we again speak about Algeria from this
rostrum, but this time in order to welcome among us
the representatives of heroic Algeria. atlong lastfree,
In them we sea a living symbol of the Algerian
people's moral strength, the great strength which has
enabled that people to carry on so long and unequal a
struggle against the army of a Power strong in re..
sources and alliances. and finally to l'egain its in...
dependence.
117. This struge-1e was promoting not the oause of
Algeria alone. While it may be said that several
African peoples ha'v'e gained their independence more
or less peaoefully t one must not lose sight of the faot
that all Africa's fighters foX' freedom have oontributed
to that result. The Algerian people's struggle, aland~
mark ill the history of the decline of colonialism, has
played a partioularly important role in that process.
Beoause it was also a struggle in the interests of peaoe,
of the independenoe of peoples and of progress,it was
supported and upheld byfighters for these noble oaUdes
throughout the world.
118. Algeria's independenoe is in the true interest of
the I·'rench people. too. No people which oppresses
others can itself be truly free. This has been fUlly
realized by those Frenchmen who, during this war,
have oourageously championed peaoe and freedom for
Algeria.
119 t\lth h th' , th f
•
. , oug
IS IS
e irst appearance ox a delega..
tion of the Republic of Algeria in this Hall. their
country, by reason of the fight it has carried on in defence of the fundamental principles of the United
Nations, has alway,s been present here. We:realizethat
the people and Government of the Popular and Democratic Republic uf Algeria face difficult problems in
connexion with the country's reconstruction and development, the consolidation of its national independence, and its protection from all possible dangers.
But we are firmly convinced that the Algerian people,
which has paid so high a price for its freedom and ha0
given such ample evidence of its courage and tenacity,
will be able to deal with all of them. I am equally convinced that free Algeria's efforts will meet with the
active sympathy and support of all those who expressed solidarity with it in its struggle and are today
welcoming its representatives with heart-felt joy. I
wish to as sure the Algerian delegation that such will
be the attitude of the Polish people andits Government.
120. Mr. SOULEYMANE (Mauritania) (translated
from French): It is a signal honour for me, in my
double capacity as acting chairman of the AfricanAsian group and chairman of the Ml:l.uritanian delegation, to extend our warmest and most sincere congratulations to the Algerian delegation on their
oountry's admission to this august Assembly. Speaker
after speaker has paid tribute, from this rostrum, to
the revolutionary virtues displayed and the immense
sacrifices made by the Algexian people in its st!'uggle
for liberation. It is beyond doubt that that struggle
has oalled forth the admiration of the entire world.
Many countries, especially in Africa, hope to see in
Algeria a brother who will make an objective, con~
structive and calm contribution to the lxttainment of
our joint objective-that of African unity.
121. As I said here a few days ago [1143rd meeting],
we are convinced that Algeria, '/wing to the calibre
of its men, :it~ practical experience and the purity of
its revolution, will help to give a new style to interAfrican relations and will play the outstanding role
which falls to it in bringing the nations north and south

of the Sahara 01
tion between \hel
122. After a ni
promising day h,
brothers. For UEl
of rejoicing and
portance of Alg
many problems,
ing and which 1
espoused the cat
throughout the
continent of Afri
123. It would s
into words all ou
its Government.
poor vehicle a
passioned words
We shall there
extreme pleasu
sister country,
aud say that it
fruits of its ge
elsewhere.
124. Mr. I~O
happy day inde
people of Algeri
dom and indepe
symbol of hero
domination, is a
The historical v
eight-year war
won thanks to th
and unity of the
,hat the Algeri
the sympathy 0
world.
125. It is a ma
to remind the As
all of us, tha
Yugoslavia hav
many other cOUl
and every assi
struggle for fre
Government wa
de jure the Gov
126. It is likew'

the Assembly th
was the meeting
ments of twenty
sentatives of Al
this historical
declaration that
peeple of Algeri
dependence and
necessary, and
people of Algeri
127. On behalf
Yugoslavia, I s
pay tribute to
Algerian people
years of the na
tribute to the e
which has won
world in the m
,Evian Agreeme

12$. The l>res
Josip Broz Tit

1146th meeting - 8 October 1962
of the Sahara oloser together and seouring oo-opera..
tion between \hem.
122. After a night of bloodshed and tears, a new and
promising day has dawned on the land of our Algerian
brothers. For us and the whole world, this is a souroe
of rejoicing and pride. We are convinced of the importance of Algeria's contribution to the solution of
many problems, oft6nminorones, which are stiUpend..
ing and which hinder the efforto of those who have
espoused the cause of peace, progress and friendship
throughout the wo!'ld and partioularly in our beloved
continent of Africa.
123. It would serve no useful purpof:le to tl'Y to put
into words all our feelings for the Aigerianpeople and
its Government. On such an occasion, language is a
poor vehicle and even the most sinceX'a and impassioned words are inadequate to convey our emotion.
We shall therefore merely express our real and
extreme pleasure at the admission of Algeria, our
sistel' country, to membership in the United Nations,
al1d say that it is with impatienoe that we await the
fruits of its genius and its oo-operation, here and
elsewhere.
124. Mr. POPOVIC (Yugoslavia): Today is a very
happy day indeed, not only for tbe freedom..loving
people of Algeria but for all those who cherish free.jam and independence. Algeria, which has become a
symbol of heroism in the struggle against colonial
domination, is a new Member of the United Nations.
T~e historical victory of the Algerian people, in the
eIght-year war which was forced upon it, could be
won thanks to the unprecedented heroism, organization
and unity of the Algerian peopl ~; as well al:) to the fact
lliat the Algerian peopld were not alone but enjoyed
the sympathy of all freedom-loving peoples in the
world.
125. It is a matter of particular grl',tification for me
to remind the Assembly on this occasion, so great for
all of us, that the peoples and Government of
Yugoslavia have from the beginning, together with
many other countries, given their unselfish support
and every assistance to the Algerian people in the
struggle for freedom and independence, and that my
Government was the first in Europe to recognize
de jure the Government of the RepUblic of Algeria.
126~ It is likewise a great pleasure for me to remind
the As'semblythat Belgrade, the capitalofmycQuntry,
was the meeting place of the heads ofState or Governments of twenty-five non-aligned countries, therepresentatives of Algeria among them, who assembled at
this historical Conference. They stated in their
declaration that they considered the struggle of the
peaple of Algeria for freed<;>m, self-determination, independence and territorial integrity to be just and
necessary, and that they were' ready to extend to the
people of Algeria all possible support and aid.

127. On behalf of the Government and peoples of
Yugoslavia, I should like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute to the heroism and endurance of the
Algerian people and its leaders, manifested in the
years of the national liberatior. struggle, a..'1d to pay
tribute to the excellent discipline they have shown,
which has won for them the admiration of the whole
wm.'ld in the months preceding the signature of the
Evian Agreements.

12$. The l>re~i'~ent of the Republio of Yugoslavia,
Josip Broz Tito, on the occasion of the agreement on

391

the independenoe of Algeria, expressed to the Provisional Algerian Government and to the President of
the Republic of Franoe, Charles de Gaulle, the great
satisfaction of the peoples and the Government of
Yugoslavia, stating his belief that it woulcl lead not
only to a construotive and friendly oo-operation between the peoples of Algeria and France, but that it
would represent apowerful element ofpeace andpeaoeful development toward the fulfilment ofthe aspirations
of the peoples of Africa, and that it was a great contribution to peace and the peaceful settlement of
disputes in the world in general.
129. The freedom and independence of Algeria
represent a triumph for the Algerian people, who have
realized their dearest aspirations. The freedom
and in<:\ependenoe of Algeria represent a suocess for
France as well, despite all those who stubbornly endea,voured to turn back the wheel of history, because
by recognizing the independence of the Algerianpeople,
the French people protec;~s its own independence.
130. The peoples of my country have, over a very
long time, lived in friendship and co-operation with
the French people. France was our ally in the First
and Second World Wars. We are pleased that the independenoe of Algeria was eventually achieved with
the positive participation of Franoe as well.
131. The cause of the Algerian people was a matter
of great concern to the entire international community.
The freedom and iu.dependence of Algeria represent a
success for the United Nations also, because it has
contributed to the reoognition of the faot that a refusal
to grant independence to Algeria would be not only a
flagrant violat~on of the undeniable right of a people to
self-determination but also a serious threat to intarnational peace and security. The United Nations thereby made its contribution, and we are here welcoming
with enthusiasm the heroic Algeriallpeople as a new
Member of our Organization.
132. The Algerian struggle for freedom has come to
a happy and successful end. The example of Algeria
can serve as one more lesson that every attempt to
deny the right of a people to freedom is doomed to
failure and can only be a source of grave complications for those engaged in such actions and also for international peace and security. The recognition ofthis
fact is an act of wisdom. It is in keeping with the
historical trends and is in the interests of all peoples
and of all States.
133. The Algerian example also proves tha:i; there is
no international dispute today which, provif~ed there is
good will and statesmanship, cannot be solved by
means of negotiations. For these reasons, the solution
of the Algerian problem can serve as an example for
the settlement of similar outstanding international
disputes.
134. The independence won by Algeria and the formation of the Government of the Democratic and Popular
Republic of Algeria represent a new and significant
step not only on the path of freedom of the Algerian
people itself but also of all the peoples of Africa. The
day is nearing when all the shameful vestiges of the
colonial system will be eliminated. Through Algeria's
taking of the road of independent development, the
sphere of existing contradictions which divide the
world is being limited, and those forces which unselfishly strive for the preservation of peace and foX'
the promotion of fruitful international co-operation in
keeping with the principles of active and peaceful coexistence are greatly strengthened.

___---~-........:e::". mm
392

;I

11

1R

r

General ASlSembly - Seventeenth Session - Plenary Meetings

135. The President of the Republic of Yugoslavia,
Josip Broz Tita, conveyed to the Government of the
Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria, on be...
half of the peoples and the Government of Yugoslavia,
warm good wishes on the occasion of the Algerian
people's great victory. He noted that the peoples of our
t\\1Q countries have become closer and have become
friends in the course of the struggle of the Algerian
people, which was followed with feelings of great sympathy and was supported by the peoples of YugoslaVia,
and he e"''Pressed the conviction that the friendly relations between the peoples of Yugoslavia and Algeria
woul<i continue to gl'OW, to their mutual benefit and in
tt-e interests of the ~neral progress and peace of the
world.
136. The Algerian people, having won its independence. is now faced with the gl'eat and difficult tasks
of \.lonsolidating the independence and the sovereignty
of its national State, of reconstruction and of the development of its national economy. These tasks are
difficult. but they are glorious, and the united Algerian
people and its leadel's will undoubtedly fulfil them with
success.
137. The Government and the peoples of Yugoslavia
wal'mly wish every success to the revolutionary
Government headed by Mr; AhmedBenBellaandto the
peopie of the Democratic and Popular Republic of
Algeria in the building of their national independent
and sovereign State, in economic reconstruction, and
in all fields of activity, and express their readiness to
extend to the Algerian people and its Government every
possible assistance.
138. ThE?; unity that has been manifested, the competence and the wisdom of the Algerian people and its
leaders. strengthen all of us in our belief that the
Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria will make
its active contribution to the implementation of the
principles of the United Nations Charter, the: removal
of the remnants of colonialism, the furthering of
economic and social progress, and the maintenance of
peace in the world.
139. Welcome, heroic and peace-loving nation, nowa.
Member of the United Nations.
Mr. Zafrollah Khan (Pakistan) resumed the Ghair.

140. Mr. TAKLA (Lebanon} (translated from French):

The particularly warm welcome extendeu to Algeria
by many representatives who have spoken from this
rostrum is an eloquent ~estimony to the admiration
that the world feels for the great and noble Algerian
nation.
141. Seven years of bloody conflict and approximately
800,000 victims: such is the glorious record of this
Algerian war, which is indelibly inscribed in the
annals of histor~T. But all those sacrifices were not in
vain since they led to the triumph of right and justice
and to agreements dictated by reason and concluded
in honour and dignity.
142. 'Ihis struggle. it must be admitted, might have
lasted much longer, leaving in itJ wake further suffering and misery, if France. faithful to its traditions of
freedom. had not deliberately helped to hasten the conelusion of a final agreement, which in accordance with
world evolution was an inevitable outcome. On this
happy occasion, we must pay a tribute to France. too.
143. We are, moreover, convinced 'that the cooperation between Algeria and France provided for in
the Evian agreements will be fruitful and that it will

-----

be established in a genuine spirit of sincerity and
mutual respect.
144. If all the nations of the world have applauded this
final result, namely, the admitlsion of AlgElria into the
community of free nations, what must be the joy of the
Arab peoples of Africa and Asia at the dawn of this
memol'able day, whioh fills them with justified pride:
The Arab States, independent and sovereign, which now
stretch in an unbroken chain from the Atlantic Ocean
to the Indian Ocean, are conscious of their responsibilities in that part of the world, as well as in the
Unite<i Nations, and of the contribution that they must
make to the maintenance of peace and the harmonious
development of international relations. Strengthened by
this latest addition to their ranks, they will continue
together to strive for the achievment of the principles
of the Charter, in particular the sacred right of peoples
to self-determination and the sovereign equ,ality of
natiohs.
145. In addition to co-operation in international bodies
and to inter-Arab co-operation in the League of Arab
States. where we were also happy to welcome the
admission of Algeria a few weeks ago, Lebanon wishes
with all its heart to develop direct co-operation with
this sister nation; we are convinced that the many
features we have in common and our nl.1merous
affinities, especially in respect to our culture and
civilization, will facilitate such co-operation and make
it more fruitful.

150. The Unit
from the very
eral Assembly
Asian group tt
year lSurveilla
the forefront
moral pressur
resistance in i
the Algerian p
most overwhe
recall that the
Algeria was n
diplomacy and
when we appoi

146. On behalf of my country and my Government, I
offer the Algerian Republic our warmest congratulations, together with our sincere and confident wishes
for the greatness, prosperity and happiness of the
Algerian people.
147. Mr. MALALASEKERA (Ceylon): Throughout the
ages man has aspired to lift himself from the abyss of
suffering and bondage, of oppression and death, to the
height of immortality. Such is the goal univel'sally em~
bodied in every major creed and acclaimed in every
dignified concept of the human race. But down the vistas
of time few are the men who have attained the glory of
immortality, and far fewer the nations that have been
able to do so. Among the cl:losen few, history will surely
include the Algerian people who, by their indomitable
will and their unflinching courage, fought against a
mighty empire and won victory in the greatest liberation movement of our day. It took them eight years wd
cost them a million lives, but the memory of those
dead heroes will be enshrined in the hearts of libertyloving men to their eternal glory.

153. It is ou
lead these p
bondage. But 1.
the courage
least have th
lead us.

148. When in the last years of this epochal struggle
that goal was imperilledby a foul terror, a secret army
organization which stopped at nothing to gain its ends,
this small pu~ proud nation under its brave and farsighted leaders earned undying fame by a uniCil\e display of discipline and self-control whichhadsofar been
associated in history only with a handful of martyrs
and saints. Never before had an entire people in the
face of the most blood-curdling threats and despite
the gravest provocations shown such unmistakable faith
in the ultimate triumph of :right and p:'inciple.
149. But just as man cannot achieve immortality
without associating himself with a universal powercall it by what name you will-so might the valiant
Algerian people not have attained undying honour without their association with the higher moralforce in the
world which, in our time, is represented by the United
Nations.

151. So many
mind and the h
Algeria. but I
be omitted bec'
under differen
parts not only
where.
152. There a
be learned fr
being brought
problems of a
moments of do
lesson which
courage and th
peoples of the

154. There i

must resolve
anywhere on
the sufferings
too dangerous
ism is a ho,
colonial Powe

155. Mention
sentatives of t
de Gaulle in
of Algeria. W
the tributes 1
situation whic
great Eletermi
which were c
demonstrated
world even a:
encounters d
colonial prob
is deferred t
this. therefor
colonialism,
case, is no he
156. The Uni

resolution 15
manifold var'
Assembly. all
Algerian rep
statesmen, le
, Bella, will be
the confines
unliberated pe

J.l46th meeting - 8 October 1962

393

150. The United Nations was with the Algerianpeople
from the very start of thoir fight. And when the Gan"
eral Assembly could move only haltingly, the African...
Asian group took up that responsibility in round..theyear surveillanoe, oontinuing to keep the struggle in
the forefront of world public opinion, exerting grea~
moral pressure and keeping high the hopes of Algerian
resistance in its darkest and most diffioult days, when
the Algerian people were facing what appeared to be almost overwhelming odds. It is altogether fitting to
recall that the Chah'man of the Standing Committee on
Algeria was none other than U Thant, whose patient
diplomacy and wisdom has been so justly recognized
when we appointed him our Secretary-General.

157. The Government and the people of Ceylon salute
independent Algeria and wish its Oovernment and
people ever~r happiness, prosperity anti suocess inthe
years and in the great tasks thatUe ahead of them.
158. Mr. OKAZAKI (Japu.l): The reality of an inde"
pendent Algel'ia as a sov~ .ceigu, equal State and Memh
b
hi d W
bel' of the United Nations as now een ac eve. e
of the Japanese delegation share fully in the general
rejoicing and I count it a privilege and honour, on behalf of thl' Government and people of Japan, to offer
our warmest congratulations and most sincere good
wishes to the Prime Minister, Ahmed Ben Be1la, to
the representatives from Algeria, to the Government
they represent here, and to the Algerian people.

151. So many thoughts and feelings spring from the
mind and the heart when one speaks about the epoch of
Algeria, but I shall end by stati,lg only wbat must not
be omitted because the Algerian struggle stlll continues
under different names and in various guises in several
parts not only of the African continent but also else"
where.
152. There are many lessons, many greatlessons, to
be learned from the historic chapter which is now
being brought to a close. Confronted as we are with
problems of appalling magnitude when we encounter
moments of doubt and hesitation, let us rememberh'le
lesson which Algeria taught us, the lesson of the
courage and the invincibility ofthe great masses of the
peoples of the world.

159. In the end it was not strife, it was not war, that
brought independence to Algel'ia. It was the sober
realization at long last that war never really settles
anything and that conflict must give way, sooner or
later. to the processes ofpeaceful change, the methods
of negotiation and oompromise. Our highest tribute
must be paid to all those on both sides of thE:' ~ong and
terrible struggle in Algeria. inpartioularto President
de Gaulle, who, with great wisdom and foresight, paved
the way to self-determination for the people of Algeria
and to the happy event we celebrate today.
160. The st~uggle for self-determination in Algeria
was beset with many perils; the path towards independence was strewn with obstacles: the way was long
and filled with sorrows. To all those. ,both of French
and of indigenous origin, who lost their lives along the
tortuous way, and to all those who have suffered so
keenly in the loss ofthose they loved, we pause to offer
our deepest sympathy.

153. It is our privileged appointment with destiny to
lead these people to freedom from oppression and
bondage. But if we do not ourselves have the faith and
the courage and the wisdom to lead them, let us at
least have the gallantry and the wisdom to let them
lead us.
154. There is one more lesson, and that is that we
must resolve that there shall be no more Algerias
anywhere on the face of the earth. The sacrifices and
the sufferings involved are too great to bear repetition,
too dangerous for world peace. The cause of colonialism is a ho,eless cause; it is a dead cause which no
colonial Power can ever hope to win.
'
155. Mention has been made here by many representatives of the courageo~ role played by President
de Gaulle in the emergence. of the independent State
of Algeria. We should like, to associate ourselves with
the tributes made to President de Gaulle. It was a
situation which he inherited. He dealt with it with
great determination and far-seeing statesmanship.
which were charactex'istic of the man. But it also
demonstrated to us that with the best will in the
world even a: man as great as President de Gaulle
encounters dangerous difficulties in dealing with a
colonial problem when the solution of that problem
is deferred too long. The lesson we must learn from
this, therefore. is that the qUicker the liquidation of
colonialism. the better for everybody. Time. in this
case. is no healer.
156. The United Nations has already decided by its
resolution 1514 (XV) to end colonialism in all its
manifold varieties. We are now. in this General
Assembly, all the stronger for this task because the
Algerian representatives and heroic leaders and
statesmen, led by their Prime Minister, Ahmed Ben
, Bella. will be with us to carry on the struggle beyond
the confines of their own dear homeland to all the
unliberated peoples of the world.

161. It is our earnest hope that the wounds opened by
the terrible ordeal of the past eight years will all soon
be healed and that. as the new Algeria undertakes the
arduous tasks of reconciliation and reconstruction, a
spirit of t:rue brotherhood will now and for ever after
prevail between the two communities in the country.
and between the two great Republics. Peace and continuing close, friendly relations between tire Republic
of France, a Charter Member of the !Jnlte,i Nations,
and the Republic of Algeria. the newest M:ember of ou\,
Organization, cannot but strengthen greatly the entire
fabric of international peace and security and the
efforts to which we all are committed to achieve that
high ideal.
162. We welcome you among us with hee.rt-felt sincerity and we look forward eagerly to working side by
side with you in pursuit ofthe noble aims of the United
Nations.
163. Mr. JAWAD (Iraq): We welcome today in our
midst a new Member to the United Nations. the Republic
of Algeria, whose birth has been preceded by an heroic
struggle without parallel in our history. For seven and
a half years the walls of this Assembly have echoed
with the impassioned cry of a brave people determined
to be free. No alternative to independence wa,s ever
'olerated or envisaged. and the fair land of Algeria
~vas witness to heroic achievements and sacrifices of
such magnitude as to fill the whole world with awe and
admiration.
164. The significance of this historic day must be
seen in theconte:xtofthemovementfornationalliberation which has now enveloped the entire globe. Algerian
independence may be. justly regarded as the turning
point in that historic movement. Fo!' seven years the

394

General Assembly -.Seventeenth Session - Plenary Meetings

world looked with admiration at the epic struggle of the
, Algerian people against the vastly superior strength
and resouroes of a great Power with its network of
allianoes. Never before have a people fought ag~inst
such odds in order to attain their freedom. Never be..
fore did a people fight with such determination and
sacrifice. The Algerian struggle threatened to split a
great country and cause irreconcUable strife. were it
not for the sagacity and the determinationofone great
man, President de Gaulle, to whom we wish to pay a
deserved tribute.
165. Out of tragedy and sacrifice a nation was born.
It shall move forward and forge for itself a future
worthy of the valour of its heroic fighters who died
by the hundreds of thousands on the field of battle. The
people of Algeria have with their suffering and their
invincible courage translated into a living and vibrant
reality the great ideals enshrined in the Charter.
Can anyone deny the decisive influence ofthe Algerian
revolution in accelerating the march of freedom in
Africa and elsewhere in the world ?By its example and
by its sacrifices Algeria is truly the redeemer of
Africa. For us, the Arab people, the Algerian epic shall
for ever remain one of the most glorious pages in our
history. We owe the valiant people of Algeria a debt of
gratitude. Their struggle provided, and continues to
provide, inspira~ion and hope for those of our people
still fighting for liberty and independence.
166. Today we welcome in our midst the repre'"
sentatives of the Algerian people, led by Prime
Minister Ahmed Ben Bella, whose renown as a
d t
h t
dauntless fighter for liberty has sprea hroug ou
the world. The ravages of war have left a tragic legacy.
The task of rebuilding will tax the patience and fortit
d
tude of the Algerian people as much as he arme
struggle they had to wage to free themselves from
foreign domination.
167. On this day, and from this rostrum, we salute
the countless thousands who gave their lives so that
Algeria may be free. Their great sacrifices have not
been in vain. This is the day forwhich they fought and
died. This is a day which shallfor ever live in history.
marking one of the greatest victories in man's'
t
al t
If! f
d
dd' 't
e ern s rugg e or ree om an 19m y.
168. Mr. ALl (Pakistan): It is difficult for me to give
adequate expression to the emotions of joy and happiness we feel today as we see the delegation of Algeria,
led by Prime Minister Ben Bella, take its rightful
place in our midst.
169. For seven long years the people of Pakistan
watched-often With anguish, on occasion with anger,
but always with admiration and hope-the unflinching
struggle of their brothers across the ocean to break
the shackles of foreign bondage, become a free
people and thus be enabled truly to mould and shape the
course of their destiny. Their sorrows we:re our
sorrows; their sufferings found an echo in our hearts.
170. Today, as that long struggle reaches its culmination, with hearts elated with joy we welcome the
representatives of free Algeria here and acclaim and
salute the leaders of a people that fought bravely.
triumphed honourably and remained trlle to their
cherished goal.
171. The victory the people of Algeria have won is
not the victory of one· people over another. In the
bitter years of war and in the folly of its aftermath,
the people of Algeria suffered terrible and tragic
lOsses. They gave the flower of their manhood for

the triumph of a oa\U!le whioh was not theirs alone,
but that of all people still subject to fOl'eign domina..
tion-a cause that moves all men everywhere, whatevel'
their raoe, colour, creed 01' belief: the caUSE> of human
dignity, the cause of freedom. the cause of justice, the
oause of liberty, equality and fraternity.

of the Franc
pedists, Vie
179. I am
Government
President of
paving the w
fident that
France are 1
from the col
France whic
dispatched s
for(1 firmly
countries an
standing and
180. In cone
the congrat
and Governm
of the Demo
181. Mr. A
It is with gre
the Latin Am
cratic and P
Nations and t
Government.
and enthusia

172. Long after the din and the noise of the struggle
have died down and the years of bitterness are for-gotten, after the memory of this day of rejoioing has
dimmed, the name of Algeria will remain a symbol of
man's indomitable oourage andl spirit and a torch to
light the way of all who struggle to be free.
173. Franoe, too, emerges from a travail. Honour is
due to its great leader and statesman, r'l"esident de
Gaulle, whose sagacity, clear-sightedness and deter...
mination brought France out of its time of trial.
174. We join othtlr delegations in paying our tribute
both to the people of Algeria and to the people of France
for having enabled this Assembly to witness today the
triumph of right and justice over might and mis...
guidance. This is a victory over which all men of good
will must rejoice and at which fighters for freedom
must take heart.
175. On behalf of the Government and people of
Pakistan and on behalf of the Pakistan delegation, I
extend a warm welcome to the delegation of Algeria
and. through it, convey to the people of Algeria our
fraternal greetings and good wishes for their happiness
and prosperity.

182. Every
tance accom
Which, fortun
forgotten in
which comes
inspires gre
under tropic

176. Mr. TARAZI (Syria) (translated from French):
In 1955, when the General Assembly was considering
whether the Algerian question should be placed on its
agenda, Mr. Shukairy-who was then representative of
Syria-stated from this rostrum [532nd meeting] that
Algeria would one day be admitted to the United
Nations. ! am prOUd to recall his words, for they were
imbued with resolute optimism and unshakable faith. I
am happy to note that the first speaker to congratulate
independent Algeria on its admission to the United
Nations was Mr. Couve de Murville, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the French Republic.
177. The Algerian people waged a heroic struggle
which is now enshrined for ever in the annals of the
wars of liberation. They fought for the recognition of
their Arab personality; they fought in order to be
master on the soil of their ancestors; they fought for
the complete destruction of the coalitions fostered by
reactionary forces still living intheeraofcolonialism
and nostalgic for an illusory and vain grandeur. The
fight of the Algerian people has not been in vain. It has
served not only Algeria but all mankind. The people and
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, who have
followed with vigilant attention the various stages of
the struggle of the Algerian people, are happy to con'"
gratulate Algeria as an independent nation and Member
of the United Nations, as also Mr. Ahmpd Ben Bella,
the Head of its first Government.
178. Algeria, made greater by its struggle tempered
by experienne, cannot fail to contribute to the success
of ou:t Organ'i:Zil."tidn. It Is ,mm With pleasure that I
congratulate and thank all those Frenchmen who
assessed the motives of what was called the Algerian
war at their true value. There can be no doubt that
distinguished personalities such as Jean-Paul Sartre,
Simone de Beauvoir, Louis Aragon, Claude Bourdet,
the Ba-tannier William Thorpe and many others have
done honour to the great traditions offreedomof revo'"
lutionary France. They have raised the world prestige

183. In the
the great eve
great joys of
are bought a
the finest pa
who believe
thought.

1\1
.(,
\

184. The De
which we ar
those pages
able facts an
do honour to
people and t
politician
President of
185. In addi
those who,
make Algeri
we are happy
constitutes 0
firm a victor
which remi
achieved thr
freedom.
186. For al
day opening
come to joi
those great
18'1'. We wo
representiog
of its sons al
been extolle
Government
sincere adm'

f

i

I
~

n

.t

i,

"

e

e

1146th meeting -- 8 OCtober 1962

895

and prosperity, and we say to them: We are ~ertain
that your patriotism, courage and firm determination,
which sustained you in the great combat you have waged
victoriousl~' in order to forge this free and independent
State which is youX' pride and which excites'our admiration, will now be devoted to the building of your country.
TMs is a task of another kind ana much more difficult
than that of winning military victories, but it is in no
way beyond men such as you who, thanks to the values
you represent, have won this seat whichyou so rightly
occupy in the Ur.ited Nations.
188. You have come, we are sure, to join those whose
voice will always be raised to defend and strengthen
this Organization of which you are now a Member and,
consequently, to support the great principles it cham..
pions and in whose, name we are happy and proud to
wish you a most cordial welcome.
189. Mr. KURAL (Turkey) (translated from French):
I am especially happy today to express, on behalf of
the Turkish delegation, our joy at seeing Algeria join
us here in the United Nations.
190. May I also be permitted to say on this occasion
how glad we all were in Turkey to see the Algerian
problem, which was a source of great concern to us
for many years, reach its natural SOlution, il. solution
preceded by so much suffering and so many sacrifices.
182. Every birth is an event of considera"1!e impor191. The Turkish people have always had brotherly
tance accompanied by disturbances in the natural order
feelings towards the Algerian people, and the tradiwhich, fortunately, almost inv~riably die down and are
tional ties offriendship between my country and France
forgotten in the beauty and richness of the flower
go back for many centuries. That is why we joyfully
which comes to life and the new order of things which
welcomed this solution, which meets the legitimate
inspires great hopes, like some, a radiant sunrise
and natural aspirations of the courageous Algerian
under tropical skies.
people and which is in accordance with the liberal
183. In the life of man, too, as in the life of peoples,
traditions of France.
the great eventofa birth follows aprocess. w~lereby the
192. We conl;lider that a special tribute is due to the
great joys of this world and the ultimate satisfactions
Algerian leaders and statesmen, as also to the French
are bought at the price of sacrifices which make up
statesmen and in particular to General de Gaulle, for
the finest pages of history and which remain, for those
the wisdom, realism and clear-sightedness with which,
who believe in human values, a subject for profound
in extremely difficult circumstances, they approached
thought.
the solution of a problem that was poisoning relations
between two peoplel'l.
184. The Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria,
which we are welcoming today, immortalizes one of . 193. At this time when the Algerian delegation, headed
those pages filled with lessons drawn from the memorby Mr. Ahmed Ben Bella, is joining us here in the
able facts and great political events ofour time, which
United Nations in order to make its valuable contribu,·
do honour to the courage and patriotism o~the Algerian
tion to the work of the Assembly, and when Algeria is
people and to the sense of reality of that outstanding
taking its rightful place among the nations ofU'e world,
politician and statesman, General de Gaulle, the
I am especially proud that the honour falls t-" me to
President of the French Republic.
express to it, 9n behalf of my country, our wa:'mest
congratulations and to wish it all the happiness and
185. In addition to the sacrifices and the heroism of
prosperity it deserves.
those who, arms in hand, fought and died in order to
make Algeria a free, independent and respected State,
194. Mr. USHER (Ivory Coast) (translated from
we are happy to acknowledge that the Evian Agreement
French): The independence of Algeria is a symbol.
constitutes one of those acts which, while they conEach one of us welcomes it, and perhaps for different
firm a victory won by force of ar~s, are also a symbol
reasons, but I, as an African, see in it, first and
which reminds us that, for some, greatness is
foremost, the triumph of freedom, the liberation of an
achieved through recognizing the right of others to
African country, the independence of another part of
freedom.
African soil and hence the strengthening ofthat African
unity which is taking shape.
186. For all these reasons, the United Nations is to195. Yet while my delegation rejoices it cannot, alas,
day opening its doors to one of the new States which
help thinking of those who have fallen and those who
come to join us rich in experience acquired in one of
may still fall because some ruling Powers, and even'
those great epics that command admiration.
some of the more backward among those under their
18'1'. We would ask those who have the great honour of
domination, have failed to understand that no formula.
representing it in tbis Assembly, where the courage
even a colonialist one, caD. withstand the force that is
of its sons and their passion for freedom has so often
leading all the peoples of Africa to independenl:;-a.
been extolled, to be good enough to convey to the
196. My Government knows from experience that a
Government and the people of Algeria our feelings of
sincere admiration and our wishes for their happiness
people whose freedom is threatened and Which i!il ..

of the Franoe whioh gave us Voltaire, the Enoyclopedists, Viotor Hugo, Emile Zola and so manyothers.
179. I am also happy to congratulate the French
Government and its Head, General de Gaulle, the
President of the Republio, on the work they did in
paving the way for the Evian Agreements. We are oonfident that the relations between the Arab world and
France are now entering a new phase; a France freed
from the colonial ooncept is certainly stronger than a
Franoe which claimed to be powerful blilcause it had
dispatched soldiers to Asia and Africa. We are therefor[1 firmly convinced that the relations between our
countries and France will be based on mutual understanding and friendship.
180. In conclusion, r should like to express once again
the congratulations and sincere wishes of the people
and Government of Syria to the Government and people
of the Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria.
181. Mr. AUGUSTE (Haiti) (translated from French):
It is with great emotion that we welcome, on behalf of
the Latin American group, the admission of the Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria to the United
Nations and that we see Mr. Ben Bella, the Head of its
Government, take his seat among us amid the prolonged
and enthusiastic applause of the Ass~mbly.

396 '

General Assembly - Seventeenth Session - Plenary Meetings

driven to despair has the duty and the right to defend
itself by all possible means; indeed, Napoleon nI did
not begin to think seriously about Italy until he was the
target of Orsini's bomb.
197. All nationalists who are not understood will employ the same method. But it behooves u.s to realize
that all the force used against them will only result in
useless destruction of human life, for nothing can withstand such ideas.
198. It was because he was convinced ofthat fact that
President Houphoul;!t-Boigny made more and more frequent contacts and increasingly urgent ap,paals for
negotiations to be held as quickly as possible. On 3
January, in a speech to the National Assembly of the
Ivory Coast, he made the following statement:

"France cannot be unaware of the mortal danger
hanging over Africa as a result of the prolongation
of the Algerian war. Nor can it be unaware of the
tragic situation in which it would place us if unhappily our apperJs for peace, for negotiations and
for the democratic application of 'ilie principle of
self-determination went unheeded. "
President Houphouet went on to say:
"It cannot be that France does not understand. "
199. The greatness of General de Gaulle, towhichwe
pay a tribute, lies in the fact that he has always reso-lutely followed the course of history. We admire his
faith, his fervour and his courage, which in certain
cIrcumstances have saved France and which h"ave
once again er{abled him to save France, Africa and the
world, at the risk of his own life, by giving independence to sixteen African and Malagasy countries, including Algeria.

200. President Houphouet-Boigny, his Government
and the people of the Ivory Coast send greetingS to
Mr. Ahmed Ben Bella, his Government and the Algerian
people. They llpplaud the political maturity of the
Algerian people, their pacifism in the face ofthe band
of desperadoes who sought to destroy at the last
minute the work that the ~gerian people and General
de Gaulle had accomplished at Evian. They rejoice
that the integrity and unity of Algeria has been safeguarded and express their sincere wishes for Algeria's
prosperity•
201. In conclusion, I should like to draw a lesson from
the action we have just accomplished In admitting
Algeria to the United Nations and setting the final seal
on its independence. The fiction of Algeria as a province of France dates from before the time when Nice
became French, but it has not be(~n able to withstand
the Algerians' desire for indeper.dence. The citizens
of the reign of Louis-PhHippe little thought when acclaiming Bugeaud's victories that they were acclaiming
the victory of the grandsons of Abdel-Kader's warriors. Henceforth everyone must be convinced that no
legal or constitutional fiction can withstand nationalism.

202. Colonial wars are useless; the forces of repression and tyranny are Dlerely evidence of general
insanity. Military force will never prevail over ideas
and concepts; those who aspired to preserve the empire
of Galli~ni, Lyautey and P~re de Foucault by force of
arms have reaped their award.
203. History is a science;. it even rises to the level of
theology. The Roman Empire collapsed; the great em~

pire of Napoleon was unabl~ to resist the rise of
nationRlities; nationalism is of all times, of all centuries; it has no colour.
204. On the occasion of Algeria's achievement of
independence my country hopes that all the Members
of the United Nations, which have undertaken to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war, will
be ever 1p.ore vigilant to avoid wars, all wars, even
colonial Wllrs; that can be done only ifevery one of us
realiz'es that colonialism has become a shirt of Nessus
which we must get rid of at all costs.
205. Mr. DELISLE (Canada)(translatedfrom French):
I have the honour to pror.ounce these words of welcome
not only on behalf of the delegation of Canada, but also
on behalf of the delegation of New Zealand, which
wishes to associate itself with the sentiments I am
expressing.
206. It. is with a feelitlg 0" great satisfaction that
Canada today welcomes Algeria to the General Assembly of the United Nations. We can understand the
pride felt by the Government and people of Algeria on
this happy occasion of the confirmation of their
achievement of independence and sovereignty, of which
we are witnesses today. The fact that Algeria is able
to take its place among us today is the result not only
of the courage shown by the Algerian people, but also
of the lofty vision and firm determination of General
de Gaulle, the President of the French Republic. I
venture, after so many others, to pay him a tribute in
the. name of my country for the eminent role he has
played in the historic events of the past few years.
207. I should also like to welcome Mr. Ben Bella, the
Prime Minister of Algeria, and to offer him my best
wishes. I want to congratUlate both him and his Government on the success they have achieved in ths l:'1plementation of measures concerning 'the protection of
citizens of varied racial origins living in Algeria, in
the reorganization of the administrative sector of the
Government and in the restoration of the country's
economy.

208. In addition to the difficult problems which any
Government has to face on attaining power, the Algerian
Republic will now have to try to efface tile scars left by
seven years ofbitter fighting. Nevertheless the spirit in
which the negotiations which eventually led to mdependence were carried out and the moderation shown
,by both parties durIng this difficult period are a good
omen for the future ••Canada earnestly hopes that this
spirit of understanding will persist and that a fruitful
association based on mutual esteeql will continue to
unite the two Republics.
.
209. Canada expects to maintain the same links of
friendship. with Algeria that bind it to the other countries of Africa and of the Arab world, particularly in
view of the fact that our two countries share a common
language.
210. My delegation and the New Zealand delegation
look forward to close co-operation with the Algerian
delegation in seeking solutions of the problems which
the United Nations has to face now, and will have to
face in the future.

211. Mr. VAKIL (Iran) (translatedfrom French): May'
I add my voice. to those of the preceding speakers to
welcome Mr. Ben Bella,the Prime Minister of Algeria,
and the delegation of the Algerian Republic, .which has
taken its place arr.lOng us.

212. It i
for the tl
Mr. Ben
Al~'6ria, t
sion of

213. Alg
years of
long trag
freedom,
My deleg
in 1956.
to the sit
world pub
soon as
Algerian
of the chi
rejoice to
us. We a
minent pI
standing

214. The
he recent
his taking

"I off
success
progres
people;
strengt
between
215. Ish
a tribute
to Gener
Republic,
realism
conclusio
216. Fin
happiness
reconstr

217. Mr.
In CO-Bp

Add.l] by
and by a
cratic an
wished to
pay a we
Algeria 1
were will
independ
Popular
sove,rei
ance an
solemnit
bly today
218. Th
maintain
never do
Algerian
ful'concl
call to m

li46th meeting - 8 October 1962
,of.

mof
~rs

we

\'in

~en

us
sus
Jh):
me
Iso
.loh
am
:hat
imthe
Lon
leir
doh
Lble
mly
Ilso
lral
~. I

e in
has

the
lest
irnlle1 of

~, in

the
ry's

any
rian
!;by
it in
ldeown
:ood
this
itful
,e to

s of
lUnly in
mon

Ition
rim
hich
re to

May'

~s to
~ria,

lhas

,

212. It is with profound joy that I aot as spokesman
for the Government and people of Iran in offering to
Mr. Ben Bella, and through him to the valiant people of
AI~eria, the most sincere congratulations on the occasion of Algeria's admission to the United Nations.
213. Algeria's independence, achieved after seven
years of heroic struggle which was the last phase of a
long tragedy, has finally reconciled, in justice and
freedom, two peoples, both of whom are dear to us.
My delegation is proud to haH been one of the first}
in 1956, to draw the attention of the Security COt:ncil
to the situation in Algeria§/ and tbus to have awakened
world public opinion to the need to give satisfaction as
soon as possible to the legitimate aspirations of the
Algerian people. For seven years Algeria has been one
of the chief concerns of the United Nations; today, we
rejoice to see its represen~ativetake his place among
us. We are convinced that Algeria will occupy a prominent place in this Organization and will play an outstanding part in the great African-Asian family.
214. The Prime Minister of Iran, in a. telegram which
he recently sent to Mr. Ben Bella on the occasion of
his taking office, said:
"I offer you my most sincere wishes for your
success in the noble task entrusted to you and for the
progress and prosperity of the' valiant Algerian
people; in a spirit of brotherhood, we shall work to
strengthen the numerous links which already exist
between our two countries."
215. I should also like to take this opportunity to pay
a tribute to the French Government, and in particular
to General de Gaulle, the President of the French
Republic, whose political wisdom and constructive
realism have been determining factors in the happy
conclusion of the Algerian drama.
216. Finally, I wish independent Algeria prosperity,
happiness and entire success in the gigantic work of
reconstruction which lies before it.
217. Mr. COULIBALY(Mali)(translatedfromFrench):
In co-sponsoring the draft resolution [A/L.394 and
Add.l] by which the Assembly has decided, unanimously
and by acclamation, on' .the admission of the Demo..'
cratic and,Popular Republic 'of Algeria, mydelegatioh
wished to perform a duty of fraternal solida 'ity and to
pay a well-deserved ,tribute to the valiant people of
Algeria for the sacrifices of every kind which they
were willing to make ih order to regain their national
independence. The admission of the Democratic and
Popular Republic of Algeria to the great family of
sove~eignnations is an e'ient whose historic import";'
ance and significance el\dow oUr decision with the
solemnity and gravity that are the mark of the Assembly today.
218. The Republic of Mali, 'which for centuries has
maintained good neighbourly relations with Algeria,
never doubted the success of the revolution, which the
Algerian people launched and conducted to a successful 'conclusion in circumstances and by means which
call to mind the legends in which Af:rica abOunds.
219. The people and the Republic of Mali have
always been conscious of the decisive role played by
the Algerian revolution in the African liberation
movements. This objective appreciation of the justice
and extent of the struggle of the Algerian people int:lvitably strengthened the traditional solidarity between
§j Offic:ialRecords of the Security Council. meventh Year; Supple.
mentfor April,. .May and June 195(;.' document S/3589 and Add.1.

397

Clur two countries and gave it its dynamic character.
It was against this background, on the morrow of the
proclamation of the independence of the Republic of
Mali, while the army of the former. administering
Powel', which was fighting the people of Algeria, was
still occupying important bases in our country, while
our own independence was still undergoing severe
trials, that my Govermnent recognized the Republic
of Algeria and decided to xnaintain diplomatic relations with it.
220. Mr. Modlbo Keita, the President of the Republic
of Mali, when explaining this decision to the Press,
stated: "We have no choice. The Algerian people is a
sister people; it is fighting against the colonialr6gime
which we denounce; we are at its side whatever may
happen."
221. We earnestly hope that thep:rofoundsignificance
of the presence of Algeria henceforth in our Organization may finally be understood by those colonial Powers
which are still lagging behind and by the settler
Governments which they have installed in certain
African territories. The example of the Algerian
martyrs has proved that there are no limits to the
sacrifices which a people determined to reconquer
their national independence are willing to accept.
The Algerian people have accepted sacrifices and
suffering with courage and political IRwareness,
cherishing the hope that their success would convince
the colonial Powers of the absurdity of trying to continue to dominate other peoples by force.
222. The r~alism shown by General de Gaulle, the
Head of the French State, in the solution of the Algerian
problem is admirable, and it is only right to pay a
tribute to his courage and political wisdom. May the
Government of Portugal learn from the lesson andput
all. end to the tragedy for which it is responsible in
Angola, Mozambique and elsewhere. The Algerian
people have our admiration and sympathy.
223. My delegation is therefore very glad to have
joined in sponsoring the draft resolution calli.'1g for
the admission. of the Democratic and Popular Republic
of Algeria to the United Nations, I am convinced that
the Algerian people, who have proved their unity and
their political maturity, will abide by the principles
of the Charter and'make a positive contribution to the
work of our Organization.
224. On behalf of the Republic of Mali, I offer the
Algerian delegation my fraternal congratulations @dI
am convinced that the similarity of the aims pursued
by our two Governments v.:ill strengthen our co;;':,
operation within the Un.ited Nations.
,.
225~, Mr. WACHUKU (Nigeria): It is with the greatest .
of pleasure and with a certain emotion that,I come to\'
this rostrum to say a few words in welcoming a new
African nation to the United Nations. TwO years ago,
the scene which we are witnessing today was also, '
staged herein connexion with my own country.':'

226. This is not an occasion for a long speech~but/
it is an occasion for reilection because we are noW'
remembering the difficult problem which was solved
by the joint efforts of all the Members of the Unitea
Nations working together, and particularly of the
members of the African-Asian group who, through
thick and thin, stood by Algeria in its struggle to Win
independence. The new status that the Algerian nation
has today acquired brings great responsibilities inits
wake.

..-.. .
398

General Assembly - Seventeenth Session - PlenlU'Y Meetings

227. I have before me a !nap of Africa. As I look at
the northern fringe, running from the Atlantic to the
Red Sea, I see that with the story that is being written
today, with the exception of a littlepatchon the northwestern portion of the continent. we should have written
finis to the history of colonialism and imperialism on
the northern fringe of our continent. It is the deeper and
the central heart of Africa which today feels great joy
and great emotion.
228. In congratulating Algeria on behalfof the Government and people of Nigeria, I want also to take this
opportunity to express our deep appreciation of the
part played by Tunisia. Morocco, Libya. the United
Arab Republic and the other northern neighbours of
Algeria in the days of Algeria's tribulation, suffering
and hardship. Without the support, moral, material
and physical, that they gave to Algeria, it would have
been impossible to have had for background the security
of Algeria's backwoods to enable it to resist a great
Power that kept it under subjugation for so long.
229. So in showing our gratitude to all those who had
made it possible for this newAfrican nation to be born
and to be admitted to this Organization today. we shall
not be fulfilling all our duties effectively if we do not
::-?member all those who have contributed to this great
success. For the success of Algeria is the success of
Africa;-Algeria's achievements will be the achievements of Africa, and if Algeria. succeeds in making its
ir!.dependence a worth-while one. it will add to the glory
and honour of our continent. As a country upon which
great responsibilities have been placed by circumstances and historical events, I can see that Algeria.
even though it is becoming a Member of the United
Nations only today, has a mighty and a decisive role
to play on the northern fringe of Africa. Therefore.
consistent with the telegram which my Prime Minister
has already sent to the Prime Minister of Algeria,
and consistent with the goodwill and the gratitu~e that
flow from the depths of our hearts in welcoming Algeria
to this Assembly. I want to say that I am sure that,
having accepted membership in this Assembly, Algeria
will use all its talents and all the experience gained
through these difficult times in endeavouring -to contribute its part in the total redemption of our continent.
I am sure also that, in the struggle for the complete
liberation of the rest of the continent, all the African
countries will work in harmony and brotherly fellowship, so that in the final analysis we can look back to
this glorious day as another chapter in the annals of the
future splendour of Africa.
230. As I said a few moments ago, this is not the time
for long speeches. From tne moment we were admitted
to this Ass·embly we did not hesitate to associate ourselves with the struggle of Algeria. We have never
fallen behind in our efforts to make it possible for
Algeria to regain its soul, and it is ,our earnest hope
that, with the advent of Algerian independence and with
its membership in the United Nations, Algeria will be
a great daughter of Africa.
231. Once more, on behalf of my country and my
Government, I say to Algeria: welcome to the United
Nations, welcome to the African family of nations,
welcome to the world community of free and independent nations.
232. Mr. CHERMONT (Brazil) (translated from
French): The delegation of Brazil wishes to be associated in the congratulations and good wishes which have
been expressed on the occasion oftheadmissionof ,the

Algerian Republic to our Organization. The United
,Nations-and Brazil in particular-is proud to count
among its Members a new state whose struggle for
independence has been a page of history characterized
by tenacity and heroism.
233. In Algeria we have a striking demonstration of
the principle of self-determination. We are convinced
that because of the very way in which its liberation was
achieved Algeria will make a contribution of inestimable value to the Work of our Organization.
234. On behalf of the Government and people of Brazil
I am happy to express to the Government presided over
by Mr. Ben Bella and to the brave people of Algeria
our profound satisfaction at the admission of the
Algerian Republic to the United Nations and our
warmest wishes for the future of the new State.
235. Mr. PAZHWAK (Afghanistan): It is a great
privilege for me to take this opportunity to welcomr~
tp.e admission of Algeria to the United Nations, on
behalf of the Afghan Government and the people of
Afghanistan, and to express our heart-felt joy irithis
historic moment for which we have waited for so long
a time and to which we have so long looked forward.
236. I shall not allow sad thoughts to enter into this
moment of rejoicing. We are joyful that at present
we have a situation which we have always wanted to
have, and our jo~r is intensified not only by the bonds
of amity between the Afghan and Algerian peoples, but
also, much more than by anything else, by the fact that
the independence of Algeria is a further recognition of
the inherent right of all peoples and nations to selfdetermination, to liberty and to equality.
237. This is a day of pride not only for the people of
Algeria ~ut also for the United Nations. The struggle
of the Algerian people has culminated in the only way
it could in any circumstances; but it is remarkable
that the role played by the United Nations in bringing
the Algerian struggle to' this happy conclusion, the
only one possible, has been historic and great.
238. While we recall the gre?t co-operation of the
Algerian leaders with the United Nations, we also wish
to pay tribute to the great French people, many of whom
from the beginning of the struggle supported Algerian
independence and who finally constituted a majority
supporting the policy of self-determination adopted by
the great French leader President cieGaulle., While we
happHy !lote this decisive role, we haile not forgotten
how sad it was for us when we found ourselves having
a great difference of opinion with France. with whom
we have always erjoyed most friendly relations and
to whom we are g-ratefully indebted for their great
assistance and co-operation with Afghanistan in the
most vital fields of our cultural and educational programmes, for many years, and in a. spirit of traditional friendship.
239. Therefore, we appreciate the fact-and we do this
with a special sense and feeling of joy-that the solution
of the Algerian problem promises the restoration of
friendly relations between Algeria and France, and
that the admission of Algeria in the United Nations has
taken place with the positive participationof France in
accordance with the earnest desire of all other Member States of the United Nations.
240. The cost of Algerian independence has been
tremendous' indeed. As all students of history will
agree, no other people can better apprecIate the
heroic fight of the Algerian people than the Afghans.

History
Algerian
indepe.nd
perience
mainten
one coul
people i
was at
do when
confiden
tribution
241. It
moil, th
producti
becomin
inherent
and a s
are still
by Alger
242. I
our own
and free
liTho
flag to

We are
words,
whomw
by princ
in takin
nations.
243. To
Algeria
words:l
244. M

French):
Norway
the grea
this hap
ing the
this Or
long an
hearts
and the
scious
munity
France,
termina
long has
It is a g
this ha!
depende
tience,
needed
time th

Litho in U.

399

1146th meeting - 8 October 1962
nited
Jount

e for

rized
on of
lnced
l was
imarazil
over
;eria
r the
our
ltate.
great
Domr;:
S, on
lIe of
ithis
; long
/lard.
) this
esent
;ed to
)Onds
s,but
t that
ion of
self~le of

uggle
(way
kable
nging
I, the

If the
'wish
whom
:erian
jority

~edby

ilewe

~otten

,aving
whom
IS and
great
,n the
,pro;radi-

History has no better example than the one set by the
Algerian people in recent years in regaining their
independence, an example which matches the experiences of the Afghans in the defence and the
maintenance of their own independence. Therefore, no
one could have been more sure and confident than my
people in the Algerian victory when that great nation
was at war, and no one can rejoice now more than we
do when we see their aims achieved. We are equally
confident that Algeria will make a constructive contribution to the work of the United Nations.
241. It is our hope that after so many years of tur-

moil, the Algerian nation will be able to devote its
productive energies to building up their country and
becoming a more living symbol of the power of the
inherent right of self-determination and independence,
and a source of greater hope for those peoples who
are still struggling to achieve what has been achieved
by Algeria.
242. I conclude with the words with which we salute
our own national flag and the fla.gs of independence
and freedom everywhere:

"Thousands and thousands of men fall for a single
flag to be hoisted and for a nation to riBe. n
We are happy to welcome the Algeria'nflag in the same
words, among the flags of the independent nations with
whom we are united, in this great gathel ingof nations,
by principles which have resulted in Algeria's success
in taking its rightfUl place among the community of
nations.
243. To pay tribute to the heroic men and women of

Algeria who have givsn their lives, we say only three
words: long live Algeria.

244,. Mr. MERIKOSKI (Finland) (translated from
French): The delegations of Austria, Denmark, Iceland,
Norway and Sweden have done the delegation of Finland
the great honour of asking it to speak on their behalf on
this happy occasion. Our six delegations join in offering the Algerian delegation their warmest we'come to
this Organization. We have awaited this day for many
10'1g and painful years. In our consciences and in our·
hearts we have acutely felt the violence, the magnitude
and the scope of the Algerian tragedy. Deeply conscious as we are of our responsibilities in the community of nations, sincere friends of both Algeria and
France, we have done our utmost to contribute to the
termination of that fratricidal struggle which for so
long has drenched the so.il of your country with blood.
It is a great joy to us to be able at last to welcome in
this hall the representatives of free, sovereign, independent Algeriao We . 'lW what efforts, what patience, what wisdom and what courage have been
needed on both sides to achieve this end, At the same
time that we congratulate,you on your action we must

also acclaim the eminent qualities of the great statesman who presides over the destinies of France and
who has done so much to bring about this happy result.
245. It is a source of satisfaction to us to be able to
work with you here in '!:Iuilding a peaceful and united
world and inaugurating the reign of justice, security
and mutual respect to wb.ich we all aspire. We hr::.ve
great hopes of ~Tour contribution. We realize its importance. We are convinced that, following the ordeal
through which you have come and all your past experience, you will pursue with tenacity, patience and
wisdom the common aims enumerated in the Charter,
which constitute the reason why the nations of the
world, ardently desiring a better life, decided to ioin
together to form the United Nations.
246. Mr. BARRINGTON (Burma): Though separated
by thoUSa..llds of miles from Algeria, the Government
and people of the Union of Burma have from the very
outset looked upon the struggle of the people of Algeria
for independence as their own struggle. In this spirit,
we have rendered all possible help to the gallant
Algerian people in their epochal fight for freedom.
247. The humble role which Burma, in common with
all other members of the African-Asian gl'OUp, was
privileged to play 'both within and outSIde the United
Nations is a matter of record. It is therefore a matter
of great joy and gratification to my delegation that we
have admitted into our Organization today the representatives of the Democratic and Popular Republic of
Algeria. We extend to them a most 'warm welcome
and look forward to further developing and consolidating the friendship between our countries andpeoples,
a friendship which was born during their years of
struggle.
24f, In e",'tending our congratulations to our Algerian
brotllers, we would also wish to pay a tribute to
President de Gaulle of France, without whose great
foresight and courage the Algerian tragedy-a tragedy
for Algeria, for France and for the world-would today
still be continuing.
249. The emergence of the Democratic and Popular
Republic of Algeria and the presence here today 0:(
Prime Minister Ahmed Ben Bella, is a victory for
freedom, a victory for justice, a victory for peace. It
is also a victory and a gain for the United Nations,
which today joyously opens wide its doors to this new
State, born of supreme heroism and sacrifice, and
eventually of that good sense and reason which are
the heart and core of our Charter.
250. We request the delegation of Algeria to convey
to its Government and people the warm fraternal
greetings and the very best wishes of the Government
and people of the Union of Burma.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

10 this
lution
ion of
I, and
IS has
nee in
YIem-

been
(will
e the

~hans.

Litho in U.N.

77001_january 1964-2,22S
