Decision

nationals or in their territories which promote or are calculated to promote such sale or supply of such commodities or products;

At its 2934th meeting, on 9 August 1990, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Oman to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled:
"The situation between Iraq and Kuwait:
"Letter dated 2 August 1990 from the Permanent Representative of Kuwait to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/21423); 104
"Letter dated 2 August 1990 from the Permanent Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/21424); 104
"Letter dated 8 August 1990 from the Permanent Representatives of Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/21470)". 104

4. Decides that all States shall not make available to
the Government of Iraq, or to any commercial, industrial
or public utility undertaking in Iraq or Kuwait, any funds
or any other financial or economic resources and shall
prevent their nationals and any persons within their territories from removing from their territories or otherwise
making available to that Government or to any such undertaking any such funds or resources and from remitting any
other funds to persons or bodies within Iraq or Kuwait,
except payments exclusively for strictly medical or humanitarian purposes and, in humanitarian circumstances,
foodstuffs;

5. Calls upon all States, including States non-members
of the United Nations, to act strictly in accordance with the
provisions of the present resolution notwithstanding any
contract entered into or licence granted before the date of
the present resolution;

Resolution 662 (1990)

6. Decides to establish, in accordance with rule 28 of
the provisional rules of procedure, a Committee of the
Security Council consisting of all the members of the
Council, to undertake the following tasks and to report on
its work to the Council with its observations and recommendations:

of 9 August 1990

(a) To take appropriate measures to protect assets of
the legitimate Government of Kuwait and its agencies;

The Security Council,
Recalling its resolutions 660 (1990) of 2 August 1990
and 661 ( 1990) of 6 August 1990,
Gravely alarmed by the declaration by Iraq of a "comprehensive and eternal merger" with Kuwait,
Demanding once again that Iraq withdraw immediately
and unconditionally all its forces to the positions in which
they were located on 1 August 1990,
Determined to bring the occupation of Kuwait by Iraq
to an end and to restore the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Kuwait,
Determined also to restore the authority of the legitimate
Government of Kuwait,
1. Decides that annexation of Kuwait by Iraq under any
form and whatever pretext has no legal validity, and is
considered null and void;
2. Calls upon all States, international organizations
and specialized agencies not to recognize that annexation,
and to refrain from any action or dealing that might be
interpreted as an indirect recognition of the annexation;
3. Demands that Iraq rescind its actions purporting to
annex Kuwait;
4. Decides to keep this item on its agenda and to
continue its efforts to put an early end to the occupation.

(b) Not to recognize any regime set up by the occupying Power;

Adopted unanimously ar the
2934th meetin!(.

(a) To examine the reports on the progress of the
implementation of the present resolution which will be
submitted by the Secretary-General;
(b) To seek from all States further information regarding the action taken by them concerning the effective
implementation of the provisions laid down in the present
resolution;

7. Calls upon all States to co-operate fully with the
Committee in the fulfilment of its tasks, including supplying such information as may be sought by the Committee
in pursuance of the present resolution;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all necessary assistance to the Committee and to make the necessary arrangements in the Secretariat for that purpose;
9. Decides that, notwithstanding paragraphs 4 to 8
above, nothing in the present resolution shall prohibit
assistance to the legitimate Government of Kuwait, and
calls upon all States:

10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council on the progress made in the implementation of the present resolution, the first report to be submitted within thirty days;

Decision
At its 2937th meeting, on 18 August 1990, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Italy to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled:
"The situation between Iraq and Kuwait:
"Letter dated 2 August 1990 from the Permanent Representative of Kuwait to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/21423); 104

11. Decides to keep this item on its agenda and to
continue its efforts to put an early end to the invasion by
Iraq.
Adopted at the 2933rd meeting by
13 votes to none, with 2 abstentions (Cuba and Yemen).

20
