S/PV.8715

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8715th meeting

Thursday, 6 February 2020, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Soemirat
Mr. Aougi
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Mr. Zenati
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Craft
Mr. Pham

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-03035 (E)
*2003035*

S/PV.8715

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
Mr. Pedersen and Mr. Lowcock are joining today’s
meeting via video-teleconference from Geneva.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on
the alarming situation in north-west Syria, which
has further escalated since last week’s briefings (see
S/PV.8707 and S/PV.8708).
Heavy strikes, from both the air and the ground,
are causing massive waves of civilian displacement
and major loss of civilian life. We are witnessing the
humanitarian catastrophe about which the SecretaryGeneral warned and about which Emergency Relief
Coordinator Mark Lowcock will brief the Council very
shortly. It is causing human suffering, which is totally
unacceptable, and endangering international peace and
security. Yet it can, and therefore must, stop now.
On 12 January, Russia and Turkey announced that
they agreed on a fresh ceasefire for the north-west. Yet
heavy clashes and mutual shelling continued despite
the ceasefire. Two days later, air strikes by the Syrian
Government and its allies resumed. Syrian Government
forces have since launched a ground offensive in areas
south-east of the Idlib de-escalation zone. They have
made significant advances, most recently establishing
control over the major town of Maarat Al-Numan,
2/21

06/02/2020

whose population has fled from earlier attacks. Maarat
Al-Numan lies on the strategic M5 highway. ProGovernment forces have continued to push north,
reaching the city of Saraqib, the junction of the M4 and
M5 highways and close to Idlib city.
In Idlib city there are already reports of deep fear
and of civilians fleeing or preparing to flee. There are
also reports that aerial bombardment in support of the
Government’s offensive continues. Hostilities have
also intensified on other fronts, especially in western
Aleppo, where Government forces have advanced.
During the same period, Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham — a
terrorist organization designated by the Council — and
armed opposition groups launched several attacks and
counter-attacks along those fronts, including western
Aleppo and Al-Bab, in northern Aleppo. There were
reports of intensified shelling in civilian areas of
western Aleppo and of civilian casualties. There are
reports of weaponized drones being launched on Syrian
and Russian military installations south-west of Idlib.
The Russian Foreign Ministry has stated that Russian
military personnel have been killed.
Turkish forces and Syrian Government forces
have directly clashed inside Syria. On 3 February,
Syrian Government artillery reportedly hit a Turkish
observation post near Saraqib. Seven Turkish
soldiers were killed and several more injured,
according to the Turkish Ministry of Defence. We
have since seen differing reports of dozens of Syrian
Government forces killed in Turkish strikes on Syrian
Government positions.
Statements from the Russian and Turkish leadership
in recent days have shown deep differences between the
sponsors of the Idlib de-escalation arrangements. Two
days ago, the Secretary-General noted his enormous
concern about the fact that the most recent developments
constituted a change in the nature of the conflict and
reiterated his strong appeal for a cessation of hostilities.
So far those calls have not been heeded. Hundreds
of civilians have been killed in the past two months,
more than half a million civilians have been displaced
and most are fleeing into ever-shrinking areas, where
they still hope to find relative safety. Further mass
displacement seems inevitable if fighting continues.
We appear to have lost sight of the principle of
proportionality. Let me be very clear and remind
all parties that attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure, including health-care and educational
20-03035

06/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

facilities, are unacceptable. All military operations,
including those against and by terrorist groups
designated by the Security Council, must respect
the requirements of international humanitarian law,
including with regard to the protection of civilians and
civilian objects.
Ordinary people in Idlib are conveying to me
their grave fears for their lives and safety. They feel
totally voiceless. Civil society actors inside Idlib, the
best antidote and counterweight to radicalism, feel
dismayed and abandoned. Syrian women have shared
with me their fears of continued insecurity, including
increased violence targeting women fleeing and living
in displacement.
Idlib is the place that became a refuge for hundreds
of thousands of civilians from other parts of Syria who
had fled violence. As a result, the population of the Idlib
de-escalation zone has now swollen to an estimated
3 million, the vast majority of whom are civilians. It is
also the place that fighters who refused to settle their
status earlier had also sought refuge. Moreover, Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham and other Security Council-proscribed
terrorist groups, including foreign fighters, are a major
force in Idlib. Their presence and influence in the area
is unacceptable and constitutes a major challenge, first
and foremost to the civilian population of Idlib itself
and also in the wider sense for Syria, as well as for
regional and international security.
But we know from bitter experience that a continued
all-out military approach will not solve this problem and
that it would come at a completely unacceptable price.
What we are now seeing creates the very real prospect of
a bloody and protracted last stand on the Turkish border,
with grave consequences for civilians and the risk of
the dispersal of foreign terrorist fighters and ongoing
insurgency afterwards. We know that the continuation
of the military approach will only entrench and further
harden the deep international divisions over Syria and
lead to more and more pressure, thereby weakening
prospects for a step-by-step dynamic to build trust and
confidence. The events of the last few days, in which the
armies of two United Nations Member States — Syria
and Turkey — have clashed inside Syria, suggest the
very real prospect of conflagration in the immediate
region, as well as far beyond.
But we also know something else. We know that
it is possible via agreement to stabilize parts of Syria
and work on ways out. Idlib is a de-escalation zone

S/PV. 8715

established by agreement in May 2017, and it was
the subject of a further Russian-Turkish stabilization
memorandum in September 2018. Those agreements
do not have third-party monitoring, and we are
therefore not in a position to comment on their terms or
observance. What we do know is that those agreements
can enable prolonged periods of calm. So why can we
not make that happen once again? That is the message
that I impressed in my meetings recently in Moscow
and Damascus, with high-level Turkish officials and
with the co-Chairs of the Humanitarian Task Force
meeting today in Geneva. I will take this message to
Tehran in the coming days, and I will continue to press
on the most important actors their responsibility to take
a different path.
I do not pretend to have a magical solution for
Idlib. But I am convinced that, with a serious attempt
at international cooperation, a solution can be found,
while building on and augmenting earlier agreements.
There is an urgent need for a sustained ceasefire and
immediate unfettered humanitarian access to the
civilian population. There is a need to contain the
situation to give additional time to enable solutions
to be found. There must be strengthened engagement
with the civilian population. The question of foreign
fighters needs to be squarely tackled. The provision of
support to internationally proscribed terrorist groups
needs to be further restricted. Any use of force against
internationally proscribed groups should be carefully
targeted. There could be serious exploration of a
strengthened international presence, with the consent
of the Syrian authorities. The combined resources of
the international community need to come together.
I appeal for an end to the hostilities, and I appeal
to all to engage in a serious international effort to
cooperate on Idlib. It is a humanitarian imperative.
It is the way towards effective counter-terrorism. It
is in the interests of regional and international peace
and security. And it is the essential foundation for a
sustainable path out of the Syrian conflict, which is now
approaching its tenth year. The Council recognized that
when it unanimously adopted resolution 2254 (2015),
which stipulated a nationwide ceasefire alongside a
cooperative approach to combating terrorism, full
respect of Syria’s sovereignty and a credible and
inclusive United Nations-facilitated political process.
That remains the only path to end the conflict. The
major players and the members of the Council need to
put their full weight behind that logic.

20-030353/21

S/PV.8715

The situation in the Middle East

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: Geir Pedersen just updated
the Security Council on the political and military
developments. Let me therefore update the Security
Council on the humanitarian situation.
In the week since I last briefed the Council on the
humanitarian catastrophe unfolding in north-west Syria
(see S/PV.8707), we have seen a further substantial
escalation. Every morning we wake up to more reports
of shelling and air strikes on dozens of communities
throughout the north-west. The impact of military
operations on civilians has been severe. The Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights has now documented 373 civilians killed since
1 December. Forty-nine deaths were recorded between
1 and 5 February. Three humanitarian workers from
organizations that the United Nations works closely
with have also been killed in recent days.
While many of the attacks have been reported close
to front lines, we have also seen an escalation in the
major civilian centres in the north-west. The Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights reported one of the most serious incidents
in the last two months on 15 January, when at least
19 civilians are believed to have been killed, and more
than 60 others injured, as a result of an air strike that hit
the Souq Al-Hal vegetable market in Idlib city.
More than 95 per cent of all civilian deaths were
in non-Government-controlled areas. The bombing
and shelling have forced hundreds of thousands more
people to move in an attempt to find safety. We now
estimate that 586,000 people have moved in the last
two months. They are mostly children. Two-hundredthousand people moved in the eight days between
26 January and 2 February. UNICEF reports that some
300,000 children in total have left since 1 December.

06/02/2020

of internally displaced persons (IDPs). There is no
unused capacity left in formal camps in Idlib, forcing
many IDPs to camp on agricultural land with no
infrastructure. Towns and villages in the area are also
congested. Approximately 80,000 people are believed
to be sheltering in unfinished houses and buildings. We
are also seeing more people move north out of Idlib into
Turkish-controlled areas in Afrin, Azaz and Al-Bab.
Approximately 144,000 people have now moved into
those areas.
The United Nations has continued to work with the
Russian Federation to try to agree pauses in hostilities
along pre-identified routes to allow those fleeing to
reach temporary safety. From 27 January to 2 February,
approximately 4,000 people were supported by local
non-governmental organizations during the pauses to
move from Ariha, Saraqib and Sarmin to areas closer
to Turkey.
Civilian infrastructure also continues to be
damaged and destroyed, or otherwise affected, by the
fighting. The World Health Organization reports that
53 medical facilities have stopped operations, either
owing to the direct impact of fighting or because the
doctors themselves need to move to safer places. Of
the 53 facilities, three were affected by air strikes or
shelling, including two attacks on 26 and 30 January in
and around Ariha in south-east Idlib. The World health
Organization reports that those two attacks killed
10 people and injured 30 others. As health-care services
break down, the danger of new disease outbreaks
grows. Approximately 26 immunization centres have
had to close down since 1 December 2019.

We have all seen chaotic pictures in town after
town as vehicles line up in every direction trying to
flee. And, as we have told the Council before, the vast
majority of people continue to move north and west into
the ever-smaller enclave controlled by non-Government
groups. Those areas are now dramatically overcrowded,
and available accommodation is severely congested.

As Geir Pedersen noted, the Secretary-General
spoke once again about these issues earlier in the
week. He has been very clear. The attacks on civilians
and civilian infrastructure taking place in north-west
Syria are unacceptable; they must be brought to an
end. As the Secretary-General has also said, we need
an immediate cessation of hostilities. While localized
pauses have helped some civilians to flee — and we
will continue to work with parties to the conflict to see
pauses continue — millions of people continue to face
some of the most severe protection challenges that we
have seen in all the years of the Syrian crisis. A broader
ceasefire continues to be the only way to ensure that
civilians are protected.

People who have just moved cannot find adequate
shelter. The area already hosts large populations

The United Nations and the broader humanitarian
community are doing everything possible to address

4/21

20-03035

06/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

the significant needs of approximately 3 million people
who need help in north-western Syria. In January,
1,227 trucks of humanitarian assistance were sent from
Turkey through the Bab Al-Hawa and Bab Al-Salam
border crossings. Nearly 900 trucks carried food
assistance for some 1.4 million people. Other trucks
carried health supplies for almost half a million people,
and non-food items for more than 230,000. That is the
most aid that the United Nations has sent across the
border in any month since the operation was authorized
in 2014. The cross-border operation remains essential
to the relief effort in Syria. It is still the only way to
reach people in need in Idlib.
My team has also this week released another
humanitarian readiness and response plan for northwest Syria, requesting an additional $336 million for
the next six months to address the massive displacement
that we have seen since 1 December 2019. The greatest
need is for shelter and protection against the harsh
winter conditions — tents, plastic sheeting, stoves,
warm clothes and fuel. We announced in December 2019
the release of $44 million from the Central Emergency
Response Fund, which I manage, for the Syria crisis,
both to meet needs in refugee hosting countries and
for humanitarian activities across Syria. That was the
largest-single allocation from the Central Emergency
Response Fund for the Syria crisis since the war began.
As of today I am releasing an additional $30 million
from the Central Emergency Response Fund as the first
resources for the new response plan in Idlib. I once
again thank the donors whose contributions make this
possible, but I also note that the Fund’s resources are
limited. I urge others to provide money for the new plan
as soon as possible.
We are also continuing our dialogue with all
parties to seek cross-line access. We will use all options
available to us to reach people in need, but there has
been no substantive progress on cross-line access since
I updated the Council last week.
Finally, let me reiterate that, despite the efforts
of humanitarian organizations, needs are growing
exponentially. There are still hundreds of thousands of
civilians in what appears to be the area at risk from
the current fighting, in addition to all those who have
fled since December 2019. What we have been warning
Council members about is therefore happening. How
severe the crisis becomes will depend on whether a
solution can be found to ease the situation for those who

S/PV. 8715

remain in harm’s way and those crammed into an eversmaller area in the north-west of Idlib.
Time is short. The front line has now moved to
within a few kilometres of Idlib city, the largest urban
centre in the north-west. I therefore echo Geir Pedersen’s
appeal for an immediate end for the hostilities and for
a serious international effort to cooperate on Idlib. It is
indeed a humanitarian imperative.
A ceasefire would be a first step, and compliance
with international humanitarian law to protect civilians
and civilian infrastructure remains fundamental. As
Mr. Pedersen also outlined, however, what is needed is
a genuine dialogue by the parties to the conflict towards
a sustainable political solution pursuant to resolution
2254 (2015).
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I think that the
worst nightmare concerning Idlib has come to pass. As
Mark Lowcock just told us, the United Nations has been
warning of this day for a long time. And this is within
an environment in which nightmares happen 24/7. Idlib
has long been, as it were, the refuge of last resort for all
those people who had to flee the attacks on Aleppo and
elsewhere. Now, having thought that they were safe in
Idlib, they find themselves under even greater attack.
As my Foreign Secretary has said, this is vicious
campaign of attrition, and it continues to force
civilians to flee by targeting their schools, hospitals
and emergency first responders. We condemn the
repeated flouting of international humanitarian law.
Mr. Lowcock explained that millions of people are
currently facing a protection crisis. We know that an
investigation by the United Nations board of inquiry
is under way to determine why deconflicted sites have
been targeted. We have heard the statistics of those
who — sadly — were killed in January, including
as a result of air strikes that incapacitated Al-Shami
hospital, the last remaining surgical hospital serving
southern Idlib. The continued onslaught by Syrian
forces, backed by Russian and Iranian forces, has
displaced over 550,000 people since 1 December, more
than the entire population of Sochi.
Turkey has made efforts to seek a peaceful solution
in Idlib and prevent millions more Syrians having

20-030355/21

S/PV.8715

The situation in the Middle East

to seek refuge. However, we have seen the Syrian
authorities frustrate and ignore the memorandums
of understanding. Multiple ceasefires have been
broken — often— and they are violated as quickly as
they are announced, after one or two days. Mr. Pedersen
outlined the attacks that we have seen in the last few
days, which led to Turkish fatalities and increased the
risk of a further regional conflagration. We are deeply
concerned about the impact of that escalation on Turkey,
which is already hosting more than 3.5 million refugees
who fled the repression in Syria.
Therefore, the United Kingdom, along with France
and the United States, called for this meeting so that
we can call once again for an immediate, genuine and
lasting ceasefire in Idlib and for a lasting solution
to the situation there. Both of the United Nations
representatives briefing us today have stressed the
imperative of that. We have heard a lot of superlatives
today, including what Mr. Lowcock described as the
largest single allocation from the Central Emergency
Response Fund since the war began.
How many more imperatives are we going to need
before the Syrian authorities commit and adhere to a
ceasefire? I think it would be very good if the Syrian
representative could explain in his intervention why
there should not be a ceasefire and why the ceasefires
that have been agreed already should not be adhered
to. We never get a very clear answer to that question,
and yet the number of people, including children, who
are suffering from current Syrian policies continues
to increase.
Council members have said time and again that the
only sustainable way forward for Syria is a political
solution under resolution 2254 (2015). The offensive
being perpetrated in Idlib and the failure of multiple
ceasefires serve only to underline that it is the United
Nations and the Security Council — and not the
Astana format — that should remain the guardians
of the political process, and that our absolute priority
should be to achieve a sustainable solution in order to
address the humanitarian disaster in north-west Syria.
Mr. Lowcock has set out exactly what that means in
terms of numbers.
I would also like to use this opportunity to
encourage the Secretary-General to consider whether
the United Nations, beyond the critical humanitarian
role it is already playing, can assist in any way in
achieving a lasting ceasefire. As a Security Council
6/21

06/02/2020

member, the United Kingdom stands ready to support
any United Nations-backed agreement. For the record,
we continue to support the Special Envoy’s work on the
political process and encourage him to pursue all of the
elements of resolution 2254 (2015).
As discussed at last week’s humanitarian briefing
(see S/PV.8707), the mass destruction and displacement
are already inflicting a terrible toll on the people of
north-west Syria. There are more than 3 million
people stuck in that ever-shrinking pocket, which has
a population density greater than that of the Gaza Strip.
The United Kingdom is already providing more than
$50 million in humanitarian assistance to north-west
Syria this fiscal year, and we are looking at what more
we can do to help. We have spent more than $3 billion
to help Syria since the conflict began. I would like the
Syrian representative to explain why the conflict is
continuing when it is hurting so many of his own people.
Finally, I want to conclude with a tribute to
the United Nations, on both the political and the
humanitarian sides, for the work that it does in those
terrible circumstances and without the necessary
assistance from the host Government.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Geir Pedersen and Mr. Mark Lowcock for
their briefings.
The United States joined the United Kingdom and
France in calling for today’s meeting because we are
appalled at the Al-Assad regime’s escalation of violence
in north-west Syria. The Trump Administration
condemns in the strongest possible terms the Al-Assad
regime, Iran, Hizbullah and Russia’s barbaric and
unjustified military offensive. To be quite clear, what
we are witnessing is deliberate lethal violence against
thousands of innocent children, women and men. It is
violence that seeks only to terrorize and subdue, and
it sends a chilling message: the Al-Assad regime and
its allies are rejecting the Security Council’s efforts
to restore stability in Syria through a United Nationsfacilitated political process.
In response to that message, we come here today
with a message of our own because here, in this
Chamber, if the Security Council is to retain even
a shred of credibility, we simply cannot ignore the
resolutions we adopt. In 2015, the Council not only
adopted resolution 2254 (2015) but did so unanimously.
Today all elements of that resolution, including the
Constitutional Committee, are in the crosshairs.
20-03035

06/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

Therefore, our message today is the following: the
situation in north-west Syria demands an immediate,
comprehensive and verifiable ceasefire. If there is one
thing we know, however, it is that the Astana format
cannot be trusted to deliver such a ceasefire. We know
that because it is Russian warplanes that have routinely
terminated Russian-brokered ceasefires and because it
is Russian bombs that have destroyed Syrian hospitals
and driven Syrian children from their homes. The sheer
scale of destruction, both endorsed and facilitated by
Russia, shows that neither it, nor Iran nor the Al-Assad
regime can be trusted to deliver a ceasefire, let alone a
political solution.
With no faith whatsoever in the Astana format, we
therefore call on the Special Envoy to turn his attention
to securing an immediate, comprehensive and verifiable
ceasefire in north-west Syria as a means of preserving
the progress of the Constitutional Committee’s vital
work. It is essential for all parties to move forward on
the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). The
first step is to lend our full support to the United Nations
immediate efforts to establish a nationwide ceasefire
and ensure that vital United Nations cross-border
humanitarian assistance, authorized by resolution 2504
(2020), can continue to reach the millions of civilians
trapped by the Al-Assad regime’s assault.
The United States believes that the United Nations
should use its neutrality and impartiality to secure a
ceasefire in north-west Syria. In launching that assault,
the Al-Assad regime has not only exacerbated a dire
humanitarian situation in the region but also risks a
wider escalation of the conflict. That only puts more
Syrian lives in danger and threatens the hope for a
political solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
For months the United Nations warned Council
members of an impending humanitarian catastrophe in
north-west Syria if violence continued unabated. That
catastrophe has now arrived. Up to 700,000 people
have been displaced by Syrian and Russian attacks in
north-west Syria since September 2018. More than 500
civilians have been killed since the beginning of April.
Barring drastic change, it will get worse.
While the regime appears to be fully inoculated
against any sense of shame or guilt for the misery it
has caused, it should be under no illusions that cruelty
and violence will go unanswered. For one, Turkey, as
our ally in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, has
the full support of the United States to respond in self-

S/PV. 8715

defence to the Al-Assad regime’s unjustified attacks on
Turkish observation posts that resulted in the deaths of
Turkish personnel.
For our part, the United States will continue to
withhold reconstruction funding in regime areas of
Syria. I am here to say that the Trump Administration
will spare no effort in our campaign to isolate the
Al-Assad regime both economically and diplomatically
for as long as it continues to reject the political process
outlined in resolution 2254 (2015).
I want to conclude by speaking directly to the
Syrian people. There can be no doubt that these are dark
days, but they are not alone and they are not forgotten.
As long as Donald Trump is President and I am the
United States Ambassador to the United Nations, they
will have the untiring and unflinching support of the
United States of America.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Mr. Pedersen and Mr. Lowcock for
their briefings.
In recent months, we have entered a new phase
in the ruthless strategy of the Syrian regime. After
the horror of the destruction of Aleppo at the end of
2016 and the battle in Ghouta in 2018, we are now
witnessing a similar scenario in Idlib, but this time on
an unprecedented scale, as nearly 3 million Syrians
are involved.
It is therefore urgent to silence the weapons in
Idlib. France condemns in the strongest possible terms
the intense bombardments by the regime’s air force and
its allies, which continue to indiscriminately target the
civilian population and infrastructure in the north-west.
When entering the Security Council Chamber, one
passes a tapestry reproduction of Picasso’s Guernica.
Its meaning is simple — never again.
Three million people — nearly 80 per cent of them
women and children — and nearly 600,000 people
newly displaced since December are exposed to daily
attacks by the regime and its allies. Through those
strikes, the regime and its allies are turning thousands
of civilians onto the streets. That will do nothing to
enable the voluntary return of refugees.
In the face of that tragedy, de-escalation must be
a priority for us all. The High Representative of the
European Union expressed that view today in Brussels.
France will support the Special Envoy’s efforts in that
connection. We call on the signatories to the September

20-030357/21

S/PV.8715

The situation in the Middle East

2018 Sochi agreement, first and foremost Russia, to
ensure a genuine cessation of hostilities in the northwest.
The fight against terrorism cannot justify the
sacrifice of civilians and repeated violations of
international humanitarian law. That will only bolster
the terrorist threat and promote the radicalization of
combatants, with a real risk of the spread of terrorists
as a result of population movements. Finally, it runs
counter to the efforts of the international community
over the past five years to extinguish the hotbed of
international terrorism that Syria has become.
All parties must respect international humanitarian
law. The protection of civilians, including humanitarian
and medical personnel and civilian infrastructure, must
remain an absolute priority. It is unacceptable that health
infrastructure, including health facilities that have been
deconflicted, and schools continue to be the target of
attacks, in defiance of international humanitarian law.
Attacks on hospitals and health workers are war crimes,
which must not go unpunished. In that regard, we
reiterate our full support for the investigation launched
by the Secretary-General.
Every effort must also be made to ensure full
humanitarian access to all those in need of aid through
cross-border assistance. In the face of the worsening
humanitarian crisis, France has allocated nearly
€19 million in response to the needs in north-western
Syria in 2019.
The tragedy we are witnessing makes a political
settlement more necessary than ever before. The
offensive in the north-west and the regime’s obstruction
of the work of the Constitutional Committee are in fact
two sides of the same coin. The strategy of the regime
and its allies is to pursue a military solution to the
conflict. As we all know, only an inclusive political
solution can bring about lasting stability in Syria and
enable the refugees to return to their country.
It is more urgent than ever to truly get the political
process back on track for the full implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015). For that, the cessation of
hostilities in Idlib remains an essential precondition.
Working in parallel on the conclusion of a ceasefire, the
launching of the work of the Constitutional Committee
and on the other provisions of resolution 2254 (2004) is
the only possible solution. The Special Envoy has our
full support in that regard.
8/21

06/02/2020

Finally, France, together with its European
partners, stands ready to finance reconstruction and
lift sanctions as soon as a political settlement is firmly
and irreversibly in place — not before. The key to
breaking the current deadlock is therefore in the hands
of the regime and its allies. In the face of the tragedy
unfolding before our eyes in Idlib, it is essential today
to work together to avert the humanitarian, political
and security disaster under way.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Ambassador Pedersen
and Mr. Lowcock for their briefings.
We continue to firmly support all genuine efforts to
achieve sustainable peace in Syria for all Syrians. Based
on that decision and our confidence in international law
as the fundamental framework for achieving peace, we
welcome this meeting. We welcome it because we see it
as an opportunity to strengthen our moral responsibility
towards the Syrian people by easing their suffering.
Wherever there are reports of children being
killed or forced to leave their homes and abandon their
education, we must be present. Wherever ceasefire
agreements are violated — by either side — and
result in the loss of civilian lives, we must be present.
Wherever there are civilians in need of protection, we
must be present. But we must also act. It is critical
to protect the political process. Wherever situations
of great violence develop that involve violations of
international law, including international humanitarian
law, it is impossible to move forward with a negotiated
political solution. I would therefore like to put some
questions to the Special Envoy.
First, in the light of recent developments on the
ground, what concrete steps are being taken to achieve
an immediate cessation of hostilities and avoid a fullscale confrontation between all parties operating
in Idlib? Such a confrontation would put the civilian
population at unimaginable risk and must be avoided
at all costs. A failure to take preventive action — by
any party — would be a black mark on the history
of humankind.
My second question is with regard to the
Constitutional Committee. It is unacceptable, I say
unacceptable, that at this stage it has not been possible
to move forward. We would therefore like to know the
Special Envoy’s own assessment of the current situation
and the real prospects for progress. We reiterate that
while the Constitutional Committee is not an end
20-03035

06/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8715

in itself, it is certainly the key to a comprehensive
political process.

of the Syrian people towards the Council, where we sit
right now.

Finally, we cannot fail to reiterate our position
of condemnation of the indiscriminate attacks on
the civilian population, which have forced so many
people into displacement and created so many
humanitarian needs.

Indeed, no one is denying that there are radical
elements in Idlib but that does not justify indiscriminate
attacks against a civilian population. The deliberate
targeting of schools, hospitals and other protected
civilian infrastructure is a violation of international
humanitarian law and may amount to war crimes and
crimes against humanity. Accountability mechanisms,
such as the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism, supported by the General Assembly, are
crucial in that regard, as they help to collect evidence
of such crimes.

We therefore call for an immediate cessation of
hostilities and that we guarantee the protection of
civilians and ensure access for humanitarian assistance
to all those in need, who have paid the highest price in
this horrific situation.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): First, I would like to
thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock for their briefings from the United
Nations side.
It is clear that the ceasefire agreements established
by the Astana format have unfortunately failed. Instead
of peaceful life, the de-escalation areas have turned
into war zones, with daily bombardment from the
Syrian regime and Russia.
In that light, we remain extremely concerned
about the possible full-scale military confrontation
of Turkish, Russian and Syrian regime forces on the
ground. That is why we will be glad to hear today our
Turkish colleague in the Chamber inform us about the
recent developments in detail. Nevertheless, we already
heard from the briefers that the large-scale offensive
in Idlib province has resulted in both the loss of 1,300
lives and the displacement of more than 700,000 people
in the past four months. Is that really a ceasefire? At
least six Turkish soldiers were killed in an artillery
attack by the Syrian army on Monday. Is that what can
be called a de-escalation?
Estonia joins those countries here today that are
demanding a nationwide humanitarian ceasefire to stop
the unfolding catastrophe. The reason for that is not only
the immense human suffering that the indiscriminate
and disproportionate bombardment of the Syrian army
and Russian aeroplanes bring to the Syrian people.
It is also because of the intricate link between peace
and the political process, which resolution 2254
(2015) highlights. Stopping the violence is the simple
precondition for a meaningful dialogue. However, the
continued military operations by the Syrian regime and
its allies harm that prospect and undermine the trust

Syria is not only the presidential palace in Damascus
but also the thousands of tents of ordinary people in
Idlib. So, besides the representatives of the Syrian
regime, we also hope to hear the voices of other Syrian
parties here in the Council more often. We will work
closely with Council members to achieve that goal.
Let us not forget that the political process, and more
precisely the Constitutional Committee, have in it an
equal number of representatives from both the Syrian
authorities and the legitimate opposition.
Finally, the solution to the Syrian crisis can only
be political through a genuine political transition in
line with resolution 2254 (2015). That must start with
a nationwide ceasefire and guaranteeing unhindered
access for humanitarian aid to all those in need. What
is happening in Idlib right now completely contradicts
those aims.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Mark Lowcock and Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen for their briefings on the situation in Syria.
First of all, Viet Nam would like to share its grave
concern over the intensified hostilities in north-west
Syria, particularly in Idlib. The substantial escalation
in the past few days only compounds the plight of
hundreds of thousands of civilians who are already
in a dire situation, paying an inestimable price in this
protracted crisis. The recent numbers given by our
briefers today are heart-rending, especially with regard
to children. The protection of civilians has to be among
the top priorities for all parties. We would also like
to emphasize the utmost importance of maintaining
and ensuring the functioning of health facilities and
humanitarian services on the ground.

20-030359/21

S/PV.8715

The situation in the Middle East

Secondly, to prevent any further deterioration, we
call on all parties concerned to put an end to hostilities,
exercise maximum restraint and strictly observe
international law, including international humanitarian
law, and the relevant Security Council resolutions. We
reiterate our consistent position that the conflict in
Syria must be settled through a sustainable political
solution, in accordance with international law and the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, including respect for sovereignty, territorial
integrity and non-interference in the internal affairs of
Syria, as well as the aspirations of the Syrian people. We
urge the Syrian Government and all parties concerned
to redouble their efforts to de-escalate the situation,
paving the way for a comprehensive, lasting solution.
We call on international partners to further intensify
diplomatic efforts, bilaterally and multilaterally, to help
ensure conducive conditions for peace and stability
in Syria.
Last but not least, we would like to reiterate our
support for the work of Special Envoy Pederson, the
United Nations system and its humanitarian partners
working on the ground, assisting Syrians. The Syrian
people have suffered too much for too long. Let us work
together to help them to end this crisis in the interests
of the peace, stability and development of Syria and
the region.
Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): We would like
to thank Mr. Geir Pedersen and Mr. Mark Lowcock for
their briefings on the current situation in Syria.
South Africa notes with concern the reports of
the escalation of violence in north-west Syria. All
parties to the conflict must make every effort to reduce
tensions and refrain from any actions that may further
exacerbate the situation.
We reiterate that all States have the sovereign right
to address the threat of terrorism in their countries. We
emphasize that any action to counter terrorism must
be in line with the obligations of international human
rights law and international humanitarian law.

06/02/2020

of those civilians have already been displaced multiple
times, with violence and hostilities appearing to follow
wherever they flee. All parties to the conflict must
adhere to their obligations under international law and
international humanitarian law, particularly with regard
to the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure.
In that regard, civilians must be afforded access to
humanitarian corridors.
Civilians are facing impossible circumstances,
with winter upon them. A full military confrontation
between the parties must be avoided at all costs, as
civilians in already severe security and humanitarian
circumstances would be left to face the eventual dire
consequences. We once again urge all parties to abide
by their commitments under the various ceasefire
agreements that have been previously agreed and
call for a cessation of hostilities throughout Syria.
A cessation of hostilities would also ensure that the
necessary humanitarian aid is provided to all those
who require it. We call on the relevant authorities to
ensure the safe, unimpeded and impartial delivery of
that assistance.
As we have consistently maintained, South Africa
is firm in its belief that the political and humanitarian
situations in Syria cannot be addressed independently
of each other. An improvement in the humanitarian
situation could improve trust and build confidence
among the parties, which could in turn bolster progress
and substantive dialogue on the political track. We call
on all parties to make the necessary efforts to commit
to continued dialogue under the auspices, and with the
support of, Special Envoy Pedersen. That would include
working to ensure that the Constitutional Committee’s
third round of talks — with an agenda agreed by both
parties — is convened soon and that substantive and
sincere discussions are held to ensure that the people of
Syria have a safe, stable and prosperous environment in
which to live.

External support for armed groups must cease
immediately. Syria and its people have long endured
the deadly misfortune of being a theatre of conflict that
has involved several external role players, who have
used the conflict as a proxy for their own interests.

South Africa remains committed to supporting the
protection of the fundamental interests of the Syrian
people, the maintenance of peace and stability in the
Middle East region and the defence of the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
basic norms governing international relations, including
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of Syria.

The escalation of tensions has reportedly led to
the displacement, injury and death of civilians. Many

In conclusion, we must all remember that the people
of Syria have the most to lose should the violence

10/21

20-03035

06/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

continue. We must do all we can to support efforts to
prevent such suffering.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
At the outset, I would like to thank Special Envoy
Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for
their briefings and their tireless efforts to restore peace
in Syria.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains deeply
troubled by the reports of violence and escalating
tensions in north-west Syria. We are disheartened
to hear that the situation has intensified, as have the
humanitarian consequences. What was intended to be
a de-escalation zone is now the potential epicentre for
anguish. We therefore call for the immediate cessation
of all hostilities to prevent further human suffering.
Continuing along the path of combat will serve only
to impede humanitarian access to those in desperate
need of it, trigger a further displacement of civilians
and — if calmer heads do not prevail — continue to
result in the loss of life. We strongly condemn attacks
on civilians and civilian infrastructure, particularly
health and education services, and we implore all
parties to the conflict to recommit to a ceasefire.
At the same time, we appreciate the steps being
taken by the Russian Federation and Turkey to enhance
the coordination of their respective countries’ actions
in Syria. It is our hope that those efforts will promote a
de-escalation and help to preserve life.
We also remind parties that military and
counter-terrorism operations must comply with the
fundamental principles of international humanitarian
law. Distinction, proportionality and precaution ought
to guide all activities. We therefore reiterate that peace
and justice are interdependent. Atrocities committed
in violation of international law should not be ignored,
and perpetrators must be held accountable.
As the conflict rages on and the humanitarian
situation worsens, it is apparent now — more than
ever — that there is a need for a Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led political solution. We reiterate our support
for all efforts in that regard, as a political solution is the
only path towards lasting peace and stability.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reaffirms its
respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Syria. The actions of the
international community must have regard for the
perspectives of the Syrian Government, as it is up

S/PV. 8715

to the Syrian people to determine the future of their
country. Indeed, it is the Syrian people who are paying
the highest price in the conflict with their suffering,
as they have lost their safety, their stability and their
calm. The Security Council must continue to speak up
for them.
Mr. Soemirat (Indonesia): Indonesia would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Special
Envoy Pedersen for their briefings. We commend
their strong and tireless efforts in executing their
respective mandates.
My delegation underlined our position on the
humanitarian situation in north-west Syria and on
the Constitutional Committee at the two meetings on
Syrian humanitarian and political issues held last week
on the same day (see S/PV.8707 and S/PV.8708).
Before I continue, I would like to underscore that,
while we value every meeting of the Security Council,
we would prefer all Council meetings to be conducted
appropriately and as necessary, without creating further
divergence among Council members. It is our strong
belief that the most important approach and priority for
the Council at this particular time is to be united in
addressing the Syrian dossier. I wish to re-emphasize
the importance of three main points.
First, there must be an immediate cessation of
hostilities in north-west Syria. It is a matter of the
utmost urgency that all parties on the ground respect
their obligations to protect civilians under international
humanitarian law. In that regard, we would like to
highlight something important yet disturbing mentioned
by Special Envoy Pedersen, namely, “[w]e appear to have
lost sight of the principle of proportionality.” I think
that is a very basic, yet extremely important, issue. In
that context, let me reiterate our position that attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure are unacceptable.
Secondly, immediate humanitarian assistance
is needed by civilians. As Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock mentioned, about 580,000 people in northwest Syria have left their homes in the past two
months in order to escape the hostilities and seek
safety. Most of those individuals have been displaced
multiple times. They are vulnerable and need urgent
humanitarian support.
Thirdly, we would urge the Syrian parties to pursue
concrete efforts in order to be able to advance the work
of the Constitutional Committee.

20-0303511/21

S/PV.8715

The situation in the Middle East

We appreciate all the efforts of the various
parties to de-escalate the conflict in the north-west,
particularly those that have led to ceasefire agreements.
However, such agreements need to be firmly respected
and implemented. Indonesia supports the engagement
of the United Nations with all the relevant parties to end
the violence. Again, my delegation urges all parties on
the ground to cease their military activities. We must
avoid armed confrontations, which will only increase
the number of displaced people and exacerbate the
suffering of civilians.
Before I conclude, let me highlight the importance
of thinking beyond the agenda of the Constitutional
Committee. Indonesia sincerely hopes that an agreement
on the agenda can soon be reached so that Committee
members can begin their substantive work, which is the
crucial part of the process. Trust and confidence among
the Syrian parties are also key.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I deliver this statement on
the humanitarian situation in north-west Syria on behalf
of the co-penholders, namely, Belgium and Germany.
At the outset, let me thank our briefers, Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock, for their insight into unbelievable
human suffering. Idlib is becoming more and more
a symbol of carnage. Just a week ago, Mr. Lowcock
described the humanitarian catastrophe (see S/PV.8707)
in facts and figures. We do not see any improvement.
Instead, numbers increase day by day, the suffering is
compounding and we continue to stand idly by.
From 1 February to 4 February alone, 34 civilians
were killed, including nine women and seven children.
Eighty-three civilians were killed in air strikes
and ground-based strikes between 20 January and
30 January. Among them were 20 women and 33
children. More than 580,000 people have been displaced
by the recent offensive around Idlib. Six thousand five
hundred children are forced to flee every single day,
totalling 300,000 since the beginning of December
2019. In Idlib, at least 53 medical facilities are currently
out of order.
Those are recent and truly shocking statistics from
various United Nations official sources — not from the
Internet or based on fake news. They are reliable and
trustworthy sources. The President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Peter Maurer, recently
said that public interest in the war in Syria has
12/21

06/02/2020

decreased significantly although violence, once more,
is on the rise.
As co-penholders, we will do everything to shed
light on the humanitarian consequences of the war
in Syria. As the Security Council, we must fulfil our
responsibility to protect human life. More engagement,
not less, is needed. We remain deeply concerned about
the safety of the 4 million civilians in north-west Syria.
The ongoing military offensive causes immense human
suffering, death, displacement and destruction in the
midst of winter. Families are literally left out in the
cold, without protection, proper health care or shelter.
Children are forced to leave school and spend their
precious childhood fleeing from one uncertainty to the
next. People flee with nothing more than the clothes
on their back. Where do they go? The density of the
population at the Turkish border increases every day
because people move north to escape the fighting.
Humanitarian assistance — for example, temporary
housing — is urgently needed.
Civilians have the right to be protected from the
horror of war, and warring parties have the obligation
to ensure their protection. Once again, we recall that
there are humanitarian obligations that need to be
observed. There are rules to warfare; we should not
forget that. More than 80 per cent of the people in need
in the north-west are women and children.
As the World Health Organization stated on
Monday, at least 53 medical facilities are currently
out of order. Providing help for the 2.9 million people
in need of medical assistance becomes increasingly
difficult every day. One of the main reasons for that
is the ongoing bombardment of civilian infrastructure,
such as hospitals and schools. Those attacks are totally
unacceptable. We, the co-penholders, condemn the
violence and call for accountability for those responsible.
We also condemned the attacks perpetrated by
Security Council-designated terrorist groups. However,
counter-terrorism efforts can never absolve the parties
from respecting their obligations under international
humanitarian law.
Despite the dire situation in the north-west, we
should not forget the north-east. A total of 2.5 million
out of 4.1 million inhabitants rely on humanitarian
assistance. Safe, durable and unhindered humanitarian
access is essential. As we heard in the Council last
week, words have to be followed by deeds.
20-03035

06/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8715

We call on the Syrian regime and Russia to ensure the
protection of civilians and to comply with international
humanitarian law. We call for an immediate and fully
observed ceasefire and full humanitarian access to all
people in need. A sustainable solution can be achieved
only by political progress, as agreed upon in resolution
2254 (2015). There is no sustainable military solution.
The current offensive in Idlib must stop.

calm in the de-escalation zone and to preventing
renewed clashes, so as to ensure the restoration of
security and stability throughout Syria. We believe that
understandings reached on the issue of achieving calm
in Idlib, although importance, are merely temporary
solutions if they do not result in a joint practical solution
that excludes the terrorist groups in Idlib and ensures
the end of their presence in the region.

In my national capacity, let me say that I add my
voice to those who are deeply concerned about the
recent escalation and the attack by Syrian regime
forces against a Turkish observation post, which led
to the death of several members of Turkey’s armed
forces. I would like to underscore that such escalation
is unacceptable.

The political process cannot move forward without
creating the proper conditions for calm and stability
throughout Syria and for promoting confidence among
the parties. We recall once again that resolution 2254
(2015) noted the close relation between a ceasefire and
the political process in Syria. In that regard, we support
the efforts of the Special Envoy for Syria and those of
all other actors working to move forward the political
process in Geneva.

Mr. Zenati (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their briefings.
Since the two Security Council meetings on Syria
held last week (see S/PV.8707 and S/PV.8708), violence
and terrorist acts in Idlib have continued unabated
despite the calls from many Security Council members
for an end to the military escalation and a return to calm.
We are gravely concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation due to escalation in north-west
Syria, as civilian casualties continue to mount in Idlib
and its vicinity and more than half a million people
are being displaced. There are also reports indicating
a risk of the spread of diseases, while humanitarian
and medical assistance and services cannot meet the
increasing needs.
Tunisia reiterates its condemnation of the attacks
against civilians, regardless of their origin, in particular
attacks by Security Council-designated terrorist groups.
We call upon all parties to fulfil their obligations under
international humanitarian law and international law in
order to ensure the protection of civilians at all times
as well as to provide safe, sustained and unimpeded
delivery of humanitarian aid to those in need of it.
The priority in Idlib now is to broker a ceasefire,
compel all parties to exercise restraint and create an
environment conducive to achieving calm pursuant to
the understandings that are still valid.
We call upon the guarantor parties to work together
in order to create an environment conducive to restoring

My country’s delegation stresses anew that there
can be no military solution to the crisis in Syria. The
only way to end the humanitarian suffering of the
Syrian people is to make progress towards a political
settlement, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). The
settlement must be Syrian-led and Syrian-owned,
under the auspices of the United Nations, through an
agreement among Syrian political and civilian parties
on a new constitution that ensures free and fair elections
under United Nations supervision. Those elections must
meet the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people to
a life of freedom and dignity and uphold Syria’s unity,
independence and territorial integrity, while also
contributing to the promotion of security and stability
in the region.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock for their briefings and appreciates the
Organization’s efforts to advance the Syrian political
process and improve the humanitarian situation in the
country. A political settlement is the only way to end the
conflict in Syria. The United Nations should continue to
advance the Syrian political process in accordance with
the Syrian-led, Syrian-owned principle and resolution
2254 (2015).
Last week, Special Envoy Pedersen visited Syria and
held talks with the Syrian Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Al-Moualem. China
supports the Special Envoy in his effort to strengthen
communication with the Syrian Government and heed
its legitimate calls. The independence of the work of

20-0303513/21

S/PV.8715

The situation in the Middle East

the Constitutional Committee should be maintained.
It should not be subject to external interference, and
neither should there be an artificially preset time frame.
It should be left up to the Syrian people to find a way
out of the crisis. The members of the Constitutional
Committee should show political will and, in the
spirit of compromise, take active part in dialogue
in a concerted effort to uphold Syria’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territory integrity.
The complex situation in north-west Syria is both a
security issue and a humanitarian issue, which can be
traced back to the time when terrorists controlled Idlib.
Listed terrorist organizations must be resolutely
eliminated, in accordance with Council resolutions
and international law, using agreed standards.
Weapons collected in the course of combating terrorist
organizations should be scrutinized for their origin,
and the channels used to supply terrorist organizations
with weapons should be eradicated. A database should
be established for foreign terrorist fighters in order to
address that problem. Measures should also be taken
to prevent them from fleeing to other countries and
regions to continue their criminal activities.
China supports the United Nations in helping
displaced civilians. We hope that the parties concerned
will continue to seek a comprehensive and longterm solution to the Idlib issue through dialogue and
negotiations. China is deeply concerned about the
overall humanitarian situation in Syria due to years
of war, broken infrastructure, economic sanctions and
other reasons. The living conditions of the Syrian people
are dire. The international community should provide
the United Nations with adequate funding and resources
to ensure the provision of humanitarian supplies to the
people in need throughout Syria. At the same time,
they should lend support to the Syrian Government for
reconstruction efforts in areas with a relatively stable
security situation, with a view to repairing housing
and other civilian infrastructure, restoring medical and
educational facilities and clearing explosive remnants
of war. That is the only way for more Syrian people
to step out of the shadow of war and gradually move
towards leading a stable and orderly life.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock
and Mr. Geir Pedersen for their briefings.
Today we are once again discussing the situation
in Syria in the Security Council. We discussed it twice
14/21

06/02/2020

in one day alone, on 29 January (see S/PV.8707 and
S/PV.8708), we discussed it yesterday and there are two
more meetings scheduled for 19 and 27 February. There
are regular meetings, as well as unplanned meetings
such as today. The unplanned meetings now have a
common pattern. By some strange coincidence, they
are organized when the terrorists in the Syrian Arab
Republic are under threat, and the Syrian Government
is regaining control over its national territory. Those
terrorists, I recall, are recognized as such by the
Security Council. We are talking about the sovereign
territory of Syria and about terrorist fighters, and
fighting them is the right and duty of the Government
of any country to combat terrorists.
From December 2019 to January 2020, Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham terrorists seized the Idlib de-escalation
zone and intensified their raids. At the end of last
year, more than 1,400 attacks were recorded, in which
those fighters used tanks, machine guns, mortars and
artillery fire. Over the past 24 hours, there have been
31 incidents of open fire in Latakia, Idlib and Hama
governorates. All that data is available on the website
of the Russian Ministry of Defence. We regularly
disseminate relevant bulletins, but some colleagues do
not seem to be interested. After all, we are talking about
Syrians who are in Damascus-controlled territory.
Some of our colleagues think that those are not the right
Syrians. The information provided by the Permanent
Mission of Syria to the United Nations, which regularly
reports about civilian victims, is also not of interest.
However, I would like to take this opportunity to
bridge the gaps in my colleagues’ remarks, as well as
in the United Nations reports. In December 2019 and
early January 2020, 42 civilians were killed, among
them were five children, and 92 people were injured,
including 30 children. That mainly occurred in the
Aleppo governorate. More than 1,000 attacks were
reported in the first two weeks of January. The number
of civilians and Syrian military personnel killed or
injured has already climbed into the hundreds.
No attention is paid to recent instances of terrorist
destruction of civilian infrastructure in the vicinity of
Homs. Material damage was caused to Syria’s oil and
gas complex. Instead of bragging about the politicization
of the post-conflict reconstruction of a country, it
would be better to lift sanctions and return control of
the oilfields to Syrians, not plunder the Syrian national
treasure under the pretext of protecting it. That would
20-03035

06/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8715

make a real contribution to improving the humanitarian
situation of Syrians.

working together with Turkey and Iran to promote the
political process.

The United States Secretary of State, Mr. Pompeo,
in his press statement of 4 February said:

We would like to make it clear that that the
Russian Federation is firmly committed to the norms
of international humanitarian law. All the targets of
the Russian military are selected after careful analysis,
with airborne surveillance tools and available ground
information. Military actions are proportional and
discriminate in nature, which is clear given the small
number of targets affected out of the total number of
ground targets in the area of operation.

(spoke in English)
“The United States once again condemns the
continued, unjustifiable and ruthless assaults on
the people of Idlib by the Assad regime, Russia,
Iran and Hizbullah.”
(spoke in Russian)
He does not say “people in Idlib”, but “people of Idlib”.
Idlib is not a country, but rather a Syrian governorate,
which does not have citizens of Idlib but rather Syrian
citizens who have been taken hostage by the terrorists
running rampant. The Secretary of State also referred
to barbaric attacks in Idlib, which is something we will
return to later.
In the course of the counter-terrorist operation by
the Syrian army, more than 4,000 fighters were killed,
and 17 tanks, mortars and technicals were destroyed.
In that regard, it is bewildering that some Western
countries want to present terrorist groups in Idlib as
the moderate opposition. Observations that perhaps
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham is not so bad, or does not really
pose a threat, are something that we have been recently
hearing with greater frequency, and these observations
are made by official representatives of certain countries
that called for today’s meeting.
We also have questions about calls for a national
ceasefire, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), even
though paragraph 8 of the resolution directly states that
there is a need to combat terrorism, a point to which
we will also return. Unfortunately, there has been
a tragic recent loss of Russian and Turkish military
personnel. Armed drone attacks on the Russian air base
at Khmeimim continue. That once again speaks to the
unacceptable rise of the fighters in the Idlib area, who
enjoy complete impunity.
Given the escalation of the situation, we are
continuing to cooperate with Turkey to achieve
de-confliction and an easing of tensions. There
are relevant exchanges between the Presidents, the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs and political and military
agencies. We will continue such interaction and we will
not allow anyone to sow discord. The same is true of
cooperation within the Astana format, in which we are

I would also like to notify the Council that terrorists
deliberately turn to civilian objects, including hospitals
and schools, using the guise of their protected status,
into their combat positions, thereby violating the Geneva
Conventions. The latest such example is the terrorist
seizure of the Idlib central hospital on 29 January,
which was announced by the press release issued by the
non-governmental agency serving that hospital.
I would remind those who speak of barbarity
about the results of their operations in Raqqa, Mosul,
Hajin and Al-Baghuz Fawqani. Thankfully, relevant
information has been published by the United Nations.
As a reminder, before the operation, there were
more than half a million people in Mosul, which was
captured by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
Between 7,000 and 10,000 of them were killed in air
strikes. Dozens of thousands were injured. According
to the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements
Programme, which assessed the housing conditions
immediately after the operation, air strikes and artillery
fire destroyed over 90 per cent of all residential
buildings in eastern Mosul — 90 per cent. That is an
example of the selectivity that is being preached to us
today, or will colleagues try to prove that all of Mosul’s
hospitals, clinics and educational facilities were in the
remaining 10 per cent — and therefore untouched? How
many public Council meetings on this topic or press
conferences have been held on that, by the way? Do not
bother to check — there were none, and there were no
United Nations commissions of inquiry into that either.
Perhaps the operation in Raqqa was conducted
differently, but the mortars were used only to target
the “bad guys”, so the civilian infrastructure was left
untouched? No, the city was razed to the ground. Let us
ask the humanitarians who entered Raqqa immediately
after the coalition forces how many working clinics
remained in the city once the operation was over? The

20-0303515/21

S/PV.8715

The situation in the Middle East

Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
answered that question in its reports — there were no
such clinics. Medical facilities would have to be rebuilt
from scratch. How many civilians died there or were
left under the rubble? We were told back then that it
had been necessary to combat terrorists. We do not
recall any calls for a nationwide ceasefire or cessation
of hostilities or truce.
On the topic of geography, I should like to teach
the Council a geography lesson. Before the beginning
of the operation in 2016, the population of Raqqa
was 229,000, approximately half the population of
Edinburgh. Following the conclusion of the operation,
in October 2017, the population was 3,000 people, and,
at the end of 2018, it was 165,000. Where did 55,000
inhabitants of Raqqa go? Does anyone believe they all
ran away? I think they are wrong.
We could also take a closer look at the activities of
the coalition forces in Afghanistan or in Somalia. In
general, there would seem to be an unlimited number
of opportunities for the Security Council to hold its
meetings and for the humanitarian penholders to direct
their energy. However, so long as no action is taken with
respect to those numerous instances, and those who
allowed them to occur live by the Orwellian precept
that all are all equal under the law but some are more
equal than others, any criticism directed against Syria
and Russia is a mere farce. Moreover, this farce is based
on nothing but dubious posts on social media, reports
of unidentified observers on the ground and — the
best in this category — some mysterious radio buffs
who intercept encoded radio exchanges between pilots
and air bases, apparently by means of kitchen radio
receivers. This article has been refuted by the Russian
Defence Ministry. We read it and we could not help
being surprised by the ignorance of such reports.
There is, however, one more thing that grieves
us the most. While pursuing the goal of stopping
the offensive of the Government forces against the
terrorists, the initiators of this cynical campaign forgot
the most important thing — international humanitarian
law was created by humankind as a means of peace,
rather than a tool of war and military propaganda.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Belgium.
With regard to the humanitarian consequences
of the Idlib offensive, the representative of Germany
16/21

06/02/2020

spoke also on behalf of Belgium as the humanitarian
co-penholder. I will therefore limit my statement to
several remarks concerning the political dimension.
First, we are deeply alarmed by the military
escalation under way. Let us be clear — we support the
fight against terrorism, but efforts to combat terrorism
can in no way ever release parties from their obligations
under international humanitarian law, including the
principles of distinction, precaution and proportionality.
Secondly, unfortunately the situation demonstrates
that delegating the work of achieving a ceasefire to
the Astana format has not succeeded. Of the many
ceasefires that have failed, the most recent one lasted
only two days. The crisis and especially the risk of
any potential miscalculation resulting from clashes
among the various parties pose an enormous threat to
international peace and security.
Moreover, we have seen this film many times and,
regrettably, we know all too well how it ends. It is
civilians who suffer the consequences. We therefore call
on all parties to exercise maximum restraint. We expect
the United Nations, in particular the Special Envoy, to
spare no effort to restore calm. We call for a cessation
of hostilities at the national level, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015), and for a negotiated solution
to sustainably address the complex challenges in the
north-west of the country and Syria as a whole. The
only path leading to stability is a credible and inclusive
political solution facilitated by the United Nations, in
line with resolution 2254 (2015).
Thirdly, beyond its devastating impact on civilians,
bombing urban areas destroys homes, schools, hospitals
and electricity and water distribution networks. How
can the Syrian authorities bomb such infrastructure
in urban areas and, at the same time, expect the
international community to pay for reconstruction?
I reaffirm that, in keeping with the policy of its
European partners, Belgium will not participate in the
reconstruction process without the solid foundation of
a political solution.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Some colleagues raised important questions in
their statements, and I am ready to answer them after I
20-03035

06/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

read out my own statement, should the presidency allow
me to do so.
For eight years, we have been telling the Security
Council that there is a raging elephant distorting the
political and humanitarian situation with a view to
offend, defame and demonize my country’s Government
in anticipation of another future escalation. Today,
I have received information from my capital that
certain non-governmental humanitarian organizations
operating on the ground in Syria, including the Danish
Refugee Council and the Adventist Development
and Relief Agency, among others, are having trouble
transferring money allocated for humanitarian
activities in Syria. The problem began in July 2019.
Those organizations are therefore trying to find
alternative ways to transfer the funds. However, such
transfers — whether in euros or dollars —are being
blocked by intermediary banks in Europe and New York,
which directly affects those humanitarian organizations
and their ability to plan other humanitarian projects
and programmes for the year. That is an example of the
true situation in my country concerning actions taken
against Western, international, European and American
non-governmental organizations. No one, however,
sees or wants to see this situation. It is as if they were
addicted to a unilateral version of the situation that
they want to see. But, in the Security Council, it is not
advised to watch the overall version.
At the outset, I thank the delegations of the States
that called for this emergency meeting for their strong
commitment in their briefings today to the provisions
of international law and the Charter of the United
Nations, as demonstrated in their firm condemnation
of the aggression, occupation, pillaging and theft being
perpetrated by the Turkish regime against my country.
We also thank the same delegations for their
initiatives and steps to uphold the values of the Charter
and international law by compelling the Turkish regime
to stop supporting terrorism. We thank them as well
for compelling the Turkish regime to stop bringing its
new janissary Ottoman militias, made up of Uighurs,
Uzbeks, Turks, Chechens, Turkmens, Kazakhs, Tajiks,
Kyrgyz and Arabs, to settle on Syrian territories
adjacent to Turkey once the Syrian population is
displaced, and to prevent the Turkish regime from
carrying out a demographic change reminiscent of
Israeli crimes against Palestinians. We sincerely thank
those same delegations for standing up against the
operations of the Turkish regime to transfer thousands

S/PV. 8715

of “moderate terrorists”, who are genetically modified
but also armed, and mercenaries to Libya and then to
Europe, Africa and other places.
We also thank those delegations who called for
holding this meeting for their eagerness to enable the
Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities in
a professional and credible manner by condemning
the United States occupation of parts of my country’s
territory, including the area of Al-Tanf, where Rukban
camp is located, and by condemning the United
States occupation forces for sponsoring Maghawir
Al-Thawra, a terrorist organization that is operating in
that area whose crimes are not limited to the population
of Rukban camp but have reached peaceful civilians in
the governorate of As-Suwayda, as I explained to the
Council in a previous statement.
We also thank the States that called for convening
this meeting for condemning the illegitimate presence
of their troops in parts of Syrian territory and for
relentlessly demanding their tripartite occupation to
withdraw its forces, for disbanding their agent militias
and for compensating for the devastation they caused
to the infrastructure, along with compensating for
what they and their agent militias and terrorist groups
have pillaged in oil, gas, wheat, artefacts and myriad
possessions that belong to Syrians.
We thank the delegations that called for this
meeting for exercising pressure and engage in active
diplomacy in order to adopt a draft resolution under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations to
condemn Israeli attacks against my country. The latest
such attack was launched at dawn today from above
the occupied Syrian Golan and coincided — as a result
of Israeli-Turkish alliance and high-level coordination
between them — with more Turkish troops and heavy
military equipment entering into Idlib through the
so-called humanitarian crossing of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. The aim is to
undermine the efforts of the Syrian State and its allies to
end terrorist control over Idlib and normalize life there.
To the President and members of the Security
Council, I would like to say that a few hours ago Jabhat
Al-Nusra — a Security Council-designated terrorist
group — and the Turkish troops occupying part of my
country met at Taftanaz airport, near Aleppo. Together
they took part in an offensive in the area of Al-Nayrab,
in Aleppo. I disclose that information so that the
Council can assess it.

20-0303517/21

S/PV.8715

The situation in the Middle East

We thank the delegations that called for this meeting
for striving to unify the Council with a view to ensuring
that its resolutions on combating terrorism — of which
there are dozens — are implemented and to supporting
the efforts of the Syrian State and its allies to combat
terrorism and foreign terrorists fighters, cleanse our
territory of their evil and compel the Member States
concerned, especially those in Europe, to take back
their nationals without delay.
We furthermore thank them for their unwavering
commitment to international law and United Nations
resolutions, as well as for their humanitarian concern for
the Syrian people, as demonstrated by their rejection of
the unilateral coercive measures that would constitute
economic terrorism and collective punishment. Some
colleagues boasted about that today. I also thank the
Secretariat staff for their close review and follow-up
of all 900 official letters that we addressed to them
regarding the so-called crisis in Syria.
Forgive me for thinking that I was in the Security
Council, which, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, we entrusted with maintaining
international peace and security, rather than being in
a council that the Governments of some permanent
members have turned into a NATO forum with the
aim of inciting against my country, discredit it and
exercise all kinds of pressure on the Syrian State,
including by hysterically calling for repeated meetings
on the situation there and requesting the Secretariat
to provide countless reports and briefings to serve
their interventionist and aggressive goals. Everyone
heard the intervention by my colleague the Permanent
Representative of the United States, when she said that
Turkey is a NATO ally. Hence we are not in the Security
Council. Somebody is trying to use this Council as a
NATO forum. It is an unacceptable threat to say in this
Chamber that the United States of America protects
Turkey from the repercussions of its violations of the
Charter and principles of international law.
My delegation reiterates that attempts by certain
countries to impose the NATO agenda on the Security
Council will undermine its credibility and negate all
the pretexts used by some to demonize the Syrian State
and provide political and military cover for the crimes
committed against my country by NATO members,
including the Turkish regime.
Do those present not remember Erdoğan’s
announcement on 5 September 2012 that he, along
with allegiant terrorist organizations, would soon
18/21

06/02/2020

pray in the Umayyad Mosque in Damascus? Was that
announcement, eight years ago, not an indication of
prior aggressive intention and a declaration of war
against my country? If people said that they would
occupy Turkey and pray in the Blue Mosque in Istanbul,
or that they would occupy one of the NATO capitals
and pray in its most prominent places of worship, what
would NATO’s response be?
The story we have presented today on the positions
of certain Council members might be fiction, but it is
legitimate fiction because it is underpinned by our belief
in the provisions of the Charter and international law,
while their practices and realities lead to undermining
the Charter and manipulating the principles of
international law.
Western Governments were clear in their quest to
destroy my country and spread creative chaos, pillage
our wealth and settle their old accounts with us. They
clearly pointed out the tools they would use to achieve
that goal. The memoirs of the politicians of those
States and the WikiLeaks scandals are brimming with
arguments proving our point. Therefore, we reiterate
that improving the living and humanitarian conditions
in Syria and achieving a political solution require, first
and foremost, aggressive Western States to reconsider
their policies, adopt approaches based on international
law and the provisions of the Charter, put an end to
aggression, occupation, coercion and investment
in terrorism and respect the sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. It also
requires that they support the efforts of the Syrian State
and those of its allies in combating terrorism, which is
a right and duty that we will spare no effort to fulfil
in order to liberate Idlib and all other parts of Syria,
just as we liberated Homs, eastern Aleppo and Ghouta.
Idlib is Syrian territory, and any illegitimate military
presence there is the responsibility of the State to which
those troops belong.
Some have called for the need to declare an
immediate cease fire. With whom does the Council
want us to declare a ceasefire? With the entities that the
Council agreed to designate as terrorist groups, such
as Jabhat Al-Nusra and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham? With
whom does the Council want us to declare a ceasefire?
With hundreds of cannibals that the Council has listed
as terrorists? How can we declare ceasefire with entities
that the Council agreed to name as terrorist —
The President: I invite the representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic to conclude. The normal
20-03035

06/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8715

speaking time is five minutes, and it has been almost
15 minutes now.

to leave and have killed anyone who tried to do so. They
have killed dozens of our people trying to leave Idlib.

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

At your request, Mr. President, I do not want to
prolong this discussion. As I said, however, if you and
others want to hear answers to the questions raised, I
am ready to do so.

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today we are discussing the question of the
situation in Syria, as requested by the delegations of
three countries. Today’s discussion directly affects the
Syrian Arab Republic. This is not an open debate today
at which 120 Members of the United Nations take the
floor. The five-minute rule is not even a rule; it is a
recommendation. The speaker who holds the floor is
the representative of the country whose situation is
being discussed in the Security Council. It is therefore
not right to stop his statement by invoking time limits
or any other artificial reason. As President of the
Security Council, Sir, I believe that you should show
respect to the representative who is making a statement
on behalf of the country currently being considered by
the Security Council.
The President (spoke in French): I once again
give the floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic, but I invite him to conclude his statement as
soon as possible.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): In recent years, the Syrian Government and
its allies have declared 17 truces, which are something
like ceasefires — 17 times and every time, just hours
after the truce has been declared, it has been violated
by the militants upon the instructions of their handlers,
be they from Ankara, Doha or elsewhere. Therefore, I
raised the question based on our experience following
17 truces — meaning ceasefires — all of which were
violated by the cannibals from the other side, who were
bombarding Aleppo on a daily basis, killing dozens
of civilians. No one in the Security Council called for
an emergency meeting to discuss the bombardment of
Aleppo by terrorists. When terrorists bombard Aleppo,
that is acceptable, but when the Syrian Army bombards
Idlib to eliminate the terrorists who are bombarding
Aleppo, it is impermissible.
In any case, we opened three humanitarian corridors
over two months ago to allow our civilian nationals to
leave Idlib for safe areas under the control of the Syrian
Government. The Syrian Red Crescent and our Russian
allies are on the ground at these three humanitarian
corridors to observe what is taking place. But terrorists
and terrorist groups in Idlib have not allowed civilians

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s important meeting. I would also
like to thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock for their briefings on
the current alarming situation in Idlib.
Syria has been the subject of discussion in the
Council for almost a decade now. The Council has
discussed the use of chemical weapons and the crimes
committed by a tyrannical regime against its own people.
It has been discussed as a civil war and a humanitarian
crisis caused by the terrorist regime of a failed State. It
has been discussed as a serious threat to international
peace and security. But nothing has changed. To the
contrary, the danger of further escalation is growing.
On 3 February, the regime, run by a clique in
Damascus controlling some parts of Syrian territory,
deliberately targeted Turkish forces, resulting in
the deaths of seven Turkish soldiers and one civilian
personnel. Acting in self-defence, the Turkish
armed forces immediately retaliated. Those Turkish
servicemen are in Idlib as part of the memorandum
signed by Turkey and Russia in September 2018 to
stabilize the situation in Idlib and preserve the status of
Idlib as a de-escalation area.
All deployments of the Turkish armed forces,
including the most recent, have been coordinated with
Russian authorities. But despite our notifications, the
regime opened fire on Turkish positions on 3 February.
As a result, we were forced to deploy additional troops
to protect our military observation posts and to prevent
the escalation of hostilities in Idlib, in line with the
responsibilities bestowed on Turkey as a guarantor. As
of today, some of our observation posts remain encircled
by the fighters of the regime. Even today, there have
been bombardments by the regime’s air force.
Since 2011, hundreds of thousands of Syrians have
been killed by the regime. Countless more have been
injured, tortured, detained or disappeared. Millions
have been besieged and denied humanitarian and
medical aid. My country hosts nearly 4 million Syrians.

20-0303519/21

S/PV.8715

The situation in the Middle East

That is almost one-fifth of the entire population of Syria
before the start of the conflict. All of this is because the
tyrant in Damascus has refused to meet the legitimate
demands of Syrian people.
Terrorist groups established their own states
in Syrian territory because the tyrant in Damascus
would not allow the Syrian people to enjoy their basic
rights. And now, he wants to pull my country into his
dirty war by deliberately targeting Turkish forces. I
cannot overemphasize the point that Turkey believes
in a political solution in Syria and is working with the
United Nations for a settlement in line with resolution
2254 (2015). However, Turkey will never tolerate
belligerent acts. Any military aggression targeting
Turkey’s security interests and Turkish soldiers will be
severely punished.
We will never hesitate to use our right to selfdefence. I am not drawing a red line here. This is a
warning. As announced by President Erdoğan, the
regime should withdraw from its current positions until
the end of the month. We expect the regime and its
supporters to take the necessary steps in that direction,
and we expect all our friends and all responsible
members of the international community to respect our
legitimate security concerns.
With the Sochi memorandum, we agreed with
Russia to stabilize the situation in Idlib and preserve the
status of Idlib as a de-escalation area. We also agreed
that Turkish observation posts would be fortified and
continue to function. As the guarantor of the regime,
Russia committed to taking all necessary measures to
ensure that military operations and attacks on Idlib
will be avoided and that the existing status quo will be
maintained. However, since May 2019, as a result of at
least 2,000 ceasefire violations by regime forces, more
than 1,500 civilians have been killed and approximately
800,000 displaced. A new ceasefire was introduced
very recently, on 12 January, following President
Putin’s visit to Turkey. Since that date, the regime has
violated the ceasefire more than 6,500 times, in total
disregard of all agreements on Idlib.
As I have informed the Council on previous
occasions, Turkey has taken a large number of
measures to ensure the full implementation of the
Sochi memorandum, in line with the responsibilities
outlined therein. In the meantime the regime and its
supporters continue to use the pretext of combatting
terrorism to attack Idlib. We all know that the
20/21

06/02/2020

deliberate targeting of civilians only fuels further
radicalization. With over 3 million civilians squeezed
into close quarters, the fight against terrorism cannot
be carried out as it is in clear violation of international
humanitarian law. Implying that millions of civilians
in Idlib are Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham terrorists is a joke.
We all know that the Syrian regime’s real intention is
not to end terrorism. It is to punish its own people and
silence the Syrian opposition, not only in Idlib but also
in other parts that are controlled by the regime. Some
1,600 people have been killed since April 2019.
Our contacts with the Russian authorities continue
at every level, including at the military level, with
our de-conflicting contacts. Our expectation of that
communication is the renewal of our commitment to
the Sochi understanding on Idlib and a return to the
status quo in Idlib. Let me underline that Turkey will
not withdraw its forces and will not abandon any
observation post.
I recently met with a Syrian doctor. His depiction
of the situation still resonates with me. He said,
“I have seen the world’s worst humanitarian
crises, but the suffering I have seen in Syria is
unprecedented. Idlib has been transformed into a
huge concentration camp.”
What the regime has been pursuing in Idlib over
recent months is the last phase of its campaign to
exterminate its own people. Hospitals and schools have
been indiscriminately bombed and civilians, including
babies, have been killed. Freezing temperatures and
fuel shortages exacerbate the needs of vulnerable
children and families. The capacity of the health system
has been severely damaged at a time when healthcare needs are increasing owing to displacement and
bombardment. Donors, however, have responded in an
inadequate manner. We need an urgent response. If this
does not qualify as an emergency situation worthy of
additional funding, then what does?
Even before the recent escalation, the residents of
Idlib were the most vulnerable people in Syria. They
had already been displaced countless times, seeking
refuge from the regime’s barrel bombs, airstrikes and
heavy shelling for many years now. In the past two
months, the regime’s brutal violence has resulted in the
displacement of almost 600,000 people, 85 per cent of
whom are women and children. As bombs fall, civilians
continue to move towards our border. The escalation
has triggered a mass influx, leading to a chain reaction
20-03035

06/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

that affects not only Turkey but also beyond. Is the
world ready to face a repetition of the 2015 refugee
crisis, when over a million people from Syria arrived
in Europe?
The children of Idlib continue to bear the brunt
of this massacre. More children were killed in July
2019 alone than in all of 2018. A dead Syrian child is
referred to in the news only as a casualty, but back in
Idlib, she or he has a name, and the body is buried with
the dreams of a peaceful Syria. It is even more tragic
when the body of a child cannot even be found under
the debris of a bombed school.
It is time for the international community, and
particularly the members of the Security Council,
to heed the voices of those Syrian children. Raising
concerns and convening meetings is not enough.
Unfortunately, this humanitarian disaster is not given
due attention by Governments and media around
the world. The United Nations and the international
community need to pay attention to the desperate calls
of the Syrian people and humanitarian organizations.
We need immediate, concrete action. We cannot leave
the fate of Syrians to the mercy of a regime that has
been systematically killing, torturing and starving its
own people.
There is a clear path forward — a genuine
political solution that will ensure the implementation
of all aspects of resolution 2254 (2015). Let me recall
the formula in the resolution: a negotiated political
settlement, elections under United Nations supervision,
with the participation of all Syrians inside and outside
the country, and a new Constitution. For that to happen,
the first step is immediate de-escalation in Idlib. Any
step in the opposite direction will inevitably derail the
political process. Let us all work altogether to end this
tragedy once and for all.
Let me also reply to previous speakers. I will not
honour the representative of the Syrian regime with a
response as I do not consider him to be a legitimate
representative of Syria. A regime that has massacred
and tortured the Syrian people for over eight years lost
its legitimacy long ago and its representative should not
have the right to sit behind the nameplate of the Syrian
Arab Republic in this Chamber. His mere presence is
an assault on the millions of Syrians who have suffered
countless crimes at the hands of that tyrannical regime,

S/PV. 8715

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
thank you, Sir, for organizing this meeting.
The situation in Idlib is critical and every effort
must be made to prevent it from getting out of control.
While we must continue to combat terrorists, it should
be done with the utmost care for the lives of civilians,
as we have always stressed and as is also underlined in
all the final documents of the Astana format. We stress
the need for the implementation of the Sochi agreement
on Idlib, the importance of which is also highlighted
in the Astana format meetings. We need to ensure
that the crisis will be settled through political means.
Nevertheless, terrorists must not be allowed to exploit
the situation, consolidate their positions, turn Idlib into
their safe haven, kill more civilians or continue taking a
large number of civilians hostage. We should be vigilant
enough not to confuse the protection of civilians with
the protection of terrorists.
As one of the guarantors of the Astana format,
the Islamic Republic of Iran stands ready to use its
good offices to contribute to the political settlement
of the current differences between Turkey and Syria
regarding the situation in Idlib. The upcoming summit
of the guarantors of the Astana format, which is due
to take place in the near future in Tehran, will provide
an essential opportunity for the comprehensive
examination of the situation in Syria. We will also
host Special Envoy Pedersen this coming Saturday to
discuss various issues related to Syria, including the
work of the Constitutional Committee.
Finally, I would like to stress the following. First,
the fight against terrorism must continue unabated
and the terrorists must not be allowed to benefit
from the existing differences. Secondly, every effort
must be made by all to protect civilians. Thirdly, the
current situation in Idlib can be resolved only through
political means. Fourthly, the full respect of all for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political
independence of Syria is a must. We stand ready to do
whatever is in our power to contribute to the political
settlement of the current situation.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

20-0303521/21
