S/PV.9351

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9351

st meeting
Monday, 19 June 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abushahab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Sénéchal de Goffredo Junior
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Korbieh
Mr. Ishikane
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Hauri
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-17639 (E)
*2317639*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9351

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Abdoulaye
Bathily, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Libya and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya; and Ms. Abeir Imneina,
Head of WASHM Center for Women’s Studies.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Bathily, Mr. Kimihiro Ishikane,
Permanent Representative of Japan, in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, and
Ms. Imneina.
I now give the floor to Mr. Bathily.
Mr. Bathily: It is a great honour for me today to
address the Security Council on the situation in Libya.
Let me first express my heartfelt condolences to
the families of the migrants who lost their lives in the
sinking of a boat that sailed from Tobruk, Libya, and
sank in the Mediterranean Sea last Wednesday. I also
wish a speedy recovery to the survivors. That tragedy
is a brutal reminder of our collective duty to find a
solution to all aspects of the crisis in Libya, which has
an impact in other parts of the world.
Since my last briefing in April (see S/PV.9306), I
have continued to engage with a wide range of Libyan
stakeholders as part of my initiative announced
in February to enable successful elections. Those
stakeholders include institutional players, namely the
members and head of the Presidential Council, the
House of Representatives, the High State Council, the
Government, the High National Electoral Commission
and the High Judicial Council. I also engaged with
municipal councils, political parties, civil society
2/20

19/06/2023

groups, women and youth organizations, academics
and professional groupings such as lawyers, business
leaders and organizations. Furthermore, I continue to
consult with the General Commander of the Libyan
National Army, the 5+5 Joint Military Commission
and security actors from all three regions of Libya to
encourage them to commit to the electoral process in a
spirit of compromise and national reconciliation.
Between 22 May and 6 June, the 6+6 committee
tasked by the House of Representatives and the High
State Council to finalize the electoral laws met in
Bouznika, Morocco. The Kingdom of Morocco hosted
the meetings. The United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) assigned a technical team comprised
of electoral, gender and constitutional experts to advise
the committee. On 6 June, the committee announced that
it had reached agreement on draft laws for presidential
and parliamentary elections. We acknowledge the
effort of the 6+6 committee as an important step
forward, although it was not sufficient to resolve the
most contested issues and enable successful elections.
We have since seen a flurry of mixed reactions from
Libyan stakeholders on the agreed texts indicating
which key issues remain strongly contested.
In addition, while acknowledging that the proposed
law represents significant progress, the High National
Electoral Commission has officially written to the
House of Representatives and the High State Council
expressing its concerns about serious loopholes and
technical shortcomings in the draft laws. Through our
own study of the texts, we identified at least four main
issues in that regard. The most politically contested
issues include, first, the eligibility criteria for candidates
for the presidential election; secondly, the provision for
a mandatory second round of the presidential election,
even if a candidate secures more than 50 per cent of
the votes required to win; thirdly, provisions stipulating
that if the first round of the presidential election fails,
parliamentary elections will not take place; fourthly, a
provision requiring the establishment of a new interim
Government before elections can take place.
As a result of intensive advocacy, the draft law
makes it possible to secure at least 20 per cent of seats
for women in the House of Representatives. However,
it allocates only six seats out of 90 for women in
the Senate. The eligibility criteria for presidential
elections, the linkage between presidential and
parliamentary elections and the issue of forming a new
unified Government are highly contentious and require
23-17639

19/06/2023

The situation in Libya

a political agreement among the major stakeholders and
key constituencies across the Libyan political spectrum
first and foremost. Short of that, related provisions
would almost certainly not be implementable and might
even trigger a new crisis.
To avoid that gloomy prospect for the people of
Libya and the region, it is now crucial to take steps to
overcome the persistent disagreement over that longstanding issue. Acting in a spirit of compromise, the
main Libyan decision-makers must put the greater
interests of the Libyan people above everything else and
come to a political agreement on these matters. Without
such compromises, the contested issues are likely to take
the electoral process into a cul-de-sac as in 2021, which
would further polarize and even destabilize the country.
I therefore call on the Council to increase its pressure on
the relevant actors and use its collective and individual
leverage to ensure that they demonstrate the political
will needed to take their country to successful elections.
On the security front, Tripoli has remained
relatively calm. The ongoing operations conducted by
the Government against trafficking activities in drugs,
weapons, fuel and humans in Zawiya and the surrounding
areas have prompted allegations of political motives and
could therefore risk undermining the relative stability
in Tripolitania. On 25 May, the Ministry of Defence
launched an aerial campaign described as part of a lawenforcement operation against criminal networks in the
city and towns along the coastal road between Tripoli
and the Libya-Tunisia border. On 29 May, the Ministry
announced the start of the second phase of the operation,
which is ongoing. As of 11 June, available sources
indicated that 23 air raids have been recorded, resulting
in injuries to civilians and the destruction of one medical
clinic. While segments of the population in the area
have consistently called on the authorities to address the
insecurity created by the scourge of trafficking in people,
drugs and weapons, there are concerns that conducting
military-style operations in a densely populated urban
setting carries many risks that could escalate the security
situation. I reiterate my call to the authorities to make the
protection of civilians a top priority in those operations.
Meanwhile, in the South, the conflict in the Sudan has
raised concerns about its potential destabilizing effects
on Libya, especially a potential influx of refugees and
the cross-border movement of armed elements. We are
monitoring the situation closely, and I have assured the
Libyan authorities that the United Nations stands ready
to give it support, while emphasizing the need to provide

S/PV.9351

the refugees fleeing war with humanitarian protection.
There is also a widespread fear among Libyans that
should the conflict in the Sudan last longer, its spillover
consequences could pose a new set of challenges to the
stability of Libya and the region. It would be likely to
render elusive the withdrawal of foreign fighters, foreign
forces and mercenaries from Libya, which we have been
working on very actively.
In that delicate context, the dialogue that I have
facilitated among security and military actors is
continuing. I recently facilitated a meeting between the
5+5 Joint Military Commission and armed formations
in Tripoli, Sebha and Benghazi. Those meetings, which
brought together warring parties for the first time since
the beginning of the crisis in 2011, have raised positive
expectations among the Libyan public and created some
momentum that must be maintained and developed.
Regardless of their affiliation, the security and military
actors committed in public statements to supporting
the electoral process, accepting its results, rejecting
all forms of violence and ensuring the protection of
civilians. I intend to broaden that dialogue by taking
those meetings to other cities in all three regions and
by securing further commitments on the part of those
actors, and their actions on the ground must reflect the
commitments they make.
The International Follow-up Committee on Libya
of the Berlin process and its Working Groups continue
to serve as the overall framework for international
support to the intra-Libyan dialogue tracks. Two
in-person meetings were held inside Libya in May for
the first time. On 22 May, the co-Chairs of the Working
Group on International Humanitarian Law and Human
Rights organized an in-person plenary session in Tripoli
jointly with the Presidential Council. The presence of
all members of the Presidential Council demonstrated
their commitment to mainstreaming human rights
throughout the political process. At the meeting I
stressed that an open civic space with an active civil
society and independent rule-of-law institutions are
critical enablers of elections, long-term stability and
national reconciliation in Libya. The session concluded
with the signing of a declaration of intent between the
Presidential Council and the working group co-Chairs to
make human rights a central pillar of the Libyan political
and reconciliation process and to establish a regular and
inclusive dialogue to advance human rights in Libya.
On 24 May, I also co-chaired with Türkiye the
first in-person plenary meeting of the security working
group, which was attended by the 5+5 Joint Military

23-176393/20

S/PV.9351

The situation in Libya

19/06/2023

Commission, the security working group co-Chairs
and other members of the International Follow-Up
Committee on Libya. That meeting was a continuation of
our efforts to support the implementation of the ceasefire
and the reunification of military and security institutions.
I appreciate the efforts of the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission to continue their dialogue to rebuild unity
and trust among military and security actors.

publish them on social media. That is a clear violation
of Libyan and international laws that protect against
self-incrimination and confessions obtained under
duress. I call on all Libyan leaders to demonstrate more
tolerance among themselves and towards their fellow
citizens. I also urge them to engage on the path of
national reconciliation. The release of detainees must
be a pillar in that commitment.

On the economic front, I welcome the conclusion
of the International Monetary Fund’s (IMF) article IV
consultation with the Libyan authorities after a decade-long
hiatus. Many of its recommendations reinforce calls on
the Libyan leadership to enhance equitable, accountable
and transparent State resource management and oversight
and to make tangible progress in unifying the Central
Bank of Libya. Those issues are pertinent to the effort to
build consensus on elections, including on establishing
a level playing field for all candidates. UNSMIL will
support the implementation of the recommendations
agreed upon between the IMF and Libya, including
through the economic working group of the Berlin
process, and ensure that the implementation progresses
in a manner that adds momentum to the political track.

The political process in Libya has, as members
can see, once again reached a critical stage. Let
me reiterate what has been my consistent message
in Libya: successful elections require not only a
legal framework, but also a political agreement that
ensures the inclusion of all major stakeholders. By
my next briefing to the Council, I intend to intensify
negotiations and convene major stakeholders — or their
trusted representatives — to reach a final settlement
on the most contentious issues, to make the draft laws
implementable and to enable successful elections
through an inclusive political agreement.

On human rights, I observed a concerning increase
of excessive controls by security agencies that, together
with other actors, restrict fundamental rights, including
freedom of assembly and freedom of movement. The
Internal Security Agency recently introduced a new
procedure that restricts women’s freedom of movement
by requiring women departing alone from Libyan
airports in the western region to complete a form on their
reason for travelling abroad without a male companion.
That discriminatory procedure has raised concerns
among women and other citizens. We support their call
for the revocation of that procedure.
Equally alarming are the decisions issued by the
Government of National Unity on 22 May to form a
committee to regulate civil society organizations based
on law no. 19 of 2001 — a restrictive historical law that
asserts State control over civil society activities. Any law
or regulation governing civil society should comply with
national and international human rights guarantees. New
restrictions on civil society and on women’s freedom of
movement are particularly alarming in a country working
towards inclusive elections and national reconciliation,
in which women and civil society play an essential role.
I am also deeply concerned by measures that
contravene basic fair trial guarantees, whereby security
actors force confessions from persons in custody and
4/20

While we all endorse calls for non-interference
and the principle of a Libyan-Libyan solution as the
basis of any efficient instrument for sustainable peace
and stability, those catchwords must not remain mere
slogans to hide an agenda for prolonging the status
quo at the expense of the aspirations of the Libyan
people for legitimate institutions and prosperity. The
prolonged status quo is detrimental to the interests of
the people of Libya. It is fraught with disaster for Libya
and its neighbours. It is imperative that the Council’s
commitment to the mandate it entrusts to UNSMIL
is translated into increased and targeted pressure
on actors, truly speaking with one voice and acting
accordingly to remove the spoilers from the process
towards Libya’s full recovery.
I reiterate my call on all regional and international
partners to truly help the Libyan leaders to work
together towards the recovery of their motherland and
answer the call of the ordinary Libyan citizens vying
for peace, prosperity and national reconciliation.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Bathily
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Ishikane.
Mr. Ishikane: In accordance with paragraph 24
(e) of resolution 1970 (2011), of 26 February 2011, I
have the honour to report to the Security Council on
the work of the Committee established pursuant to
23-17639

19/06/2023

The situation in Libya

resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya. The report
covers the period from 19 April to 19 June 2023, during
which time the Committee conducted its work using
the silence procedure with the aim of facilitating the
implementation of the sanctions measures.
Starting with the arms embargo, the Committee
responded to a letter from the European Union in
connection with the exception contained in paragraph
9 of resolution 2095 (2013). The Committee is also
considering a letter from Libya, submitted in response to
a prior letter from the Committee, pertaining to certain
aspects of the implementation of the arms embargo.
In the context of the measures aimed at preventing
illicit exports of petroleum, including crude oil
and refined petroleum products from Libya, and
following up on my previous report to the Council (see
S/PV.9306), the Committee dispatched a letter to Libya
on the subject of the Libyan Government focal point
pursuant to resolution 2146 (2014). In relation to the
assets freeze, no negative decision was taken by the
Committee regarding a notification invoking paragraph
19 (a) of resolution 1970 (2011), submitted by the United
Kingdom. The Committee also provided clarification on
the scope of the assets freeze, as requested by Belgium.
With regard to the travel ban, the Committee
received a travel notification from Ms. Aisha
Al-Qadhafi, a listed individual, for travel from Oman
to Saudi Arabia, under a travel exemption previously
granted for unlimited travel within a six-month
period for humanitarian purposes. Subsequently,
the Committee was notified on the matter in a letter
from Saudi Arabia, the country of destination, as well
as a communication from the individual confirming
her return to Oman. During the reporting period the
Committee extended for a fifth time the six-month
exemption granted for humanitarian purposes to three
individuals on the Committee’s list — Ms. Safia Farkash
Al-Barassi, Ms. Aisha Al-Qadhafi and Mr. Mohammed
Al-Qadhafi.
With regard to the sanctions list, the Committee
received a ninth communication from the focal point for
delisting established pursuant to resolution 1730 (2006),
in connection with a delisting request submitted by a
listed individual, conveying the position of the country
of citizenship. I would like to mention that while the
delisting process through the focal point for delisting
is ongoing, Libya also submitted a separate delisting
request relating to the same individual, as previously

S/PV.9351

reported. During the reporting period, through the
focal point for delisting, the Committee also received a
request for delisting from the travel ban from a second
listed individual, whose name is currently inscribed on
the Committee’s sanctions list as subject to the assetsfreeze and travel-ban measures.
During the reporting period the Committee received
a letter from the Panel of Experts on Libya on its future
planned travels to Libya, which the Committee is
currently considering. Lastly, I would like to note that
the Committee remains committed to facilitating the
implementation of the measures I have discussed and to
contributing to promoting peace and stability in Libya.
The President (spoke in Arabic):
Ambassador Ishikane for his briefing.

I

thank

I now give the floor to Ms. Imneina.
Ms. Imneina (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to begin my statement by thanking the
Security Council for inviting me to this meeting and
providing civil society with an opportunity to brief the
Council on the human rights situation in Libya from a
gender perspective.
I am Abeir Imneina, a professor at the University
of Benghazi and Head of WASHM Center for Women’s
Studies. I am also interested in human rights issues in
general and gender issues in particular. I want to address
the Council today with a view to emphasizing civil
society’s urgent priorities with regard to establishing
genuine and sustainable stability in Libya through the
creation of an environment that guarantees freedom
to work and freedom of expression and contributes
to development and reconstruction and strengthening
social peace.
Before I go any further, I would like to describe
the features of the current situation in Libya. They
include the proliferation of weapons, weak and divided
governmental institutions and multiple forms of
extremism; a political deadlock caused by the repeated
postponement of elections, especially parliamentary
elections; an unacceptable delay in the holding of a
referendum on the draft constitution aimed at ending the
transitional stages that have failed to create the stability
we desire; unbalanced demographics in southern Libya,
owing to a lack of control over the borders in the south
and blatant foreign interference violating Libya’s
sovereignty; overlapping corruption in the political,
governance and security arenas that is obstructing

23-176395/20

S/PV.9351

The situation in Libya

all electoral processes or projects aimed at achieving
stability and rejecting the client-State system; and a
dominant extremist religious narrative that is opposed
to democracy and women’s participation in public
policymaking at all levels.
With that in mind, I would like to remind members
of the reality facing civil society in Libya. We are
suffering from the prevailing power of national
institutions over the right of people to assembly,
association and work under the existing laws, which
has not only shrunk the space for civil freedom, as
stipulated under the interim constitutional declaration,
but has also restricted freedom of expression and
movement and the right to belong to any civilsociety organization. Civil society, including unions,
federations and working organizations, is suffering the
consequences of such associations’ exclusion from all
the committees deciding the future of Libya and from
discussions on a genuine and fair road map to bring
about peace. Civil society in Libya has fallen victim
to enforced disappearances, kidnapping, extrajudicial
arrests and accusations of immorality and espionage
on behalf of foreign Powers. People have been subject
to arrest and torture on the pretext of safeguarding
established values. Members of civil society, and
women in particular, are suffering from systematic
online violence aimed at intimidating and excluding
them from participating in the public space.
In addition, women in particular are suffering
from unjustified measures restricting their movement
and encroaching on their privacy by depriving them
of the right to travel if they refuse to fill out specific
forms explaining the reasons for their travel. That is
an arbitrary measure representing the worst forms of
discrimination and violations of citizens’ rights and
public freedoms.
Women are also suffering from reluctance on
the part of the legislative authority to enact laws
combating violence against women and the violations
of women’s right to live in safety and dignity in both
public and private spaces. Libyan women’s right to
marry non-Libyans is being violated and their children
from such unions forbidden from obtaining citizenship.
Today, as I address the Security Council, which adopted
resolution 1325 (2000) to protect women in peace and
war, I believe it is important to recall the stigmatization
that has affected women activists in civil-society
organizations who have called for establishing a national
strategy to implement resolution 1325 (2000), as has
6/20

19/06/2023

been done in other sister countries and those that have
suffered from the scourge of war. A national strategy
would bring justice for women who have suffered from
war and displacement.
Through this statement, civil society is calling on
national institutions in Libya to work on several areas.
They must structure civil society through the
enactment of a law regulating the establishment and
work of civil society organizations and preventing any
authority from asserting dominance over their activities
and rights.
They must involve various civil society components,
organizations and unions in all United Nations processes
to discuss future political arrangements.
They must respect women’s participation regarding
elected councils by ensuring fair opportunities for women
to compete and be appointed to high-level positions.
They must accelerate the adoption of a law combating
violence against women and another law establishing
a national council for women in order to address all
aspects of women’s empowerment. Likewise, they must
adopt a national policy to implement the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and promote the role of
women within it.
They must eliminate all forms of discrimination
related to women and their economic, political and
social roles.
They must focus on improving educational,
economic, social and health conditions of people with
disabilities, and work to create an urban environment
that is responsive to their rights to movement and work.
They must inspire confidence in the successful role
of civil society organizations, instead of disseminating
hate speech and intimidation.
They must integrate referendums as a priority
into future processes and detain activists only in
accordance with legal regulations and procedures.
They must integrate parties, if elected, into all future
institutions to promote civil values and include women
on candidate lists.
Finally, they must stress the importance of publicly
adopting a policy against impunity, which undermines
all efforts to ensure accountability for all those who
violated human rights, especially the human rights of
active individuals and organizations working in the civil
domain. God save Libya.
23-17639

19/06/2023

The President (spoke
Ms. Imneina for her briefing.

The situation in Libya
in

Arabic):

I

thank

As a result of a number of technical difficulties
during Ms. Imneina’s briefing, we will distribute the
text of that statement at a subsequent stage.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
would like to start by thanking Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Bathily, Ambassador Ishikane
and Ms. Imneina for their briefings today.
I visited Libya earlier this month to meet the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the team
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. I want
to thank them for their engagement and tireless efforts
to support Libya on its path to peace and stability.
During my visit, I also met Libyan people to hear
and understand their concerns. The clear and consistent
message was the urgency of moving the political
process forward and for political leadership to deliver
the stability and security the people of Libya want
and deserve.
As we have heard so clearly from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, this is not just
an abstract point about politics and governance. I visited
a World Health Organization (WHO) health-centre
project, to which the United Kingdom has contributed
over $2.5 million of funding. I want to thank the WHO
and the staff for facilitating my visit and for their
work to bring physical and mental health support into
primary health-care services in Libya. That is important
work. But the point is that the political impasse directly
impacts the health-care system and Libyans who need
health care, antenatal checks, dental treatment, primary
care and so on. These hospital services, health care
provision and long-term investment that Libya can well
afford are stalled because of the political impasse.
I therefore return from my visit with clarity about the
importance of Council members and the international
community supporting Special Representative Bathily
in his work to facilitate an effective political process for
positive change through a clear road map to successful
elections and beyond.
In that context, the United Kingdom takes note
of the 6+6 committee’s work to agree draft electoral
laws. However, the reception to their announcement

S/PV.9351

demonstrates the need for broader political agreement
between Libyan power-holders, and we welcome the
Special Representative’s commitment to convene
stakeholders to reach agreement in order to make the
draft law implementable. That is the only way we can
overcome the issues preventing elections and then make
progress towards long-term stability.
During my visit, Libyan people told me that they
want to engage actively, freely and safely in the political
sphere. They want to exercise their right to vote and
work towards a better future, to move beyond — as the
Special Representative said — slogans that prolong the
status quo and are detrimental to the Libyan people. The
United Kingdom will continue our work to ensure that
those aspirations are fulfilled, including through our
support to the Special Representative and his efforts
towards peace and stability.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bathily
and Ms. Imneina for their briefings and welcome the
participation of Ambassador Elsonni here today.
At the outset, I would like to express Japan’s
satisfaction with the recent adoption of resolution 2684
(2023), extending the authorization for Member States
to conduct inspections on the high seas off Libya.
First and foremost, Japan again reiterates the
importance of holding elections before the end of 2023.
As Special Representative Bathily and Ambassador
Elsonni have repeatedly said in the Council, the Libyan
people wish to see elections. The holding of transparent
and credible elections is the most important step towards
an inclusive, Libyan-led and -owned political process.
The Security Council unanimously expressed its strong
commitment to that in its presidential statement in
March (S/PRST/2023/2). Elections are the only way to
restore the legitimacy of the country’s institutions.
In that regard, we acknowledge the recent effort of
the joint 6+6 committee of the House of Representatives
and the High State Council. Building upon that effort, it
is imperative to swiftly introduce an electoral law that
will pave the way for the prompt holding of elections.
We hope that this step will receive the full backing of
all relevant Libyan stakeholders. We will spare no effort
in our support for Special Representative Bathily and
his Mission to help the Libyan people hold elections as
soon as possible.

23-176397/20

S/PV.9351

The situation in Libya

Turning to the security track, Japan welcomes
the continued positive developments, including the
meeting of the security working group of the Berlin
process International Follow-Up Committee, held for
the first time on Libyan soil on 24 May. We also support
the holding of a series of working group meetings in
different regions of Libya.
Libya’s stability is key to the peace, security and
prosperity of the whole region. In that regard, Japan
echoes the Special Representative in welcoming the
advancement of dialogue on the withdrawal of foreign
fighters, foreign forces and mercenaries.
Regional stability is also key to Libyan peace.
The deteriorating situation in the Sudan could pose a
security and humanitarian threat to Libya, especially
in the southern region. Japan will keep a close eye
on possible cross-border movements of fighters and
equipment, as well as on whether developments in the
Sudan encourage illicit business, including smuggling
and human trafficking by opportunistic organized
criminal groups.
Before concluding, let me again reiterate our firm
commitment to support the Libyan people’s desire to
have legitimate State institutions that can protect them
and promote their welfare.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative Bathily and the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, the Permanent
Representative of Japan, Ambassador Ishikane, for their
briefings. I also welcome the Permanent Representative
of Libya, Ambassador Elsonni to today’s meeting.
For some time now, the parties in Libya have made
positive progress in advancing the political process,
maintaining security and stability, and restoring
construction and development. That having been said,
Libya’s political and peace processes still face many
difficulties and challenges. There is still a long way
to go to achieve long-term peace and security. The
international community should increase attention
to and investment in Libya and provide constructive
support for the maintenance of peace and stability in
the country and the region.
I wish to emphasize the following points.
First, the political process should be advanced
without any let-up. China commends the 6+6
committee for holding several rounds of talks earlier
8/20

19/06/2023

this month and reaching preliminary consensus on
the draft electoral laws. We welcome Egypt, Morocco
and other countries of the region for their continued
support. China encourages all parties in Libya to
build on their achievements, maintain the momentum
of communication and dialogue and seek to forge
consensus on key issues and create enabling conditions
for advancing the political transition.
China supports Mr. Bathily in stepping up
engagement with all parties in Libya. We also support
the African Union and other regional organizations
in promoting the national reconciliation process. The
recent developments in Africa have once again shown
that solutions to African issues need to be found from
within Africa. The international community should
respect the Libyan-led and Libyan-owned approach,
accommodate the reasonable concerns of all parties
in Libya, provide constructive support to the political
process and avoid forcing any solutions on the country
from outside
Secondly, security and stability should be
maintained with commitment. China commends the
5+5 Joint Military Commission for holding multiple
meetings this year to discuss such issues as unification
of security institutions and establishment of a ceasefire
mechanism. We have noted that the security working
group has held its first plenary meeting. China
encourages the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) to strengthen cooperation with the
5+5 Joint Military Commission, promote the ceasefire
monitoring mechanism and create a favourable security
environment for the political transition in Libya.
At the same time, militia fighting, abduction,
assaults and other security incidents still occur from
time to time in Libya. The spillover effects of the
situation in the Sudan cannot be ignored either. All
parties in Libya must maintain the hard-won ceasefire
and avoid actions that could cause escalations of the
situation. In the current situation, it is imperative to
properly address the withdrawal of external armed
forces and mercenaries and ensure that the relevant
processes can proceed in a smooth and orderly manner
to avoid any fallout on Libya’s domestic stability and
the security of the neighbouring countries
Thirdly, there should be persistence in promoting
reconstruction and development. In the recent period,
Libya’s oil production and export have steadily resumed,
along with a positive momentum for development.
23-17639

19/06/2023

The situation in Libya

S/PV.9351

Development and reconstruction will generate economic
dividends, improve livelihoods, work as an important
catalyst and provide cohesion in maintaining peace and
political stability, strengthening national identity and
promoting social unity. The international community
should support Libya’s reconstruction, help the
country develop its economy and improve its people’s
livelihoods. When implementing the Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework 2023–⁠2025, the
United Nations should align it with Libya’s key areas
for cooperation and use United Nations development
resources to generate real benefits.

all candidates will be essential, within a framework
guaranteeing the equality, equity and transparency
of the electoral process. In this respect, France
reaffirms its full support for the Libyan High National
Electoral Commission.

All parties in Libya should properly resolve their
differences over the management of the oil industry
and the distribution of oil revenues and ensure that
the oil revenues benefit the Libyan people. The Libyan
Government has long-standing concerns over losses
resulting from the frozen assets. The Security Council
and the Libya Sanctions Committee should take this
matter very seriously and craft substantive measures to
address it.

These events underline the importance of unified
security and military institutions throughout the
country. It is in this spirit that France will continue
to support, in coordination with the United Nations,
the Libyan 5+5 Joint Military Committee and the two
Chiefs of Staff, with a view to reunifying the Libyan
army. France has allocated $100,000 to finance United
Nations efforts to support the work of the 5+5 Joint
Military Committee.

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, the Permanent Representative
of Japan, and Ms. Abeir Imneina for their briefings. We
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Libya in the Chamber today.

France also demands compliance with the arms
embargo and the withdrawal of all foreign forces, foreign
fighters and mercenaries from Libyan territory, in
cooperation with Libya’s neighbouring countries. It also
reaffirms its commitment to preserving the consensus
in Libya against terrorism and radical Islamism.

National elections in Libya are within reach. The
full mobilization of all Libyan and international players
in this direction is essential. The Libyan people wish
to choose their leaders democratically. That is why
France welcomes the progress made on the electoral
law by the 6+6 committee, which represents the Libyan
Parliament and High Council of State. We are grateful
to the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), and to Morocco and Egypt for their support
for the committee’s work over recent months. This is
a significant step towards the holding of simultaneous
presidential and legislative elections. We must move
forward on this basis, and we encourage the Libyan
players to facilitate the promulgation of the electoral
laws as soon as possible.
France welcomes UNSMIL’s commitment to
continuing to work with all the Libyan institutions and
players concerned to ensure credible, inclusive and
transparent elections. The contribution of everyone
is necessary to creating an optimal political, security
and legal environment. Fair competition between

The full implementation of the October 2020
ceasefire agreement is essential. In recent weeks,
armed clashes have taken place in Tripolitania, in
the town of Zawiya in particular. France calls on the
Libyan authorities to prevent any escalation and recalls
that they are responsible for ensuring the safety of
the population.

Public funds must serve the general interest in Libya.
Libyans expect a fair and transparent redistribution of
oil revenues.
France is also concerned about human rights
violations in Libya, the first victims of which are
migrants. The reduction in freedom of expression and
association is also worrisome, as are the restrictions
on the freedom of movement of Libyan women,
as mentioned by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Ms. Imneina.
Political legitimacy must be restored in Libya,
as must the country’s sovereignty and unity. This
is essential for lasting stability and prosperity that
benefits all. France supports Special Representative
Abdoulaye Bathily in achieving these objectives. An
endless political transition in Libya is unsustainable,
and the holding of elections is essential.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bathily for his
update on the recent developments in Libya. We support

23-176399/20

S/PV.9351

The situation in Libya

his work and mediation efforts and strongly encourage
him to maintain his focus and leadership. I also thank
Ambassador Ishikane for his briefing.
I would like to make the following brief points.
First, on the political situation, despite promising
developments, a frustratingly long stalemate on the
way forward towards elections recalls what we have
witnessed in Libya for many years. It is hard to deny that
multiple failed political transitions since 2012 have taken
their toll on the Libyan people. So many times hope has
surrendered to cynicism, eroding trust and blurring
perspectives. The continued and increasingly complex
internal divisions and external influences affecting the
country threaten to undo progress and throw the country
into another spiral of crisis and violence. That should not
be allowed.
We take note of the work made by the 6+6
commission, which met again in Bouznika, Morocco.
Libyan parties must define the legal basis necessary for
holding elections in 2023. It is crucial that the electoral
laws meet the expectations of all political stakeholders
through a broad political agreement to guarantee swift,
free, fair and transparent elections.
As we have reiterated many times before, time is
of the essence. The status quo, perpetuated through
indefinite delays, is not an option, nor is it sustainable.
Obstructive manoeuvres just place an undue toll on
the Libyan people, society and economy and delay the
restoration of democracy. They only keep the country
up against a wall. That is why elections are a must and
the starting point to restore legitimacy to the Libyan
institutions and charter a path towards stability. The
efforts of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in that respect deserve and have our full support.
Secondly, with regard to the security track, we
acknowledge that the situation remains fragile and
volatile. Despite the holding of the ceasefire and the
sustained contacts between the Chiefs of Staff from
western and eastern Libya, recent episodes of armed
violence in both regions of the country are a testament
to the urgency of unifying the military and security
institutions. We welcome the meeting of the security
working group on 24 May, which was held for the first
time in Tripoli, and we are confident that the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission will soon resume its meetings.
Maintaining the ceasefire and agreements on
productive confidence-building mechanisms are critical,
but comprehensive security sector reform, as well as
10/20

19/06/2023

the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
integration of the armed groups is also essential for
security throughout the country. That has become even
more pressing given the serious deterioration of the
security situation in the region. The alarming events
in the Sudan only reinforce the need to quickly find a
sustainable solution in Libya. Weapons supplies from
Libya to the Sudan, Mali and other countries in the
Sahel remain a serious concern. The arms embargo must
be fully implemented, and therefore we commend the
Council on its adoption of resolution 2684 (2023) earlier
this month.
Thirdly, turning to human rights and civil society,
just a few months ago, the Independent Fact-Finding
Mission on Libya expressed deep concern over the
country’s deteriorating human rights situation. Attacks
against human rights defenders, women’s rights
activists, journalists and civil society associations
must stop. Civil society has a crucial role to play in
building an atmosphere that is conducive to free and
fair elections for Libyans to exercise their rights and
choose a representative Government to run the country.
Let me conclude by emphasizing again the
centrality of a clear path towards elections. We
reiterate our call on all stakeholders to constructively
engage with the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and break the current deadlock. Libya’s actors
and current rivals need to come together and agree
on a political settlement for the future of the country.
That is what Libya needs. That is what Libyans want.
It should provide a framework for the division of
power and national resources, promote reconciliation
and redress grievances and injustices. None of that
is impossible, but none of it will be achieved without
concerted efforts and genuine political will. That long
and arduous path starts with free and fair presidential
and parliamentary elections.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Libya and Head of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, and the Permanent
Representative of Japan, Mr. Kimihiro Ishikane,
for their statements. We also listened closely to
Ms. Abeir Imneina.
The developments in Libya do not give us much
cause for optimism. The country continues to have two
competing Governments. The prospects for overcoming
23-17639

19/06/2023

The situation in Libya

the protracted internal crisis unfortunately continue to
appear dim. We call on the Libyan leaders to put aside
any possible differences and work together to ensure
comprehensive security and a definitive normalization
of the situation. We firmly believe that this is in keeping
with achieving lasting peace and stability throughout the
entire North African region, which is still suffering the
consequences of the tragic events of 2011.
The way out of the current stalemate is the holding of
national elections. It is essential for Libya to agree on the
modalities for organizing the electoral process as soon
as possible. Active efforts in the joint 6+6 committee
format have paved the way for holding those elections.
We welcome the progress made during the inter-Libyan
talks in Bouznika, Morocco, where a compromise on
key aspects of the legal framework for the upcoming
elections was almost reached. Libyans are literally one
step away from the breakthrough that is needed. We
hope that those efforts will continue and that conditions
will be met for the simultaneous holding the presidential
and parliamentary elections in the near future. The focus
of international mediation efforts should be on providing
Libyans with all possible support to enable them to
swiftly move on to the next stages of the political process.
We believe that the electoral process should
be transparent, truly inclusive and include, on a
non-discriminatory basis, the entire spectrum of the
leading political forces of the former Jamahiriya,
including representatives of the former Government.
That will ensure that Libyan society accept the results
of the elections and will preclude the possibility of a
new military and political deterioration of the situation.
It is also necessary to limit external interference and
allow Libyans themselves to play the leading role in
determining the future of their long-suffering country.
An important positive element of the situation on
the ground is that there have been no active hostilities
in Libya for over two years. However, the threat of
a resumption of large-scale military confrontation
has not been completely eliminated. We continue to
see sporadic clashes between local armed groups.
In that context, it is important to ensure the general
maintenance of the ceasefire regime in the country to
eliminate the threat to civilians and ensure uninterrupted
transportation connections.
We welcome the ongoing activities of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission, but further progress towards a
comprehensive settlement of the conflict requires active
work. One of the key areas in that regard is the eventual

S/PV.9351

withdrawal of the foreign military presence in Libya.
We advocate a synchronized, balanced, gradual and
phased withdrawal of all non-Libyan armed groups and
military units.
We believe that reinvigorating the political process
requires the conscious desire on the part of the key Libyan
stakeholders to come to a reasonable compromise under
the auspices of the United Nations and UNSMIL, its most
important instrument in Libya, with the consolidated
support of the international community. We take this
opportunity to reaffirm our support for Mr. Bathily in
his efforts to find ways to overcome the internal political
impasse and give impetus to political dialogue. In that
context, we consider any unilateral initiatives, including
those aimed at creating formats to facilitate a settlement
without the participation of all influential international
and regional players and the Libyans themselves, to
be counterproductive.
Operational coordination with members of the
Security Council has also taken on a special role at
this decisive stage. We stress once again that our
country stands ready to work constructively with all
interested parties.
At this critical juncture for Libya, the main task of
the international community is to continue to encourage
the country’s leaders to maintain and build on the
positive trends of recent months. We cannot allow Libya
to become a stage for confrontation between external
forces working to perpetuate divisions within the country
and exacerbate instability and chaos. Against that
background, the double agenda of our Western colleagues
is obvious. Their goal is the same as it was before: not a
long-term solution, but rather to provide resources for
their own economic needs at the expense of Libya’s
hydrocarbon resources. The stable functioning of Libya’s
oil sector is important for post-war reconstruction, with
the understanding that the country’s natural resources
belong first and foremost to its citizens. Order must also
be restored in its economic and financial sectors, based
on the principle of Libyan ownership of financial assets,
including those in frozen accounts.
In conclusion, we remain concerned about the
problem of illegal migration and the proliferation of
weapons in Libya, which have an impact on security
both within the country itself and in the Sahelo-Saharan
region as a whole. We look forward to more effective
inspection efforts off the coast of Libya, which must be
carried out in strict compliance with international law.

23-1763911/20

S/PV.9351

The situation in Libya

Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Special Representative Abdoulaye Bathily
and the briefers for their insights. I also welcome the
presence of the Permanent Representative of Libya in
today’s meeting.
Before I elaborate on three points, I just want to
mention the tragic incident in the Mediterranean in
which an overloaded boat capsized and sank off the
coast of Greece on its way from Libya. Thousands
of migrants are dying and disappearing every year
in the Mediterranean. We are saddened by the news
of the shipwreck, and I want to express my deepest
condolences to the victims and their families.
First, Switzerland takes note of the work done by
the 6+6 joint committee in Bouznika, Morocco, to
reach agreement on draft electoral laws. While they
represent an essential step in the political process,
electoral laws alone will not pave the way for elections.
An inclusive pre-electoral agreement is needed to
guarantee an environment conducive to the elections
and to acceptance of their results. In that agreement,
the Libyan stakeholders should commit firmly to
guaranteeing the security of the electoral process,
respect for freedom of expression and association and
the full participation of civil society. The agreement
should also include clear benchmarks and specific
deadlines. That process can be carried out only under
the auspices of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) and through the personal commitment
of the Special Representative, to whom Switzerland
reiterates its full support. Switzerland therefore urges
all Libyan stakeholders to engage constructively,
sincerely and substantively, with the mediation of the
Special Representative, who will be working to develop
an outline of the pre-electoral agreement.
Secondly, Switzerland encourages the international
community to support the Special Representative in a
united and coherent manner. We are ready to provide
that support, particularly at the various levels of the
Berlin process. In Tripoli on 22 May, Switzerland and
the other co-Chairs convened a plenary meeting of the
Working Group on International Humanitarian Law and
Human Rights. The meeting concluded with the signing
of a declaration of intent between the Presidential
Council and the Working Group’s co-Chairs aimed at
ensuring the centrality of human rights at all stages
of the political and reconciliation process, as well as
establishing a permanent and inclusive dialogue to
improve the human rights situation in Libya.
12/20

19/06/2023

Thirdly, Switzerland notes with concern that
security agencies and other actors have been increasingly
using populist discourse to justify excessive oversight
procedures that restrict fundamental rights. In that
context, we are concerned about the recent introduction
of a new procedure at Mitiga airport that restricts
women’s freedom of movement. Furthermore, we
regret that bureaucratic restrictions continue to
criminalize the work of Libyan and international civilsociety organizations. Any legislation pertaining to
those organizations must comply with Libya’s national
and international obligations under such agreements
as the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, to which Libya is a signatory. In particular, the
Covenant protects the fundamental rights to freedom
of expression and peaceful assembly and association,
as well as the work of civil-society organizations and
human rights defenders. The old law no.19 of 2001 does
not meet those standards, which are binding for Libya.
On the security front, we have followed with concern
reports of the use of force, including in populated areas,
as in the recent case in Zawiya. We call on all actors to
take the necessary measures to guarantee the protection
of the civilian population — and that includes internally
displaced persons. In that regard, Switzerland urges the
Government of Libya to continue to find sustainable
solutions for such people in order to meet their needs,
including by improving access to basic services and
undertaking reconstruction efforts.
Switzerland believes firmly that there can be no
lasting solution — in Libya and elsewhere — without
ensuring the human rights of every individual,
especially those who are vulnerable. That is why we
are ready to continue our commitment and cooperation
in this area.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the African members
of the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon, Ghana
and Mozambique.
The A3 thanks the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily,
and Ambassador Kimihiro Ishikane, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya, for their insightful briefings.
Our gratitude also goes to Ms. Abeir Imneina, Head
of WASHM Center for Women’s Studies, for her
23-17639

19/06/2023

The situation in Libya

important statement. We welcome the participation of
Ambassador Elsonni, the Permanent Representative of
Libya, in today’s meeting.
(spoke in French)
The A3 is very pleased to endorse the role played
by Special Representative Bathily in the efforts to
find consensus ways to hold credible presidential
and legislative elections in Libya. Gabon, Ghana and
Mozambique welcome Mr. Bathily’s inclusive approach
with all the relevant Libyan actors and institutions,
aimed at narrowing differences and resolving the
contested elements of the electoral framework, securing
the political agreement necessary for the elections and
creating a level playing field for all candidates.
We also welcome the progress made by the 6+6
joint committee in drafting electoral laws for the
presidential and legislative elections. We believe that
is an important step that must be maintained. In that
regard, and in order to ensure the acceptance of all
the political players involved, we call on the parties
to continue to engage constructively and in a spirit
of compromise so that the elections can take place
in 2023, in line with the sincere hopes of the Libyan
people. We reiterate our appeal to the various segments
of Libyan society, including women and young people,
to engage in good faith in the talks, to ensure that all
the efforts made so far can contribute significantly to
the promotion of lasting peace and stability in Libya.
(spoke in English)
The A3 would like to further reiterate that the
peace process in Libya must be Libyan-led and -owned,
facilitated by the United Nations and supported by
the international community as a whole and guided
by an inclusive dialogue conducive to national
reconciliation. The A3 further emphasizes its call for
the national reconciliation process to be part of any
political arrangement. That will help to heal Libyans’
wounds. In that regard, we welcome the critical role
of the African Union, the Libyan Presidential Council,
regional organizations and neighbouring countries.
We take positive note that the 2020 ceasefire
agreement continues to hold in Libya, despite the tense
situation and security incidents in the country. We call
on the parties to continue showing restraint by fully
complying with the ceasefire agreement in order to
preserve the current path conducive to lasting peace
and security.

S/PV.9351

Gabon, Ghana and Mozambique strongly condemn
the presence of foreign forces and foreign fighters
on Libyan soil. Their presence undermines Libya’s
territorial integrity and the country’s full ownership
of the peace process. Their immediate departure is
essential for a favourable and conducive environment
for advancing the ongoing political process, leading
to the holding of elections this year. In that regard, we
reiterate our appreciation for the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission and liaison committees’ efforts to
facilitate the full withdrawal of foreign forces and
foreign fighters from Libya.
We are concerned about the spillover effect of the
actions of foreign fighters and their consequences on the
security situation in the Sahel region. It is a situation that
aggravates the spread of terrorism and the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons. We reiterate our call
for coordinated action by the countries of the region,
regional organizations and the international community
in order to address and counter that threat. We urge that
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts
not only be concentrated in Libya but also be undertaken
through a collaborative approach with neighbouring
countries and regional organizations.
The A3 is concerned about the fact that the protracted
conflict and ongoing political crisis in Libya continue
to have an impact on macroeconomic indicators and
negatively affect access to essential services, including
health and education, particularly for the most
vulnerable. Oil production disruptions, in particular,
constrain economic growth and prevent Libyans from
fully harnessing their vast natural resources potential
to finance development programmes and accelerate
progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals.
We wish to remind the Council that Libya’s frozen
assets belong to Libyans and must be protected and
preserved for the Libyan people.
The A3 is deeply disheartened by the sinking of a
migrant boat off the coast of Greece. In that connection,
we strongly condemn the violations of human rights of
refugees and migrants, including human trafficking,
torture, sexual and gender-based violence and extortion,
as presented in the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2023/248). We demand the humane
treatment of refugees, migrants and asylum seekers, as
a basic requirement of international law and associated
conventions. We echo the Secretary-General’s call for
alternatives to detentions in order to manage migration,
in line with international law.

23-1763913/20

S/PV.9351

The situation in Libya

19/06/2023

The A3 wishes to reiterate its call for full respect
for Libya’s territorial integrity, sovereignty and national
unity, in line with resolution 2656 (2022).

reconstruction of peace, stability and prosperity in
Libya. On this occasion, we also underline the key role
of civil society and youth in mapping Libya’s future.

Mrs. Frazier (Malta): Echoing the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and others,
I begin by expressing Malta’s heartfelt condolences
to the families of the migrants who lost their lives
at sea last Wednesday. We wish a speedy recovery
to the survivors. The tragedy is a brutal reminder of
how important it is to address the scourge of human
smuggling and trafficking.

The security situation in Libya continues to severely
affect children and is undermined by the proliferation
of weapons under the control of various State and
non-State actors. Malta strongly believes in the full
and rigorous implementation of the 1970 sanctions and
in the full compliance by all Member States with the
arms embargo. In that context, we emphasize the role of
Operation IRINI and welcome the Council’s adoption
of resolution 2684 (2023).

I thank Special Representative Bathily for his
briefing, and the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
Ambassador Ishikane, and Ms. Imneina for their
contributions. I welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representative of Libya in our briefing today.
The international community’s focus on and
support to the situation in Libya remain critical. We
take positive note of the work of the 6+6 committee to
overcome the political impasse in Libya. We are also
encouraged by the Special Representative’s efforts
and consultations with a broad range of actors, which
are aimed at generating the necessary impetus and
consensus to address the political stalemate. We support
all such efforts and their effective implementation to
develop the political consensus and legal framework
needed to advance the Libyan-led and Libyan-owned
political process, under United Nations auspices.
To that end, it is fundamental that actors, including
all Libyan political actors, engage with each other in
a constructive and transparent manner, guided by a
spirit of compromise, to address all outstanding issues.
That includes the finalization of the relevant electoral
legislation that will lead to free, fair, transparent,
inclusive and secure elections. The international
community has an important role to play and must
be ready to provide the necessary assistance and
political support to the United Nations and to the
Libyan authorities for the holding of such elections. It
is crucial that the High National Elections Commission
be provided with the necessary resources to complete
its mandated tasks in a timely manner.
Malta also emphasizes the importance of gender
equality and of ensuring the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in all political processes and
electoral reforms, as well as women’s safe participation
in elections. Women have a crucial role to play in the
14/20

Security is equally threatened by the continued
presence of foreign fighters, foreign forces and
mercenaries. Their full withdrawal should be
prioritized. Efforts to stabilize the security situation
are to be commended. We continue to highlight the role
of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission and welcome
the holding of the first plenary session of the security
working group of the Berlin process International
Follow-Up Committee on Libya.
The safety, stability and protections offered to
Libyans must be a priority. In that regard, Malta also
underlines the complementary importance of advancing
accountability efforts to achieve long-term peace and
stability in Libya. Progress on all fronts will also be
needed to address the difficult socioeconomic conditions
facing large segments of the Libyan population.
Mr. Sénéchal de Goffredo Junior (Brazil): At
the outset, I would like to echo previous speakers in
expressing our condolences to the families of the
victims of the sinking of the ship off the coast of Greece
last week.
I thank Ambassador Ishikane for reporting on the
recent activities of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya. I also thank
Special Representative Bathily for his comprehensive
briefing, as well as Ms. Imneina for sharing her
perspective with the Council. I also welcome the
Permanent Representative of Libya to today’s meeting.
Brazil supports the Special Representative’s
engagement with all Libyan stakeholders with a view
to building a nationwide consensus for presidential
and parliamentary elections. Given that we are already
halfway through 2023, the goal of holding elections in
the current year seems increasingly ambitious. In our
view, that ambition should be carefully measured. We
23-17639

19/06/2023

The situation in Libya

should not lose sight of the core mandate of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), which is
to mediate and provide its good offices in furthering a
political dialogue among all the Libyan parties.
We welcome the announcement made by the
members of the 6+6 joint committee earlier this month
on the agreement they reached regarding electoral
laws. We thank the Government of Morocco for
hosting the meetings in the city of Bouznika, Morocco,
enabling the members of the House of Representatives
and the High State Council in the 6+6 committee to
work constructively for that goal. We encourage the
two Libyan chambers to follow up on the outcome,
as appropriate, including by addressing concerns
identified by key Libyan stakeholders and eventually
by enacting the relevant legislation.
Brazil recognizes the important role that the
League of Arab States and the African Union can play
in support of building trust and fostering national
reconciliation among all Libyan stakeholders. National
reconciliation and measures that build trust should run
in parallel to efforts to bring about a political transition.
Additionally,
a
comprehensive
peacebuilding
approach would also contribute to the sustainability
of any political settlement in Libya. In that regard,
Brazil encourages the Libyan authorities to consider
engaging with the Peacebuilding Commission, which
could help mobilize international support for Libya’s
national peacebuilding priorities, with full respect for
Libyan sovereignty.
In relation to foreign assistance provided to
Libyan authorities outside the framework of United
Nations institutions, Brazil stresses the importance of
respecting the relevant Security Council resolutions.
The provision of material and logistical support carries
the risk of further destabilizing the situation on the
ground. We want to specifically point out that the
provision of military training may constitute a breach of
the United Nations arms embargo pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), regardless of the Libyan stakeholders that
benefit from it. We also echo concerns expressed by
the Panel of Experts of the 1970 Committee regarding
the freezing of Libyan assets under the United Nations
sanctions regime. As the Panel has suggested, we
encourage Member States to consider exempting
those assets, where applicable, from banking policies
of negative interest rates, which contribute to their
depletion. We also trust that the Sanctions Committee,
assisted by the Panel of Experts, will be sensitive to the

S/PV.9351

need to avoid other reasons for the erosion of Libyan
assets frozen abroad and preserve Libyan funds for the
benefit of the Libyan people.
We share the concerns expressed by UNSMIL
regarding the situation of asylum seekers in Libya and
encourage the relevant Libyan authorities to collaborate
with UNSMIL to address those concerns, with a view to
protecting the human rights of refugees and migrants.
We agree with the Special Representative on the need
“to work together to ensure the centrality of human
rights throughout all stages of the political process
in Libya”. Alleviating the tragedy of refugees and
migrants in the Libyan context is part of our common
responsibility, and we call for intensified efforts by
the international community in that regard, including
through development-based approaches.
In conclusion, Brazil reiterates the need for an
inclusive Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process,
which the United Nations should continue to facilitate
based on the principles of inclusivity, transparency,
non-discrimination and national ownership.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
We join others in expressing our sentiments of sorrow
today regarding the sinking of a ship that led to the
death of many Libyan migrants — a incident that could
have been prevented.
I thank Ambassador Kimihiro Ishikane, Permanent
Representative of Japan, for his report on the activities
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
We have also taken note of the briefing provided by
Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, as well as that by Ms. Imneina, a
member of civil society, and we very much regret that
we could not hear her full statement due to an issue
with the interpretation. We also welcome Ambassador
Elsonni, the Permanent Representative of Libya, to
this meeting.
Ecuador reiterates its support for Mr. Bathily and
for the United Nations Support Mission in Libya team
for the work they are doing there in the quest for a
lasting solution to the political crisis and for peace and
stability in the country.
We note the outcome of the work of the 6+6
joint committee of the House of Representatives and
the High State Council in reaching agreement on the
laws laying the groundwork for the presidential and

23-1763915/20

S/PV.9351

The situation in Libya

parliamentary elections scheduled for the end of this
year. We join others in expressing our appreciation
to the Kingdom of Morocco for its efforts to facilitate
that meeting between the Libyan parties. We hope that
within a framework of cooperation and compromise, the
Libyan actors will resolve the outstanding issues and
reach the political agreement necessary for the holding
of fair, transparent, inclusive and secure elections that
guarantee a level playing field for all candidates, and that
all political actors will refrain from any action that could
delay the ongoing process.
We encourage Special Representative Bathily to
continue promoting alternative mechanisms aimed at
ensuring the political transition in Libya and the holding
of elections as soon as possible. We also encourage
him to continue the rounds of consultations with the
various sectors of Libyan society, including persons with
disabilities, women, young people and ethnic minorities,
in order to ensure their participation in the political
process. Ecuador hopes that such an inclusive process
will contribute, as was noted in April (see S/PV.9306),
to the adoption of a code of conduct that will allow the
results of the elections to be accepted by all candidates.
It is imperative that the election campaign be conducted
in a safe and peaceful environment, free from hate
speech and violence. To that end, the civic space must be
protected. All Libyans must be able to express themselves
freely and to assemble and associate peacefully.
With regard to the security situation, we reiterate
our thanks for the work of the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission on the reunification of security institutions
and the implementation of the ceasefire agreement.
We commend the support of the military and security
leadership for the political process and the creation of an
environment conducive to the safe holding of elections.
The significant progress on dialogue concerning the
withdrawal of foreign forces and fighters and the
reactivation of the liaison committees with neighbouring
countries are important, particularly in the light of the
developments in the Sudan. Their withdrawal must be
carried out in a coordinated and gradual manner. We
also encourage the Libyan authorities to take effective
measures to address the plight of migrants and refugees.
We remain concerned about the reports of possible
arbitrary arrests of migrants and asylum seekers,
including pregnant women and children. We should
remember that those vulnerable groups must be treated
with dignity and in accordance with international law
and international humanitarian law.
16/20

19/06/2023

We would be remiss if we failed to mention the
impact that the Libyan crisis is having on the entire
region and by extension how important it is to counter
situations that could further affect its stability and
security. The support of the international community
will therefore be vital to the intensification of all efforts
in that regard, including those that help to dismantle the
criminal and human trafficking networks operating in
the region.
In conclusion, I reiterate Ecuador’s support for
the peace process in Libya and urge all the parties
in the country to work constructively with Special
Representative Bathily to find a solution that can end
the political impasse.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative Bathily and Ambassador
Ishikane for their briefings. We also thank Ms. Imneina
for her contribution.
The United States takes note of the progress reported
by the 6+6 joint committee in reaching agreement on a
package of electoral laws and thanks Morocco for hosting
that round of talks. We welcome the commitment of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya to working
with all Libyan institutions and actors to ensure that the
progress made so far leads to timely elections. We urge
all players to engage constructively with Mr. Bathily
in securing the necessary political, security and legal
environment for elections. It is beyond time for those
who occupy Libya’s leadership positions to demonstrate
leadership and fulfil the Libyan people’s demand for
elections that relegitimize their political institutions
without further delay. We reiterate our full support
for the Special Representative’s efforts to promote a
political consensus for holding elections. Anyone with
Libya’s best interests in mind should welcome his good
offices and impartial facilitation.
We continue to credit the work of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission and encourage the speedy
implementation of all the terms of the 2020 ceasefire
agreement, particularly the removal of foreign forces,
fighters and mercenaries and the identification
and categorization of armed groups for possible
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. The
cooperative and practical approach of the 5+5 to solving
problems that affect Libyans’ daily lives highlights
the benefits of progress by Libya towards unifying its
security structure.
23-17639

19/06/2023

The situation in Libya

We are concerned about the military operations in
Zawiya involving drone strikes and urge all the parties
to take great care to avoid actions that could spiral into
wider violence. We are concerned about the possibility
of weapons transfers from Libya to the conflict in the
Sudan and note that the Libya arms embargo prohibits
the export of arms and related material from Libya. The
United Nations regional arms embargo on Darfur also
prohibits arms and related material from entering the
Darfur region. We encourage the Panels of Experts on
Libya and the Sudan to monitor the situation carefully.
We continue to be deeply concerned about the detention
of Mr. Imad Ben Rajab, the focal point for the area of
the illicit transport of petroleum, and urge the Libyan
authorities to provide the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya
with information about the circumstances of his arrest
and ensure that he is provided with full due process.
Without a focal point able to perform the functions
detailed in the relevant resolutions, the Sanctions
Committee’s ability to carry out its responsibilities
is threatened, and we are concerned about reports of
increased fuel smuggling since Mr. Ben Rajab’s arrest.
We are pleased that this month the Security Council
renewed the authority used by the European Union
Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI to inspect
vessels suspected of violating the arms embargo and
applaud IRINI’s work in deterring such violations.
Violations of the arms and oil embargoes, as well as the
continued presence of mercenaries and foreign fighters,
are an indication that foreign actors are profiting from
and supporting the status quo. Foreign interference has
prolonged the political impasse and destabilized Libya
and must end so that the Libyan people themselves
can control their future and chart a path to peace
and prosperity.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement as the representative of the United Arab
Emirates.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily and Mr. Kimihiro
Ishikane, Permanent Representative of Japan, in his
capacity as Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, for their
comprehensive briefings. I also thank Ms. Imneina
for her briefing and welcome Ambassador Elsonni to
this meeting.

S/PV.9351

With regard to recent developments in Libya, I
would like to express our hope that the Libyan people
can resolve their outstanding issues, reach the consensus
needed to adopt the laws required for holding legislative
and presidential elections, end the transitional phases
and meet their aspirations for security and stability.
In that context, we stress the importance of ensuring
the full, meaningful and equal participation of women
in those efforts and of safeguarding their safety and
dignity. We reiterate the importance of keeping the
political process on track, which is critical to achieving
a Libyan-led and -owned permanent political settlement
that can enable Libya to put the past behind it and end
its internal divisions.
It is therefore important to continue the diplomatic
efforts, including those under the auspices of the United
Nations. The good offices of Mr. Bathily and his team
play a vital role in bridging Libyans’ views. We also
value the continued efforts of Morocco and Egypt in
supporting the Libyans and providing an environment
conducive to a dialogue that contributes to achieving
constitutional progress. While the efforts related to
the electoral process continue, we underscore the
importance of focusing on national reconciliation and
dialogue, which are essential to building trust among
the parties, healing divisions and achieving the national
unity that is imperative to ensuring stability in Libya.
Accordingly, we support the efforts by the Presidential
Council, the African Union and the League of Arab
States to ensure the success of national reconciliation
efforts for the sake of all Libyans.
Establishing security in Libya is also essential
for building a stable State. In that connection, we
welcome the meeting held in May, in Tripoli, of the
security working group of the Berlin process with the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya as part of
the continued meetings held by the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission in various regions of Libya.
Those encouraging steps, in addition to the
release of prisoners, demonstrate the commitment of
the military leaders to support the implementation
of the ceasefire agreement and the determination of
the national leaders to participate in those meetings.
We hope that those steps will contribute to boosting
national morale among the Libyan people.
Actual steps must also be taken on the ground,
including the withdrawal of all foreign forces, foreign
fighters and mercenaries in a simultaneous, phased,

23-1763917/20

S/PV.9351

The situation in Libya

gradual and balanced manner. The unification of military
and security institutions across the country must also
proceed. We again urge all parties to avoid any escalatory
actions or practices threatening the safety of civilians.
We are fully committed to international efforts aimed
at supporting the security situation in Libya. However,
we have concerns and observations to share about the
effectiveness of the mechanisms authorized to implement
the arms embargo and the extent of compliance with it.
Ignoring the positions and legal interpretations of the
Member States regarding the arms embargo and its
selective application can undermine national capacitybuilding in Libya.
To maintain Libya’s counter-terrorism gains, the
measures adopted by the Council must not impede the
efforts of the Libyan forces to address security threats,
especially in southern Libya. The Council must therefore
seriously consider the current sanctions regime and
ensure that it reflects the current reality in Libya and
supports its national efforts, rather than becoming a
means of disruption.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms
its support for Libya’s sovereignty, independence and
national unity. We hope that all efforts will be aimed at
overcoming political divisions, putting Libyan interests
above all, preserving and protecting Libya’s natural
resources and frozen assets and realizing the aspirations
of the brotherly Libyan people towards building a State
that enjoys sustainable peace.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
during this month, and I wish you every success in your
endeavours. I also thank the Ambassador of Japan, His
Excellency Mr. Ishikane, for his briefing as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya. I also thank Ms. Imneina for
her statement, especially as she represents one of the
segments of civil society in Libya.
We listened to the briefing of Mr. Bathily as he went
over the challenges facing my country, Libya. According
to the previously adopted timeline, by the end of this
month we were supposed to conclude all consultations
to issue the legislation necessary to conduct the elections
by the end of the year.
18/20

19/06/2023

In that context, we have followed the work of the
6+6 committee and of the House of Representatives
and their agreements, as well as the different reactions
to said agreements and the challenges they met. It is
therefore important to tackle the outstanding issues
and settle them. It is equally important to consult
with the committee and with the other national and
political leaders and the relevant institutions in order to
guarantee continued stability and provide an enabling
environment, as well as to adopt a timeline for the
parliamentary and presidential elections to be held
this year. The elections should be fair, transparent and
based on equitable and fair legislation. That is indeed
achievable. The elections do not seek to marginalize
anyone, and they should be accepted and conclude all the
transitional stages. In that context, I would like to thank
the Kingdom of Morocco for hosting the committee
meetings and for providing us with an environment
conducive to conducting the intra-Libyan dialogue.
If we are to objectively and responsibly deal with
the current situation and respond to the aspirations of
the Libyan people to a dignified life, prosperity and
development, it is important to ensure the success of
the democratic process. We should avoid repeating the
failed experiences of the past. The Libyan people are
tired of them and of coming up with new transitional
stages that would once again bring about a new
conflict of power. We must consider the concerns and
reservations of the various parties. We have heard
some of those concerns in Mr. Bathily’s briefing and in
today’s statements.
Despite the efforts of the 6+6 committee, we have
received objections on some of the outcomes of their
work. We therefore call on all parties to positively
contribute to settling those issues. We call on the
United Nations, as a facilitator, to help us tackle those
differences expeditiously. We are confident that with
the necessary goodwill, we can overcome that vicious
circle and start building a stable State.
The Libyans are in a state of anger and frustration.
They see that the dream of holding elections is fizzling
for the second time. I therefore ask the Council not
to give up on them. Today, as I address the Council
and ask it not to give up on the Libyan people, it is
because many countries are directly intervening in the
Libyan political decision. The slogan of a Libyan-led
and -owned process is just a slogan, unfortunately.
That has been repeatedly borne out. We therefore recall
the importance of what Mr. Bathily has repeated time
23-17639

19/06/2023

The situation in Libya

and again — that he will be working with the relevant
Libyan institutions and the Presidential Council and
will engage with the various political stakeholders
in order to resolve outstanding issues and help reach
consensual laws that would allow us to organize free
and fair elections.
In the same context, we welcome the response of
the United Nations to the request made by the President
of the Government of National Unity to send a team
to assess our needs to organize elections. The team
has already met several stakeholders in Libya, and
we are looking forward to their report, comments
and observations. In that context, the Government
reiterates its support of United Nations efforts and its
willingness to spare no effort to guarantee the success
of the elections.
Despite all the challenges my country is facing
on the political track, we should always remember
the efforts that are being made by the Joint Military
Commission in order to guarantee stability and defuse
tensions. We remain hopeful and commend the national
spirit that has prevailed in their meetings, especially
the most recent one held in Tunisia, in order to follow
up on the implementation of the ceasefire agreement.
That meeting culminated again with a call to the entire
Libyan people to put an end to all foreign presence on
Libyan territories.
We listened to the statement of the Chair of the
1970 Committee and to the outcomes of the Panel of
Experts. I would like to comment on the nature of
those sanctions, their objective and their effectiveness,
especially with regard to the asset freeze and the
sanctions imposed on individuals.
We all know the conditions that led to the freezing
of the Libyan assets and the funds of the Libyan
Investment Authority in 2011. The purpose was to
protect Libyan wealth, but we also witnessed the
measures subsequently taken by several countries that
show how the issue has been politicized for the past
12 years, leading to enormous losses and the depletion
of those funds. Some countries preferred to continue
imposing the asset freeze in order to earn interest on the
funds deposited in their banks. Such measures, which
were previously unheard of in the context of the United
Nations sanctions, have affected the sovereignty of our
national institutions. Unfortunately, during this period,
the role of the Sanctions Committee and its Panel of
Experts has changed many times — from monitoring

S/PV.9351

the implementation resolution 1970 (2011) to managing
the Libyan Investment Authority and its methods of
work, asking it to adopt certain strategies and assessing
its performance and building its capacity.
We do not believe these roles fall within the
Committee’s competency and mandate, as if the
Authority had only been established today. Nevertheless,
the Libyan Investment Authority responded to all the
demands it received and elaborated strategies to fulfil
its plan of action. It also reviewed the status of assets
frozen by seeking help from international companies
and was able to show that the assets were indeed
being depleted. It worked with Deloitte auditors, and
it recently asked Ernst and Young to verify the status
of the assets and ensure transparency. What else could
we do?
Unfortunately, things are becoming even more
complicated because some countries are using certain
paragraphs, or even language in reports of the Panel
of Experts — and we all know that those reports are
not necessarily binding, as they are just opinions by the
Panel — to keep the Libyan assets frozen without any
legal justification. We have had a very disheartening experience with Belgium in that regard. We therefore call
on the Sanctions Committee to reconsider the regime
and allow, as we have repeatedly requested, the Libyan
Investment Authority to invest and manage Libya’s frozen assets. We are not asking the Council to lift the
assets freeze, but to give us, at the very least, the freedom to manage our own assets, even if they are frozen.
With regard to the sanctions regime, and specifically
to the sanctions on individuals, Council members
know that Libya has submitted requests to remove
the names of some individuals from the sanctions list
for humanitarian reasons or because keeping them
on those lists was no longer justified. However, our
requests have not been satisfactorily answered, nor
did we receive a logical or clear explanation for that
failure. Keeping those individuals on the sanctions list
is exacerbating their humanitarian plight. Accordingly,
I would ask whether those individuals — among there
are women — are in fact threatening international
peace and security. I would also ask how keeping these
individuals listed are protecting human rights.
For instance, Council members are aware of the dire
humanitarian situation of citizen Hannibal Al-Qadhafi,
who started a hunger strike two weeks ago. He has
been forcibly detained in a prison by certain groups

23-1763919/20

S/PV.9351

The situation in Libya

in Lebanon for nine years now. He has been tortured
and humiliated for illogical and unjustified political
reasons. Unfortunately, some are using the fact that
he is on the sanctions list to justify his detention.
We therefore call on the Council to ask the Lebanese
Government to release Mr. Al-Qadhafi immediately
and end this inhumane situation.
We are confident that our brothers in Lebanon will
cooperate with us through the committee established
by the Presidential Council, the National Unity Government, Libyan institutions and friendly countries to
find an immediate solution to this crisis. The positive
engagement of the Security Council with the cases of
detained Libyan citizens sends a hopeful message and
bolsters efforts led by the Presidential Council and the
African Union to foster national reconciliation, for
which Council members have repeatedly expressed
their support.
In conclusion, and as stated in previous briefings,
although we are witnessing relative stability across
the regions of our country, and notwithstanding our

20/20

19/06/2023

optimism, we would still like to convey the calls of
the Libyan citizens to the Security Council to end all
negative interference in our internal affairs. We call on
the Council not to use the situation in Libya as grounds
for settling political scores. We need the Council to
support the Libyan national will, end the divisions and
achieve stability based on true Libyan ownership and
leadership. We greatly believe in our people, particularly
Libyan youth, who, in the last 12 years, have become
more mature and knowledgeable. If they are allowed to
take over, we will be able, through a collective national
effort, to overcome the crisis, achieve reconciliation,
bridge the gap and restore to Libya the international
position that it deserves.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no more
names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

23-17639
