A/66/PV.48

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

48

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 2 November 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Qatar)

In the absence of the President, Ms. Kamara
(Liberia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 86 (continued)
Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
Note by the Secretary-General (A/66/95)
Draft resolution (A/66/L.6)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly considered item 86 at its 46th plenary
meeting on 1 November. We shall now hear the
remaining speakers.
Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, allow me to thank Director General Yukiya
Amano for presenting the 2010 annual report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) (see
A/66/95) and for his statement (see A/66/PV.46), which
provides additional information on the past year’s
developments in the Agency’s activities. I would also
like to express our appreciation to the Director General
and to the secretariat of the IAEA for their dedication
and professionalism in carrying out the statutory
mandates of the IAEA.
The IAEA plays a vital role in accelerating and
enlarging the contribution of atomic energy to peace,
health and prosperity throughout the world. Those
mandates are subject to ever-increasing demands and
new challenges, ranging from the risks of nuclear
proliferation and nuclear terrorism to nuclear safety, as

shown by the Fukushima accident. To meet those
challenges and demands, we are of the view that the
IAEA should be equipped with the appropriate
resources to maintain its capacity.
I would like to comment on several topics
covered in the report that are important to my
delegation, namely, safeguards and nuclear safety and
security. The report shows that the international
nuclear community maintained a high level of safe
performance in 2010. The nuclear incident at
Fukushima, however, sent an unmistakable signal to
the international community that we cannot afford to
remain complacent when it comes to nuclear safety. In
that regard, we welcome the adoption, by this year’s
General Conference of the IAEA, of the Action Plan on
Nuclear Safety, which outlines practical measures to
strengthen the global nuclear safety framework in
12 key areas. We look forward to its effective
implementation through the full cooperation and
participation of Member States. Properly implemented,
those measures and the lessons learned from the
Fukushima accident will serve to enhance global
nuclear safety and promote the sustainable
development of nuclear energy.
The work of the IAEA in the field of nuclear
security, particularly the efforts to coordinate and
enhance cooperation among various initiatives and
activities, is also noteworthy. However, the threat of
terrorism is real. Indeed, as evidenced by the IAEA
Illicit Trafficking Database, 172 incidents were
reported during the one-year period ending in June.
Those include 14 cases of unauthorized possession

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-57701 (E)

*1157701*

A/66/PV.48

and/or attempts to sell or smuggle nuclear material or
radioactive sources. In that connection, the Republic of
Korea remains committed to improving nuclear
security through its contributions to the IAEA Nuclear
Security Fund and its support for the relevant legal
instruments and international activities.
In March 2012, the Republic of Korea will host
the second Nuclear Security Summit. The 2012 Seoul
Summit will provide an excellent opportunity to review
the commitments made at the Summit held in
Washington, D.C., in 2010, assess existing nuclear
security practices and challenges, and consider ways
and means for realizing a stronger, more cohesive and
responsive global nuclear security regime. While
recognizing the central role of the IAEA in that field,
the Seoul Summit will try to maximize the synergies
among various initiatives and activities to keep nuclear
materials and related facilities in safe hands. We look
forward to a successful outcome and request the
cooperation and support of the international
community to that end.
We highly appreciate the comprehensive report
released by the Director General early in September on
the application of safeguards in the Democratic
People’s
Republic
of
Korea
(GOV/2011/53GC(55)/24), the first of its kind in the history of the
IAEA’s dealings with the North Korean nuclear issue.
The report is all the more meaningful as the Agency
has provided an analysis of the uranium enrichment
programme of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea for the first time since it was discovered in
November 2010. The report states that that country’s
nuclear programme is a matter of serious concern and
that information about the construction of a new
uranium enrichment facility and a light-water reactor
are deeply troubling.
Moreover, the report emphasizes that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has not
abandoned its existing nuclear programme, contrary to
the provisions of Security Council resolutions 1718
(2006) and 1874 (2009), and underlines that the
country’s uranium enrichment programme therefore
clearly violates those resolutions. In the current climate
of dialogue, we look forward to the Agency resuming
an active role in the process of the denuclearization of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
In addition, we welcome the unanimous adoption
of the resolution on the Democratic People’s Republic

2

of Korea (GC(55)/RES/13) at the fifty-fifth IAEA
General Conference, especially as it marks the first
time that the international organization has condemned
the country’s uranium enrichment programme since it
was discovered. The resolution expresses concern
regarding the country’s claimed uranium enrichment
programme and light-water reactor construction and
calls on the country to fully comply with the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and
to promptly cooperate with the IAEA in the full and
effective implementation of IAEA comprehensive
safeguards. In that context, we strongly urge the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea once again to
abandon all nuclear weapons and existing nuclear
programmes and to immediately cease all related
activities,
including
its
uranium
enrichment
programme.
We take note of the entry into force of the
comprehensive safeguards agreement in five States and
of additional protocols in 10 States during 2010. It is
encouraging to hear that 110 States have already
ratified the additional protocol. We urge other Member
States that have not yet done so to conclude and bring
into force the comprehensive safeguards agreement and
its additional protocol.
In full support of the work of the IAEA, and with
a view to achieving our common goal of harnessing
nuclear energy in the service of peace and development
for humanity, the Republic of Korea is pleased to
sponsor the draft resolution (A/66/L.6) on the report of
the IAEA.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to extend my thanks to the Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
Mr. Yukiya Amano, for his presentation. I would like to
underline that Egypt has become a sponsor of draft
resolution A/66/L.6.
International crises in the fields of energy and
climate change pose constraints on the growing energy
needs of the developing world in terms of quantity and
quality. The IAEA report (see A/66/95) demonstrates
the continued importance, amid those challenges, of
nuclear technology for electricity generation and points
out that 60 countries have so far expressed an interest
in exploring the use of nuclear energy. Many of those
States will begin operating their first reactors by 2030.
That attests to the growing interest in the inalienable
right to acquire and use nuclear technologies for

11-57701

A/66/PV.48

peaceful purposes, in accordance with article IV of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT). That right was further reiterated in the Final
Document of the 2010 NPT Review Conference
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)), which emphasized the
importance of respecting the decisions and policies of
non-nuclear-weapon States regarding their plans to use
nuclear energy for their development needs and for the
peaceful use of nuclear energy in the implementation
of such plans, without any constraints and through
international cooperation on the necessary nuclear
technologies and materials.
The timetable of Egypt’s nuclear energy
programme has continued to evolve and to be assessed,
as Egypt undergoes fundamental transformation, to
allow the consideration of recent lessons learned from
other countries’ experiences as we continue to make
progress in the implementation of this national project,
working on achieving its legitimate goals and
responding to our development needs. Egypt looks
forward to further cooperation with the IAEA, given
the Agency’s growing role in supporting the
sustainable development of its non-nuclear-weapon
member States that are party to the NPT, and in light of
its role in facilitating their access to nuclear energy and
responding to their needs in that important area.
Egypt remains at the forefront of countries that
have provided unlimited support to the IAEA since its
establishment; it has continued that support to date,
based on its belief in the value of the IAEA’s role in
nuclear non-proliferation and in promoting the
peaceful use of nuclear energy to support the ambitions
and global needs of developing countries in a wide
range of areas.
States party to the Non-Proliferation Treaty
ensure compliance with the comprehensive safeguards
regime of the IAEA, which remains a major pillar of
the non-proliferation system, through the Agency’s
verification
and
strengthening
mechanisms.
Nevertheless, that regime has yet to be fully effective
as it lacks universality, especially in the Middle East
region. Intensified international efforts are necessary to
ensure implementation of the comprehensive
safeguards system in all countries of the region without
exception.
Significant progress is necessary to achieve a
global comprehensive safeguards system, universality
of the NPT and the accession to the NPT, as

11-57701

non-nuclear-weapon States, of three countries that
remain outside the Treaty. That would encourage
non-nuclear States to make further commitments and
thus reinforce the NPT regime in a balanced and
non-discriminatory manner both at regional and
international levels.
At the regional level, all of the countries of the
Middle East are in compliance with their obligations
under the IAEA comprehensive safeguards system,
except Israel, whose opaque nuclear activities have
remained outside any international control, while it has
continued to ignore dozens of appeals and international
resolutions demanding its accession to the NPT as a
non-nuclear-weapon State and the submission of all of
its nuclear facilities to the full scope of the IAEA
safeguards. There is no doubt that this continuing
situation increases the risk of nuclear proliferation in
the Middle East and hinders the establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region.
In that regard, Egypt believes that the conference
on the establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle
East, to be convened in 2012, will offer promising
prospects for concrete progress. In that context, Egypt
looks forward to the background documents to be
prepared by the IAEA in accordance with the fourth
action plan adopted at the 2010 Review Conference.
My country welcomes the seminar convened by the
European Union on 6 and 7 July on supporting the
establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.
The IAEA Forum on Experience of Possible Relevance
to the Creation of a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in the
Middle East, to be held on 21 and 22 November,
represents an additional opportunity to contribute to,
rather than replace, the substantive preparations in
support of the 2012 conference set to take place under
the auspices of the Secretary-General, pursuant to
paragraph 7 (a) of part I, section IV, of the Final
Document of the 2010 NPT Review Conference
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol.I)).
The year 2011 witnessed the earthquake and
tsunami disasters that caused the Fukushima nuclear
power plant accident in March. Egypt reiterates its
solidarity with the people of Japan in dealing with the
effects of that disaster, and its willingness to provide
assistance to any country facing a similar accident.
Lessons must be drawn from the accident, which has
shown the importance of the IAEA’s central role in

3

A/66/PV.48

matters relating to nuclear safety, including by
assisting member States, at their request, in capacitybuilding and infrastructure, as well as in providing
expertise and advice and in strengthening the nuclear
safety culture in all parts of the world, while seeking to
formulate comprehensive, progressive nuclear safety
standards to be agreed by Member States in a gradual,
comprehensive and transparent manner.
In that context, Egypt attaches great importance
to the promotion of international cooperation aimed at
strengthening national capacities in the field of nuclear
safety and enabling them to respond to nuclear and
radiological emergencies, in particular through the free
flow of information and the transfer without prejudice
of relevant technology. In accordance with its Statute,
the IAEA should seek to assist member States with
emergency preparedness and response to nuclear
accidents,
through
capacity-building,
including
education and training in crisis management and
technology transfer.
Those important issues were considered by the
IAEA ministerial conference on nuclear safety held in
Vienna in July 2011, which provided a forum for
preliminary assessment of the Fukushima nuclear
accident and for exchanging views on lessons learned
aimed at further strengthening the framework on
nuclear safety, emergency preparedness and response
mechanisms. It also helped to launch a process — in
which Egypt participated actively — that resulted in
the adoption of the action plan of the outcome of the
2010 NPT Review. In the same vein, the high-level
meeting convened by the Secretary-General on
22 September in New York was valuable in
highlighting once again this important subject as well
as the crucial role of the IAEA in this area.
Regarding nuclear security, the Seoul Summit to
be held in March 2012 will serve as an opportunity to
focus on the important issue of the security of nuclear
materials and preventing them from falling into the
hands of terrorists, complementing the other
frameworks, including Security Council resolution
1540 (2004). On the other hand, the crucial role of the
IAEA in the field of nuclear security must be anchored.
Any guidelines or advice on nuclear security should be
developed and negotiated in multilateral frameworks;
and any initiatives and measures to enhance nuclear
security and safety must not be used as a pretext for
restricting the inalienable right of developing countries
to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.

4

In that regard, Egypt reiterates its concern about
the continued imposition of unwarranted restrictions on
exports to developing countries of material, equipment
and technology that will be used for peaceful purposes.
Egypt emphasizes especially the responsibility of those
countries that are advanced in the nuclear field to
respond positively to the needs of developing countries
with respect to peaceful uses of nuclear power, by
allowing them to participate to the maximum extent
possible in the transfer of equipment, materials,
scientific information and nuclear technology and
enabling them to derive the greatest benefits within
their sustainable development strategies.
In the field of technical cooperation, Egypt will
continue to exchange experiences with countries in the
Arab region and the African continent, because it
believes in the importance of international cooperation
activities in the field of peaceful use of nuclear energy.
In that regard, Egypt stresses that priority must be
given to the Agency’s activities in the field of technical
cooperation, with the aim of enabling Egypt and other
developing countries to benefit from the use of nuclear
technologies in various sectors including health,
agriculture, food and water resources and radioisotope
technology. Thus, we reaffirm the importance of
securing and increasing funding for international
cooperation which is one of the main pillars of the
work of the Agency, in accordance with its Statute.
Egypt also renews its determination to intensify
and expand cooperation with the IAEA with the aim of
strengthening our national capacities in the field of
peaceful uses of nuclear technology and to benefit from
the full support of the Agency for our national efforts
in efforts.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I thank the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) for his statement on the work of the Agency in
the past year.
I would also like to convey my country’s
appreciation for the initiatives of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon with regard to the effort to prevent future
tragedies at nuclear facilities by strengthening the
capacity of the IAEA to promote nuclear safety and
security and to enhance cooperation among
international organizations, particularly in the areas of
emergency response and information-sharing. We have
no doubt that the high-level meeting on nuclear safety
and security held on the margins of the general debate

11-57701

A/66/PV.48

on 22 September will help build the political will
needed to confront those challenges.
We commend Director General Amano and his
team for delivering on the Agency’s mandate in the
areas of technical cooperation and nuclear safety,
safeguards and security, despite numerous constraints,
including in financial resources. Nigeria appreciates
and commends their tireless efforts. We are delighted
that the IAEA continues to contribute immensely to the
maintenance of international peace and security, while
ensuring that humanity derives the maximum benefit
from nuclear science and technology in a safe and
secure environment.
The tragic Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power
plant accident in Japan has provoked global debate
about the rationality of nuclear power. It has also led to
a review of various measures that have been taken with
regard to our common agenda of ensuring the safe and
secure use of nuclear science and technology, as well
as of ways of strengthening the Agency so as to deal
with current and future challenges and enhance its
capacity to further deliver the full benefits inherent in
nuclear technology.
In that regard, I want to express my appreciation
for the prompt and insightful initiatives of the Director
General, including his decision to convene the June
Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Safety and put
together the resulting Action Plan, which has already
been endorsed at the Agency’s fifty-fifth General
Conference in September, as well as at the high-level
meeting held here the same month. We expect that the
implementation of the Action Plan and other measures
at both the national and regional levels, informed by
the lessons of the Fukushima accident, will go a long
way towards addressing concerns about insecurity and
restoring confidence in nuclear technology.
In spite of the apprehensions raised by the
Fukushima accident, Nigeria remains convinced that
nuclear technology, safely and responsibly applied, can
facilitate the attainment of our energy development
goals and those of other Millennium Development
Goals, and therefore has a vital role to play in serving
humankind’s immediate needs. The introduction of
nuclear-powered electricity into our national energy
mix is high on the Nigerian Government’s
transformational agenda. We are working closely with
the IAEA towards that goal, while honouring the
attendant obligations to ensure safety and security.

11-57701

That is why for us in Nigeria, transparency in handling
the information coming out of the Fukushima accident
and the lessons learned from it are important, as they
will help us to avoid dangerous pitfalls.
My delegation notes with satisfaction the
Agency’s phenomenal achievements in the application
of nuclear technology in the area of food and
agriculture, including its role in collaborating with the
Food and Agriculture Organization, the World
Organization for Animal Health, the African Union and
other strategic partners in the total eradication of the
deadly cattle disease known as rinderpest. We
encourage the Agency to continue in its efforts to assist
its member States in applying that technology to the
diagnosis and control of other transboundary animal
diseases, and ultimately to the promotion of food
security. The focus at the fifty-fifth General
Conference on the application of nuclear techniques to
prospecting for and managing water was very timely,
because it addressed one of humankind’s current needs
in both developed and developing countries.
We also appreciate the priority the Agency has
given to cancer control in developing countries and its
commitment to helping Member States to fight that
scourge. We urge the Agency to increase its support to
African countries in the areas of cancer therapy and
manpower development, through its Programme of
Action for Cancer Therapy (PACT). We welcome the
assistance rendered to Member States through the
Programme’s imPACT reviews, which assess countries’
readiness to develop long-term radiation medicine
capacity-building plans as part of a national cancer
control programme.
Nigeria’s health sector has benefited from the
Agency’s cooperation in capacity and infrastructure
development for cancer control and management,
through advances in nuclear medicine and
radiotherapy, radio-oncology and nuclear medicine
technology. Through such cooperation, 10 nuclear
medicine facilities are to be built, between 2010 and
2016, and equipped in tertiary hospitals across the
country, through national funding. It is our expectation
that our national programmes will continue to benefit
from the Agency’s Programme of Action for Cancer
Therapy.
On technical cooperation, we would like to note
that the Agency’s Technical Cooperation Programme
has continued to make an invaluable contribution to the

5

A/66/PV.48

efforts of Member States in addressing national
development priorities and leveraging the comparative
advantages of nuclear techniques. We welcome the
increase in new resources reported by the Director
General in his report, as well as the contributions of the
United States and other donors under the Peaceful Uses
Initiative, launched in 2010. I would like to encourage
other Member States in a position to make extra
budgetary contributions to join that United States
initiative.
While the IAEA continues to coordinate
multilateral efforts to ensure nuclear safety and
security, we believe that the primary responsibility
rests with Member States. In recognition of that
principle, and in appreciation of the fact that with the
benefits of nuclear technology come responsibilities,
the Government of Nigeria has continued to build
capacity, as well as to strengthen the requisite
institutional framework.
In September, just two months ago, the Nigeria
Atomic Energy Commission, the national focal agency
for atomic energy development, was reconstituted as an
independent and self-accounting agency. Furthermore,
the Nigeria Nuclear Regulatory Authority is being
strengthened to regulate our new nuclear power
programme. In the area of nuclear waste management,
which is key to the success of any national nuclear
power programme, Nigeria, with a wide range of IAEA
technical support in the areas of project design and
implementation, has begun developing facilities for the
comprehensive management of low- and intermediatelevel radioactive wastes at the Nuclear Technology
Centre at Sheda, in Abuja.
I would like to reaffirm Nigeria’s commitment to
the basic tenets of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), and to assure the Assembly
that our national nuclear power programme will
continue to be purely for peaceful purposes, geared to
the enhancement of the living standards of the peoples
of Nigeria, and will remain within the framework of
verifiable safeguards.
The NPT remains a pillar for keeping our world
safe from nuclear holocaust. The role of the IAEA in
promoting a safer world remains pivotal. Nigeria
therefore appreciates the initiative of the Director
General in holding a forum this month to reinvigorate
the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East. We also look forward to the 2012 Seoul

6

Nuclear Security Summit, as a forum vital to taking
political decisions at the highest level on securing
nuclear materials away from unauthorized end users.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Nigeria’s
support for and abiding faith in the IAEA, and our
confidence in its leadership in putting the benefits of
the atom within the reach of all in a safer and secure
world.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): Today
nuclear technology, as the common heritage of
humankind, has yielded peaceful applications in
numerous fields, ranging from medicine, food and
agriculture
to
providing
a
cost-effective,
environmentally friendly and climatically benign
source of energy, and has thus played a significant role
in the advancement of human society. Taking into
account that the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), according to its Statute, should accelerate and
enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace,
health and prosperity, we underline its prime
responsibility to assist member States, including by
facilitating technology transfer and increasing their
scientific and technological capabilities.
The inalienable right to the peaceful use of
nuclear technology, without discrimination, constitutes
the very foundation of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). This is
set out in its article IV, in which States parties
undertake to facilitate the fullest possible exchange of
equipment, materials and scientific and technological
information for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We
emphasize that such an inalienable right shall not be
restricted under any circumstances, including through
ulterior outside political considerations. At the same
time we are of the view that the implementation of
related provisions of the NPT and the statute of the
IAEA requires a realistic and balanced approach. Such
an approach, by providing incentives for membership
and compliance, can guarantee the longevity, integrity
and credibility of the NPT.
Unfortunately, developed States parties to the
NPT, the main suppliers of nuclear high technology,
have given rise to two dangerous impressions by
continuing to apply a discriminatory, selective, highly
restrictive and politically motivated approach in their
nuclear cooperation with developing States parties.
First, being a party to the NPT and the IAEA
safeguards agreement does not facilitate nuclear

11-57701

A/66/PV.48

cooperation but rather impedes it, and therefore it is
not a privilege. Secondly, States not parties to the
Treaty are more richly and generously rewarded
through nuclear cooperation.
It is a source of grave concern that those who
have chosen not to accede to the NPT not only are not
subject to any pressure to do so but are also
encouraged and rewarded in different ways. A living
example is the well-documented assistance and
cooperation provided by certain Western countries —
in particular the United States and the two nuclearweapon States members of the European Union, the
United Kingdom and France — to the Israeli regime,
which, in addition to having an unsafeguarded nuclear
programme, possesses one of the world’s largest
stockpiles of nuclear weapons. That of course is a clear
case of non-compliance by those NPT States parties
with their legal obligations under the Treaty. Indeed,
such double standards and discriminatory and
paradoxical policies are contrary to the letter and spirit
as well as the universality of the NPT and only
undermine the integrity of the Treaty.
Recalling the importance of the IAEA’s
responsibilities in promoting the peaceful uses of
nuclear technology and energy, as well as its role as the
sole competent body for verification activities in
accordance with its Statute and the NPT, we strongly
emphasize the need to avoid the use of extralegal
unilateral measures and attempts to use the Agency as
an instrument in support of shortsighted political
interests, as they only undermine the authority and
credibility of the IAEA. Unfortunately, over the past
decade a few Western countries have pursued a
selective and politically motivated approach towards
the verification activities of the IAEA. By calling it a
watchdog organization, they attempt to imply that the
IAEA is solely a verification tool and has no other
mandate.
In this context, and recalling that the IAEA
statute stipulates that the Agency should conduct its
activities in a way that furthers the establishment of
safeguarded worldwide disarmament, I would like to
reiterate that one of the neglected tasks of the IAEA is
engagement in the nuclear disarmament process.
The Islamic Republic of Iran is extremely proud
and highly honoured that, thanks to the activities of its
courageous young nuclear scientists and despite all
foreign-backed plots and plans, it has been able to

11-57701

exercise its inalienable right to peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. Iran is fully committed to its legal obligations,
and its nuclear activities are, and have always been,
exclusively for peaceful purposes. Despite all external
political pressure on the IAEA, it has repeatedly
confirmed the non-diversion of nuclear materials and
the peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme.
Finally, I would like to underline that from a legal
point of view, the IAEA should verify only declared
nuclear material. The recent report by the IAEA
Director General on the Implementation of the NPT
Safeguards Agreement in Iran states that the Agency
continues to verify the non-diversion of declared
nuclear material at the nuclear facilities and at
locations outside facilities where nuclear material is
customarily used, declared by Iran under its safeguards
agreement. It is regrettable that the IAEA Director
General, in his statement yesterday (see A/66/PV.46),
made reference to all nuclear materials — which is
legally incorrect.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend our thanks to the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) for presenting the Agency’s annual report to
the General Assembly (see A/66/95). We commend the
IAEA programmes and plans outlined in the report,
which are designed to improve the transfer of
technology for peaceful purposes, maintain an
international system of nuclear security and bolster the
safety of nuclear facilities. The report emphasizes the
important role the Agency plays, particularly in the
field of cooperation in the use of nuclear technology
for peaceful purposes and development.
We would like to commend the work of the
previous Director General, Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei,
and we wish his successor, Mr. Yukiya Amano, every
success.
The Sudan attaches great importance to the
contents of the report on the applications of nuclear
technology in fostering food security, controlling
insects and effectively managing water resources, as
well as in modern irrigation systems and large-scale
agricultural projects. From that perspective, improving
the cooperation between the Agency and UNICEF on
agricultural and educational enterprises, and with the
World Health Organization, becomes increasingly
important.

7

A/66/PV.48

Assisting developing countries to improve their
respective national technical systems complements the
efforts of the Agency to implement its plans and
technical cooperation programmes. We hope that
cooperation will improve within the framework of the
Agency’s health programmes in order to revive and
support continental and regional projects aimed at
fighting insect carriers of malaria and other lethal
diseases affecting Africans, and thus to enable the
continent to successfully achieve its socio-economic
development programmes, in particular the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) and the internationally
agreed economic agenda.
The Sudanese delegation emphasizes the right of
all States, including my country, to improve research
and production of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes, without discrimination and in accordance
with international terms of reference and commitments.
My delegation would like also to stress the need
for States to refrain from putting pressure on the
Agency or interfering with its activities, in order to
preserve the Agency’s credibility and its vital role. In
that context, we call for justice and equity in tackling
some of the outstanding issues involving some States,
through dialogue and negotiations, with a view to
reaching appropriate solutions.
Moreover, the delegation of the Sudan reiterates
its firm position in supporting the aspirations of all
geographical regions to declare themselves free from
nuclear weapons, in accordance with the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), which
constitutes one of the main pillars in the international
peace and security system. On that basis, we feel
concerned by the fact that the Middle East region has
for many decades, remained far from achieving that
goal, due to opposition by Israel — the only country in
the region than possesses nuclear weapons — and its
refusal to place its nuclear programmes under the
comprehensive IAEA safeguards regime, in addition to
its continuous disregard for the appeals and repeated
initiations made by the international community in that
matter. Israel’s adherence to the Treaty and its
Additional Protocol are vital factors for eliminating the
tension experienced in the region and could lead to
strengthened regional security and the maintenance of
international peace and security.
My country is equally enthusiastic in its hope that
the Agency will continue to support the right of

8

developing countries to the peaceful use of nuclear
energy, along with the Agency’s monitoring of such
activities. It is our conviction that the production of
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes would lead to a
considerable surge in efforts towards development,
given the low cost of electricity produced through
nuclear energy as compared to other energy sources.
The rising cost of alternative energy sources will force
developing countries to look for faster and more
practicable means to solve their problems of energy
shortage.
The Sudan is persuaded that greater cooperation
and support by developed countries for developing
countries in the field of alternative energy sources
would lessen the risk of resort to nuclear energy. We
think that it is logical for the IAEA to encourage
developed countries to work side by side with
developing countries on that matter.
In that connection, my delegation welcomes the
efforts of the Agency and of many developed countries
to foster cooperation with the African States in the use
of nuclear energy in the medical and health sectors, as
well as on alternative energy projects in an effective
manner conducive to achieving the MDGs.
Mr. Cassidy (Indonesia): Allow me first to
warmly welcome our fellow country member of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, as a new member
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
This now increases the IAEA members from ASEAN
countries to nine. Indonesia stands ready to cooperate
closely and to share its experience with the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic in many areas of nuclear
cooperation.
On this occasion, we would like to express our
support to the Director General for the way in which he
has been carrying out his responsibilities at the IAEA,
which has led to more weight being given to the
Agency’s technical role. We were delighted by his visit
to Jakarta from 6 to 9 October. Apart from holding
important meetings with major national stakeholders
and visiting our nuclear facilities, in our capacity as the
Chair of ASEAN, we also facilitated his visit to the
ASEAN secretariat, where he met with its
representatives and those of the Council of Permanent
Representatives. It is our profound hope that such
visits will strengthen IAEA cooperation, not only with
Indonesia but also with ASEAN.

11-57701

A/66/PV.48

We express our sympathy to the people and
Government of Japan over the unfortunate events that
took place in March involving the Fukushima Daiichi
nuclear power plant. We also express our admiration
and respect for the tremendous courage and resilience
shown by the Japanese emergency team in getting the
facility back under control. As an expression of
Indonesian solidarity with the people and Government
of Japan, the Indonesian Nuclear Regulatory Agency,
apart from sending rescue workers, medical assistance
and supplies in the early days of the accident, offered
to dispatch its nuclear emergency response team to
Fukushima.
As the Chair of ASEAN, Indonesia also initiated
a special meeting of the foreign ministers of Japan and
ASEAN in April to promote further cooperation in
disaster management. In May, one of our experts on
nuclear radiological protection and emergency
response was honoured by the opportunity to join an
IAEA-led international fact-finding mission to
Fukushima.
In order to restore public confidence in the safety
and sustainability of nuclear power, including in
Indonesia, it is of critical importance to address nuclear
safety and place it high on the global agenda.
Globally, public expectations for bold action are
high after the last nuclear accident. We should seize the
present momentum to help in shaping a global
rethinking on nuclear safety. In that regard, my country
was pleased to see that, on 22 September, the IAEA
General Conference unanimously endorsed the Action
Plan on Nuclear Safety, which Ministers had requested
in their declaration at the IAEA Ministerial Conference
on Nuclear Safety in June. Indonesia looks forward to
finding ways and means to contribute actively to the
implementation of the Action Plan.
We remain of the view that IAEA technical
cooperation plays an indispensable role as the
Agency’s main vehicle for delivering on its mandate to
promote the peaceful uses of nuclear technology,
especially in the developing regions of the world. Since
joining the IAEA, in 1957, Indonesia has enjoyed a
great deal of cooperation with the IAEA in many areas
of nuclear applications not involving power generation,
such as in nuclear techniques for water resources,
research reactor construction and operation, uranium
extraction, food irradiation, radioisotope production
and mutation-assisted plant breeding. The extensive

11-57701

use of nuclear techniques for socio-economic
development led to growing recognition of the
importance of nuclear technology for development in
Indonesia.
Therefore, we strongly feel that now is the time
for Indonesia to share its long-developed knowledge
and experience with other developing countries. In this
regard, we are ready to serve as a technical cooperation
destination country to further support the IAEA in
promoting its technical cooperation programmes.
As a country that has benefited from a wide
application of nuclear techniques for water, we support
the decision of the Director General of the IAEA to
prioritize nuclear techniques for water this year.
Isotope tracer technology has been widely used by
Indonesian universities, the national geology agency
and the drinking water industry, as well as in
geothermal exploration. For geothermal exploitation,
isotope tracers have been utilized to determine
recharge areas and the origin of geothermal fluids.
Regarding water management, isotope technology has
also been widely applied to resolve recharge area and
groundwater dating. In Indonesia, isotope hydrology
has contributed to the mitigation of water shortages in
areas that have a problem with water sanitation.
The role of the Regional Cooperative Agreement
(RCA) in the promotion of the use of nuclear
technology for socio-economic development in the
Asia-Pacific cannot be overlooked. In the almost
40 years of the RCA’s existence, the participating
countries and the Agency have accumulated valuable
experience in cooperation and coordination of nuclearrelated development activities in the region. Therefore,
we are determined to continue our active participation
in this regional process. As the current Chairman of the
RCA, in April 2011 Indonesia hosted the 33rd Meeting
of National RCA Representatives in Bali, with around
60 representatives from participating countries
attending.
Indonesia has made progress this year in
managing radioactive waste and spent fuel. We
submitted our instrument of ratification of the Joint
Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management
and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management
on 1 April.
Indonesia continues to support international
cooperation in nuclear security and the centrality of the
IAEA’s role in this area. Therefore, Indonesia supports

9

A/66/PV.48

the Agency’s continued fostering of coordination and
exchange of information with other relevant
organizations and nuclear security-related initiatives in
order to prevent duplication between Agency
programmes and those under consideration by other
entities, thus ensuring the continued effectiveness of
the Agency’s nuclear security programme. Indonesia
also supports those who suggest that the Agency should
establish a mechanism that would allow all member
States to be involved in an inclusive manner in the
development of Nuclear Security Series documents.
Together with representatives of the IAEA,
Indonesia co-hosted the High-level Regional Workshop
on the International Legal Framework for Nuclear
Security, from 20 to 22 July. The Workshop, which was
attended by representatives of ASEAN member
countries, has raised awareness of the importance of
strong and effective measures to enhance nuclear
security.
From the discussion, Indonesia notes the value of
model legislation and implementation kits for nuclear
security that could be used to transpose certain
provisions into national legislation. Indonesia
emphasizes the importance of updating the IAEA’s
2010 Handbook on Nuclear Law: Implementing
Legislation, so that in the future it could serve as
model legislation to speed up national implementation.
Our commitment to safeguards implementation
remains strong. In collaboration with other countries in
the Asia-Pacific region, Indonesia is part of efforts to
enhance safeguards collaboration in the region by
launching the Asia-Pacific Safeguards Network. The
Network serves as a vehicle to define how we
implement the safeguards, assuring the use of nuclear
energy solely for peaceful uses in the economically
vibrant Asia-Pacific region.
On the issue of safeguards in the Middle East, we
continue to support the IAEA taking a comprehensive
and balanced approach in addressing non-proliferation
issues in the region. Likewise, Indonesia has supported
the conclusions and recommendations for follow-on
actions of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, including with regard to the convening of a
conference in 2012 on the establishment of a Middle
East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other
weapons of mass destruction, on the basis of
arrangements freely arrived at by the States of the

10

region, and with the full support and engagement of the
nuclear-weapon States.
In pursuit of paving a way for the realization of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East,
Indonesia fully supports the Director General’s
initiative to convene a Middle East nuclear-weaponfree zone forum in Vienna later this month, and stands
ready to participate constructively in the process, both
in its national capacity and its capacity as Chairman of
the Commission for the South-East Asian NuclearWeapon-Free Zone.
Mr. Aquino (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
country has joined in sponsoring draft resolution
A/66/L.6 on the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) as an expression of our firm
support of the Agency’s work.
Peru, a founding member of the IAEA, has just
concluded its term on the Board of Governors for the
period 2009 to 2011, where it actively participated in
addressing the main issues of the Agency. In
recognition of its committed participation, the Group
of Latin American and Caribbean States has endorsed
Peru’s candidature to return to the Board of Governors
for the 2013 to 2015 term.
The nuclear accident in the Fukushima Daiichi
plant has marked an important point in the Agency’s
work. While Peru recognizes that the primary
responsibility for nuclear security falls on States, we
are convinced that the IAEA plays a very important
role in promoting international cooperation and in the
coordination of global efforts to strengthen the global
nuclear security regime. In that regard, we believe,
with an eye to the Agency’s mandate, technical
specialization and broad membership, that it is the
appropriate forum in which to address all issues related
to nuclear security.
Although we would have preferred a more
ambitious document, my delegation commends the
approval of the post-Fukushima action plan, which
contains a series of specific measures to strengthen
nuclear security. It is a realistic document and has the
merit of including the concerns of all Agency member
States.
The progress made in the sphere of nuclear
security should be seen in the overall framework of the
initiative undertaken by the Director General of the
IAEA in convening a ministerial-level conference in

11-57701

A/66/PV.48

June 2011 and in the high-level meeting on nuclear
safety and security convened by the Secretary-General
here at United Nations Headquarters in September, as
well as other significant initiatives undertaken by the
international
community.
In
applauding
and
encouraging such initiatives, my delegation wishes to
emphasize that it is necessary that throughout this
process of strengthening the nuclear security regime,
the central function of the Agency in coordinating such
efforts must be preserved.
At the national level, my delegation wishes to
highlight the important work undertaken jointly with
the Agency. If I may, I would like to highlight some of
the technical cooperation activities that are geared to
supporting the National Institute for Neoplastic
Diseases in fighting cancer, the National Agrarian
University La Molina in its projects to improve grains
and native grain varieties, and the Peruvian Nuclear
Energy Institute in its research activities, as well as the
country’s other significant research institutes, such as
the Peruvian University Cayetano in its projects to
improve South American cameloids.
By reiterating Peru’s support for the management
of the IAEA Director General, Ambassador Yukiya
Amano — specifically the work related to nuclear
applications in health, agriculture and water
treatment — we wish to highlight the fact that the
Director General visited Peru at the end of June 2011.
He was able to observe directly the progress in various
projects that the Agency has undertaken in Peru, all of
which play an important role in developing the fight
against poverty, and in agriculture, ground water and
areas such as human health, industry, nuclear security
and other areas.
Peru believes that in order to give adequate
attention to the needs of developing countries, the
Agency should focus its priorities on the following
four areas. First is the fight against cancer. Taking into
account that two thirds of diagnosed cases of cancer
occur in developing countries, Peru believes that it is
urgent to create national capacities, both in training
professionals and in acquiring equipment for diagnosis
and treatment. Second is improvement of food
availability through nuclear applications in agriculture.
Third is support for member States that decide to
implement nuclear power plans by supplying them with
the necessary technical, economic and legislative
assistance. Fourth is improving the study of water
through isotopic techniques for water purification and

11-57701

using those techniques in agriculture
management of groundwater resources.

and

the

In the regional arena, since 1984 Peru has been
an active participant in the Regional Agreement of
Technical Cooperation for the Promotion of Nuclear
Science and Technology in Latin America and the
Caribbean, with special emphasis on projects linked to
training human resources and developing infrastructure
in areas related to health, agriculture, energy and
hydrology. I should also emphasize that in 2010 Peru
joined the Ibero American Forum of Nuclear and
Radiation Safety and Security Regulatory Agencies,
which works actively to standardize national regulatory
legislation.
In this Hall, we would like to reiterate our
support for and recognition of the Agency and its more
than 50 years as the principal international
governmental forum for scientific and technical
cooperation in the use of nuclear technology for
peaceful purposes and as the guarantor of compliance
with international commitments to use nuclear
installations and materials for exclusively peaceful
purposes.
Mr. Langeland (Norway): Norway is pleased to
sponsor of the draft resolution on the report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
(A/66/L.6). My Government attaches great importance
to the IAEA. Besides being a key guardian of our
collective non-proliferation regime, it is an important
partner in promoting social and economic development
while ensuring the safety and security of peaceful
nuclear programmes. Through its extensive Technical
Cooperation Programme, the Agency plays an
important role in contributing to the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals.
Nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament are
closely linked. We cannot achieve the goal of
eliminating nuclear weapons, as set out in the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
unless there is confidence in the integrity of the
non-proliferation regime. Thus it is vital that we
provide the Agency with the necessary legal tools to
implement its non-proliferation mandate.
Norway therefore reiterates that the IAEA
comprehensive safeguards agreements and additional
protocols constitute the verification standard. Norway
also remains convinced that the IAEA has an important
role to play in verifying nuclear disarmament. Norway

11

A/66/PV.48

continues to urge countries with outstanding
proliferation issues to cooperate fully with the Agency
in resolving these matters and in demonstrating the
exclusively peaceful nature of their nuclear
programmes.
Achieving a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East is an important goal both from a regional
point of view and to reinforce the global
non-proliferation regime. Norway will chair the IAEA
forum on a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle
East to be held this month in Vienna and believes that
it will represent a significant contribution on the part of
the IAEA towards that goal.
The 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
also underlined the importance of international
cooperation with regard to the peaceful use of nuclear
energy. The tragic event in Fukushima earlier this year,
as well as other safety incidents, has demonstrated the
critical importance of safety to nuclear energy. The role
of the IAEA will thus be even more crucial in the years
to come.
We look forward to working closely with the
Agency in promoting nuclear security. Norway has
provided substantial voluntary contributions to support
the IAEA’s work to strengthen nuclear safety and
security in developing countries and to the
establishment of a nuclear fuel bank. It is imperative
that we, the member States, provide adequate and
predictable funding so that the Agency can carry out its
important mandate. It is equally important that the
international community demonstrate full political
support for the IAEA. My delegation expects that
today’s draft resolution will be adopted by consensus.
Mrs. Cizare (Ethiopia): I would first like to take
note with satisfaction of the annual report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) (see
A/66/95), which describes the Agency’s significant
achievements during 2010. My appreciation also goes
to Ambassador Yukiya Amano, Director General of the
IAEA, for his comprehensive and informative
statement on the main developments in the Agency’s
activities during that period. My delegation is a
sponsor of draft resolution A/66/L.6, on the report.
We are pleased to recognize the progress made by
the IAEA over the past year in further enhancing its
contribution to global efforts to use atomic energy for
peaceful purposes. We remain convinced that within

12

the framework of its three pillars, the Agency will
continue to strengthen its technical support role to
expand international cooperation in the peaceful
application of nuclear energy. We believe that the
Agency’s sustained technical assistance to developing
nations — particularly in the areas of agriculture,
human health, water resource management, energy
planning, non-destructive testing and radiation
protection — should be highlighted and its technical
assistance programmes strengthened. In this regard we
welcome the budgetary increase for the Technical
Cooperation Fund.
Ethiopia attaches great importance to the work of
the IAEA and appreciates the useful technical
cooperation that the Agency is providing to member
States, particularly developing nations. The Agency’s
growing role in helping developing countries achieve
their socio-economic development goals is indeed
encouraging, especially in its efforts to combat and
eradicate diseases in cattle, which have resulted in
tangible progress in the agriculture and livestock
sectors. Moreover, many of the Agency’s projects have
helped to ensure access to clean water and promote
environmental sustainability. In this context, and in
order to reach the goals set by the Millennium
Declaration (resolution 55/2) by 2015, the Agency’s
technical assistance programme should be strengthened
with a view to expanding the scope of its activities
aimed at supporting developing countries, and
particularly least developed ones.
Ethiopia is a beneficiary of the IAEA’s Technical
Cooperation Programme. Among the various areas
where we have technical cooperation with the Agency
is an ongoing project to eradicate the tsetse fly from
the Southern Rift Valley region of Ethiopia through an
integrated pest management approach. I am very
pleased to report that the project has started to benefit
several communities by helping them to regain their
farmland and resume their normal livestock activities.
Strengthening such concrete gains requires enhanced
technical support from the Agency and an integrated
development approach that takes into account proper
land-use planning and management.
It is also worth mentioning that the technical
cooperation between Ethiopia and the Agency in the
area of human health has resulted in establishing a
modest national infrastructure for the application of
nuclear medicine and radiotherapy. A project is being
designed for 2012-2017 to consolidate the existing

11-57701

A/66/PV.48

radiotherapy and nuclear medicine facilities in five
regional state university hospitals for efficient
diagnosis and curative and palliative treatment for
cancer patients. I would therefore like to request that
the Agency further strengthen its cooperation in this
area, in order to combat cancer through sustainable
therapy programmes. We are also encouraged by our
technical cooperation with the IAEA in applying
isotope techniques in the management of our water
resources and by our progress to date in implementing
that cooperation programme.
I wish to take this opportunity to express our
gratitude for the technical support that we receive
through the Agency and its member States and from the
African Development Bank, the Food and Agriculture
Organization and other international organizations in
these areas, in particular for the eradication of the
tsetse fly and trypanosomiasis from Ethiopia. We
welcome the steps the Agency has taken to formalize
the cooperation framework in support of the
Pan-African Tsetse and Trypanosomiasis Eradication
Campaign, as that framework is critical to eradicating
poverty and to increasing agricultural productivity. We
call on the Agency to continue to accord high priority
to the implementation of the cooperation framework.
We consider peaceful nuclear applications a
critical input to our continued efforts to carry out
national development strategies, policies and
programmes. Indeed, we very much appreciate the
Agency’s technical support in the development and
completion of our Country Programme Framework for
the period 2012-2017. Obviously, the Framework is a
significant step in efforts to develop our national
nuclear science and technology infrastructure, and we
request the Agency to extend its cooperation for the
full implementation of the Framework.
Ethiopia supports the Agency’s efforts to promote
and ensure global nuclear safety. Ethiopia is committed
to further strengthening the national radiation and
nuclear safety and security infrastructure and to
ensuring the safe operation of equipment that uses
radiation sources. The Ethiopian Radiation Protection
Authority will continue to work towards full
implementation of regulatory control systems in all
thematic safety areas. In that regard, my delegation
would like to commend the activities of the IAEA in
assisting member States, including my own country, in
the peaceful use of nuclear energy through the
development of effective and efficient programmes to

11-57701

improve scientific,
capabilities.

technological

and

regulatory

We firmly believe it is necessary to ensure, on a
systematic basis, the provision of sufficient and
predictable resources to the Agency’s technical
programmes and, more importantly, a balanced
distribution of resources to its safeguards and technical
cooperation activities in the area of nuclear safety. That
is important, especially in view of the fact that the
Agency’s role in transferring peaceful technology is so
necessary to developing countries for the achievement
of their socio-economic goals.
In conclusion, allow me to extend once again our
support to the IAEA for its efforts in the promotion of
international cooperation in the peaceful use of nuclear
energy and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons in
all its aspects. We hope the IAEA will continue to
promote its noble objectives into the next year.
Mr. El-Mesallati (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express our appreciation and
gratitude to Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), for
presenting the Agency’s report to the General
Assembly (see A/66/95).
Having examined the report of the Agency
submitted to this session of the Assembly, our
country’s delegation would like to express its heartfelt
appreciation to the secretariat of the IAEA, in
particular the Department of Technical Cooperation,
for its rapid response, support and efforts to strengthen
cooperation in the fields of health, water resources
management and education, which are our national
priorities.
Our country’s delegation would like to emphasize
the rights of developing countries to benefit from the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, to have access to
nuclear material and equipment and to exchange and
transfer scientific and technical information in that
regard.
Our country clearly declares its position on the
need to take practical steps to support the Agency, with
a view to preserving its credibility and to
implementing, in a balanced manner, its three pillars —
non-proliferation,
technical
cooperation
and
verification — and the comprehensive safeguards
regime and additional protocols.

13

A/66/PV.48

We call on the entire international community to
accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and to the comprehensive
safeguards regime so as to demonstrate its commitment
to the international treaties, agreements and
conventions that it has signed.

Such a zone was also underscored in the outcome
document of the 2010 NPT Review Conference. That
Conference highlighted that the resolution would
continue to be in effect until all its purposes and
objectives, including the achievement of the
universality of the Treaty, had been achieved.

Libya expresses its support for the Director
General of the Agency, in particular his statement
before the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to
the NPT. We believe that nuclear disarmament should
be of the utmost importance to the Agency and that it
plays a significant role in verification activities.
Nuclear disarmament has a positive impact and will
help strengthen all efforts towards non-proliferation.

The conference to be held in 2012 will be
attended by all countries of the Middle East with a
view to underscoring the importance of implementing
the
above-mentioned
resolution,
namely,
the
establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear
and all other weapons of mass destruction. The
conference will be held in Finland. Our country
expresses its full support for that conference and for its
goals of establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East and peace and security in the region.

In that connection, our country commends the
activities of the Agency to foster international
cooperation in the fields of nuclear and radiological
safety. We place great emphasis on that issue, and thus
Libya has acceded to the Convention on Nuclear Safety
and the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear
Accident. We have participated in all activities in that
regard.
We have set up an office to oversee nuclear and
radiological safety and security. It is an independent
monitoring agency that, under enforced national
legislation, will execute its mandate in full
independence, in compliance with the Agency’s
standards. We also commend the Agency’s role in
combating any threat by terrorist groups to use nuclear
weapons.
Furthermore, the National Transitional Council
expresses our interest in fostering cooperation with all
friendly States and with the Agency in order to secure
all radioactive material in Libya, which is now in safe
areas and can be accessed only by permission from the
authorities. A delegation from the Agency will visit
Libya shortly to verify that such material is protected.
Our country places the highest emphasis on
international peace and security, in particular in the
Middle East region. The Middle East has become a
hotbed of tension because Israel possesses nuclear
arms, which has led other countries to seek to obtain
such weapons.
It has been more than 15 years since the 1995
NPT Review and Extension Conference adopted a
resolution to establish in the Middle East a zone free of
nuclear and all other weapons of mass destruction.

14

My country’s delegation calls on all nuclearweapon countries to adopt programmes to eliminate
their nuclear arsenals and to put an end to all
programmes for the development of such weapons,
pursuant to the legal commitments undertaken in
article VI of the NPT and highlighted by the 2010 NPT
Review Conference, which stated that the NPT should
represent a firm commitment to destroy all nuclear
arsenals and that otherwise the Treaty would be
meaningless.
As long as one nuclear weapon exists, the world
faces an enormous danger and a commensurate
responsibility on the part of nuclear-weapon States.
Otherwise, nuclear-weapon-free zones will be
meaningless.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Despite the unanimous view that the only
actual nuclear danger in the Middle East lies in Israel’s
possession of nuclear weapons and their means of
delivery to distant regions, some of those who turn a
blind eye to this clear-cut situation are pleased to open
illusory fronts with suspect motives. Needless to say,
such dishonest and non-objective actions evidently
expose the falsity of their assertions that they care
about the establishment of a zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction in the
region of the Middle East.
For decades, they themselves were responsible
for supplying Israel with the nuclear technology and
materials that enabled it to acquire nuclear weapons
and their means of delivery, including sophisticated
submarines. They tried their best to divert attention

11-57701

A/66/PV.48

from Israel’s nuclear weapons during the Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, held in New
York last year.
The prevailing hypocrisy on nuclear issues that
marks the statements and attitudes of some
representatives of Western States hinders progress in
nuclear non-proliferation efforts. It irresponsibly
encourages nuclear proliferation by a party that is still
outside the NPT and that refuses to subject its nuclear
installations to the international monitoring of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). In that
connection, I would recall that the conduct of those
Western States violates articles I and II of the NPT. The
Agency must therefore hold those Western States
accountable and responsible for those violations.
We regret that we are hearing words that only
heighten our concerns, such as the crass insinuation
made against my country by the observer of the
European Union (EU) in his statement yesterday (see
A/66/PV.46). We would like to remind him that many
EU member States do not at all comply with their
commitments under the NPT. I refer to that state of
non-compliance for two main reasons. The first is the
presence of nuclear weapons in the territory of
non-nuclear European States. The second is the fact
that those Western States continue to supply Israel with
nuclear technology and materials and their means of
delivery.
In his statement yesterday, the Director General
of the IAEA said that the Agency had finally come to
the conclusion that it was very likely that the building
destroyed at the Dair Alzour site in 2007 housed a
nuclear reactor that should have been declared to the
Agency. He went on to say that in June the IAEA
Board of Governors found Syria to be in
non-compliance with its safeguards obligations, and
reported that non-compliance to the Security Council
and the General Assembly. In that connection, allow
me to make the following observations.
First, the IAEA Director General knows full well
that Syria made the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) one of its main national
priorities. Syria therefore hastened to accede very early
to the NPT, doing so in 1968. By the same token, it
signed a comprehensive safeguards agreement with the
Agency in 1992.

11-57701

Moreover, in 2003, when Syria was a member of
the Security Council, it presented a draft resolution on
behalf of the Arab Group that is still in blue ink in the
Security Council. That draft resolution was designed to
create a zone free of nuclear weapons and all other
weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.
These examples show that our national
commitment is credible and should not be questioned.
When it was presented in 2003, the draft resolution,
which is in accordance with the provisions and
objectives of the IAEA, clashed with the opposition of
an influential permanent, nuclear-weapon State in the
Security Council that threatened to use its veto if Syria
insisted on putting the draft resolution to a vote.
Second, the Security Council and the IAEA did
not condemn Israel’s flagrant aggression against my
country’s sovereignty in 2007, probably because they
are inured to Israel’s violations of resolutions of
international legitimacy and do not hold it accountable.
As the Assembly well knows, Israel refused to
cooperate with the Agency or to allow its inspectors to
verify potential sources of pollution emanating from
the Israeli rockets that were used to bomb the Dair
Alzour site, as well as the materials it used in
contaminating and destroying the bombed site.
In that respect, Israel’s continued refusal to
cooperate with the Agency’s requirements, its
continued improvement of its military nuclear
capability outside of any international control or
supervision and its disregard for all appeals to create a
zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction in the Middle East, diminish the
credibility of the NPT system and threaten the security
and stability of the peoples and States of the Middle
East.
These are extremely grave matters. We had hoped
that the IAEA Director General would have referred to
those issues in his statement, instead of resorting to
such expressions as “highly probable”.
Third, as a very useful exercise, I will now read
out to colleagues a paragraph from the memoir of the
former Director General of the IAEA, Mr. Mohamed
ElBaradei, The Age of Deception — Nuclear
Diplomacy in Treacherous Times. The paragraph is
found on pages 228 and 229 of the memoir.

15

A/66/PV.48

(spoke in English)
“One of the strangest and most striking
examples of nuclear hypocrisy, multilateral and
multifaceted, must surely be Israel’s bombing of
the Dair Alzour installation in Syria in September
2007, and the aftermath of that attack.
Speculation began almost immediately that the
site had housed a nuclear facility. Syria denied
the accusations. Israel and the United States
remained officially silent, although American
officials talked anonymously on the subject to the
media. I spoke out strongly, noting that any
country with information indicating that the
bombed facility was nuclear was under a legal
obligation to report it to the IAEA. But no one
came forward with such a report. For the six
weeks following the bombing — the most crucial
period in terms of our seeing inside the facility —
we were unable to obtain any high resolution
imagery from commercial satellites.”
(spoke in Arabic)
He states that the United States of America
refused to supply the IAEA with the high-resolution
imagery that the United States claimed indicated the
presence of a building containing a nuclear reactor in
Dair Alzour. If the accusations by the United States had
been correct, why would they have refused to submit
those high-resolution satellite images, as they were the
ones who possessed them. That was the question asked
by Mr. ElBaradei.
I will continue reading from the same paragraph.
(spoke in English)
“On October 28, in New York, I gave an
interview on CNN’s Late Edition with Wolf
Blitzer. In response to Blitzer’s question as to
whether the Syrian facility was a nuclear reactor,
I said we had not seen any evidence to conclude
one way or the other. But I was clear on one
point: that ‘to bomb first and then ask questions
later,’ as Israel had done, was deliberately
undermining the system. Only the IAEA, I
pointed out, had the means to verify allegations
of clandestine nuclear activity. In another
interview, with Charlie Rose two days later, I
pointed out that Israel’s 1981 attack on Iraq’s
Osirak reactor had only served as motivation to

16

accelerate Saddam Hussein’s clandestine nuclear
program.”
(spoke in Arabic)
Mr. ElBaradei continues on page 230 of his
memoir,
(spoke in English)
“but it was clear that my condemnation of the
bombing at Dair Alzour had touched a nerve.
John Bolton was openly supportive of Israel’s
action.”
(spoke in Arabic)
John Bolton was the American Permanent
Representative to the United Nations three years ago.
(spoke in English)
“In an interview on CNN’s Late Edition, Wolf
Blitzer asked Bolton what he thought of my
public assertion that Israel should have brought
its ‘evidence’ to the IAEA. ‘If you believe that,’
Bolton retorted, ‘I have a bridge to sell you. The
notion that Israel or the United States would put
their national security in the IAEA’s hands is just
delusional.’”
(spoke in Arabic)
That is what Bolton said when he was asked to respond
to ElBaradei. The memoir continues:
(spoke in English)
“To hear these sentiments coming from the U.S.
Ambassador to the United Nations was dreadful.”
(spoke in Arabic)
Fourth, compliance by the States parties to the
Agency Statute makes it necessary for the United
States of America to inform the Agency of the
information it had before destroying the building, and
not eight months later. The same thing applies to Israel,
which supplied the Agency with information, if such
information were accurate. Rather, it launched a
military attack on the territory of the State of Syria,
penetrating the air space of a neighbouring State.
The Agency did not deal with this in an integrated
manner, nor did it take necessary measures in
accordance with its responsibilities and mandate with
regard to the encroachments and violations of the

11-57701

A/66/PV.48

international nuclear commitments by Israel and by the
United States of America, in accordance with the NPT.
Fifth, most of the contents and the findings of the
Agency in the course of the mandate of the current
Director General regarding the Dair Alzour site have
relied on the imagery and analyses presented by the
Central Intelligence Agency of the United States of
America. My country would therefore question the
credibility of such information received by the Agency,
as well as the nature of corroborating documents,
taking into consideration that such information was
presented by a State in pursuit of a political agenda that
is hostile to the interests of my country, Syria.
Sixth, the current report of the Director General
contains incomplete findings based on information that
lacks credibility and inclusiveness. The Agency’s
assessments clearly run counter to its previous
assessments, as we have mentioned previously.
Seventh, the continued confusion between the
legal commitment of a member State by virtue of its
safeguards agreement, and its voluntary accession to
the additional protocol, has no legal basis and
constitutes another means of bringing political pressure
to bear on Syria.
Eighth, with respect to States that attempt to
cover up for Israel’s nuclear weapons, we pose a
question to them, to the Director General of the IAEA,
and to the IAEA. We would like to ask all of them what
action they have taken to implement Security Council
resolution 487 (1981), which was adopted on 19 June
1981 — meaning that more than 30 years have passed
since then. What have they done to carry out that
resolution? At this point, allow me to quote the
Security Council’s call on Israel in paragraph 5 of the
resolution:
(spoke in English)
“to place its nuclear facilities under IAEA
safeguards”.
(spoke in Arabic)
That resolution was adopted three decades ago.
Next, in its important Yearbook on Armaments,
Disarmament and International Security, the
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute
(SIPRI) devoted a complete section to what it termed
Israeli nuclear forces. From this rostrum, I call on the
IAEA and the nuclear-weapons depositary States of the

11-57701

NPT, as well as the nuclear-weapons States members of
the Security Council, to read that chapter and learn the
necessary lessons. I am talking about the book I have
in my hand. In particular, those specialists here who
work on the First Committee and on disarmament
matters know what I am talking about. This book was
not published in Damascus; it was published in
Stockholm.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): On behalf of the
delegation of Malaysia, I join others in thanking the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) for his presentation to the General
Assembly of the annual report of the Agency for 2010
(see A/66/95). Malaysia is also pleased to sponsor draft
resolution A/66/L.6. My delegation also wishes to
welcome the Dominican Republic, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic and Tonga as new member States
of the Agency.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) entitles States parties to have access to
nuclear technology. The Treaty also provides for the
exchange of nuclear knowledge and scientific
information and fosters cooperation among States for
the development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In
that connection, Malaysia greatly appreciates the
IAEA’s role in assisting States in planning for and
using nuclear science and technology for peaceful
purposes. The promotion of peaceful applications of
nuclear energy constitutes a fundamental activity of the
IAEA, as highlighted in IAEA documents. In that
regard, my delegation is of the view that the IAEA
must be equipped with sufficient, assured and
predictable resources to enable it to implement its
mandated activities so that States pursuing peaceful
uses of nuclear energy can benefit from the transfer of
nuclear technology.
As outlined in the Agency’s report, more than
60 countries have expressed an interest in exploring the
use of nuclear power. Those countries include my own,
Malaysia. As part of Malaysia’s economic
transformation
programme,
nuclear
power
development has been identified as one of the main
projects for future power generation. It is aimed purely
at ensuring an adequate electricity supply for the
people of Malaysia beyond the year 2020. The
Government of Malaysia is currently conducting an
in-depth study of the project before making a final
decision on the matter. Our focus is on developing a
comprehensive nuclear programme, including legal and

17

A/66/PV.48

regulatory frameworks, involving the assessment of
public opinion and creation of a public relations plan.
The studies will be conducted by independent
consultants, taking into consideration lessons learned
from major nuclear incidents in the past, as well as the
results of stress tests on nuclear power plants by
member States. The overarching objective is to ensure
that the highest standards of nuclear safety are
observed at all times, thus contributing to
strengthening global nuclear safety.

Department, for its continuing support for the
implementation of IAEA technical cooperation projects
and various other activities in Malaysia, including the
trust shown to Malaysia in continuing to have it host
the IAEA postgraduate educational course in radiation
protection and the safety of radiation sources. My
delegation also wishes to express its gratitude to other
member States that have shown interest in the course,
which has attracted candidates from beyond our region
as well as within it.

With regard to the development of a more
comprehensive legislative and regulatory framework,
my delegation appreciates the IAEA’s input into our
draft comprehensive nuclear law, which seeks to
strengthen existing legislation. In addition, Malaysia
has also passed a strategic trade act, covering export
control measures for all single- and dual-use strategic
goods, including nuclear, chemical, biological and
missile-related items, as well as conventional arms.

In addition, Malaysia is also pleased and
appreciative of the fact that the Malaysian Nuclear
Agency has been redesignated, for the period 20102014, as the IAEA Collaborating Centre for Radiation
Processing of Natural Polymer and Nanomaterials.
Among other things, the Centre has demonstrated the
radiation-aided
production
of
non-toxic,
environmentally friendly palm oil acrylates for printing
applications.

At the regional level, Malaysia has always
recognized the importance of regional cooperation and
has participated actively in many regional projects
under the aegis of the Agency. Malaysia welcomes the
Agency’s efforts to create a common framework for
nuclear waste and spent fuel management for the
countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) through the consultancy meeting on
recommendations in spent fuel and radioactive waste
management for ASEAN held in March, and through
other efforts in the field of nuclear security and safety.

With regard to the assurance of supplies of
nuclear fuel, my delegation welcomes the continued
discussions on the development of multilateral
approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle under the auspices
of the IAEA. Malaysia reiterates that any further
consideration of the issue of assurance of supply must
be based on a coherent and comprehensive conceptual
framework that adequately addresses the views and
concerns of all Member States. Malaysia remains
convinced that further consideration of individual
proposals on this matter must be preceded by a
consensus agreement adopted by the General
Conference on the conceptual framework that outlines
the specific political, technical, economic and legal
parameters. My delegation notes the Agency’s
continuing efforts to establish and improve the concept
of a low-enriched-uranium bank facility. Nonetheless,
we wish to underline that such an arrangement must
accommodate the inalienable rights of NPT States
parties to nuclear technology.

Notwithstanding the growing renewed interest in
nuclear power generation, Malaysia still accords high
priority to the peaceful uses of nuclear science and
technology for enhanced food and water security,
human health, natural resources and environmental
management, industrial development and medical
applications. These sectors are being supported by
further developments in national capabilities in
peaceful nuclear technology research and development,
commercialization, the development of a more
comprehensive legislative and regulatory framework,
technological
infrastructure,
human
capital
development,
competency
verification,
public
information, compliance with the international system
of nuclear governance, and engagement in international
cooperation.
In that regard, my delegation wishes to thank the
IAEA, particularly its Technical Cooperation

18

With regard to international effort to establish a
Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other
weapons of mass destruction, which was agreed to by
States party to the NPT during the NPT Review
Conference in 2010, my delegation welcomes the
appointment of Mr. Jaakko Laajava, Under-Secretary
of State for Foreign and Security Policy of Finland, as
facilitator. We also welcome the designation of Finland
as the host Government for the 2012 Conference,
which could provide the impetus for the creation of

11-57701

A/66/PV.48

such zone in the Middle East. We also support the
efforts of the Director General to convene an IAEA
forum in Vienna later this month to further support this
process.
Finally, Malaysia would like to express once
again its appreciation to the Director General of IAEA,
as well as to the IAEA secretariat for their significant
and valuable work in fulfilling the Agency’s mandate.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 86.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/66/L.6. Before giving the floor to the speakers in
explanation of vote before the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): Concerning the general statements made
earlier, the delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea would like to express its heartfelt
thanks to the representatives who showed attention and
support for the peaceful settlement of the nuclear issue
on the Korean peninsula.
Concerning draft resolution A/66/L.6 and the
report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(A/66/95), the delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea totally and categorically rejects that
report. The report again refers to the nuclear issue of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as well as
to the Agency’s previous history of behaving
impartially. In particular, the report refers to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea with no basis
in fundamental reality, and is therefore misleading with
regard to that reality.
The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea would like to make a few comments
concerning the factors that violate and distort the
fundamental reality.
First of all, the report refers to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea as if it were a member of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). That
is not the case in reality. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea withdrew from IAEA in 1994 and
from the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) in 2003. Those withdrawals are in line
with international law. In particular, article X of the
Treaty stipulates that States parties can withdraw from

11-57701

the NPT if the supreme interest of that State is in
jeopardy, and that was in fact the case for the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. In 2002, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea was included
on the Bush Administration’s list of the axis of evil;
everybody knows that. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea was included on the Bush
Administration’s list of seven countries in line for
nuclear pre-emptive strikes, and those policies, which
were part of the Bush Administration’s nuclear
doctrine, compelled the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to withdraw from the NPT. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea made a firm decision to
exit the Treaty in order to defend our supreme interest,
namely, the security, dignity and sovereignty of the
country.
When the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
joined the NPT, it was in the expectation that the
nuclear danger would be removed from the peninsula.
As everybody knows, the United States introduced
nuclear weapons into South Korea in 1957. The first
nuclear weapons arrived in South Korea in 1957. The
total had reached 1,000 by 1970. Everybody can
imagine the threat of nuclear disaster with which the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has been living
for over six decades. Given that situation, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea had no choice
but to withdraw from the NPT.
Secondly, with respect to the fundamental reality,
the report makes reference to uranium enrichment.
Everybody has an equal right to enrich uranium under
international law. That is in line with international
trends and is reflected in the report, which states that
over 90 countries are now moving towards peaceful
nuclear energy. Those countries opted for nuclear
power to meet their energy needs, and the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has made the same choice.
In particular, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea is a party to the Six-Party Talks, under which the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has that right,
which is stipulated as a component of the Six-Party
Talks.
If one considers the historical background, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has been
damaged in its construction of independent nuclear
power. In 1994, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and the United States agreed on a framework,
the first ever historical document between the two
sides, which have had hostile relations. By 2003, the

19

A/66/PV.48

United States was obliged to provide light-water
reactors in compensation for freezing the verified
moderate reactor that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea had been conducting with a capacity
of 2 million kilowatts of electricity. But by the year
2002, as I said, the Bush Administration unilaterally
abrogated that agreement without giving prior notice to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. So far, the
United States has not paid a single penny to
compensate for the loss it caused the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. We have computed
already how much compensation the United States
should pay for that; everybody can imagine how much
that should be.
Thirdly, there is mention of the threat of nuclear
tests to international peace and security. Again, that is
not the case and goes against the fundamental reality.
As I said, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and the United States made an agreement and adopted
it in 1994. That was the first-ever agreed framework
between the two sides, the first-ever historical
agreement. Under that agreement, there is one
component that stipulates that the United States is
committed not to use nuclear weapons and not to
threaten the security of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. But that was not the case with the
United States. In 2002, the United States listed the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea along with Iran
and Iraq as the axis of evil. First, Iraq was mercilessly
attacked with armed invasion by the United States, and
everybody knows what has happened so far. One
month after the end of the Iraq war, the Bush
Administration openly said that the next target would
be the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea said that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is not Iraq.
So those are the threats that have been caused so
far by the United States. More than ever before, we are
under increasing nuclear threat from nuclear-powered
submarines carrying nuclear weapons and from
nuclear-powered aircraft carriers carrying massive
amounts of weapons of destruction and different types
of sophisticated weaponry that daily enter the Korean
peninsula, South Korea and its vicinity. This is the
threat, with a military alliance, that is growing
increasingly stronger, with a negative impact on the
Korean peninsula, the region and the world as a whole.
Concerning the demarche by the Director General
of the IAEA, he referred to the Democratic People’s

20

Republic of Korea once again and urged it to
implement the Security Council resolutions against it.
Those Security Council resolutions — two
resolutions — were totally and categorically rejected
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as each
of them was adopted, as being of no help at all to peace
and security on the Korean peninsula, and actually
undermining peace and security there, because they do
not reflect fundamental realities.
The United States has been a perpetrator in terms
of the nuclear threat to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea since 1957. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has been under that nuclear
threat — a victim. But the Security Council resolutions
view this in a different way, as if the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea were an offender, a
perpetrator of the nuclear threat against world peace
and security. I would like to remind the Director
General of the fundamental reality of what is
happening and of what has occurred in the past.
In conclusion, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea delegation would like to clarify its position
on the settlement of the nuclear issue. The Government
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea firmly
believes that military exercises and military alliances
are not an option or a solution to the nuclear issue on
the Korean peninsula. The Government of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea remains
committed to the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula through the Six-Party Talks, at the earliest
possible date, without any preconditions and in the
context of the full implementation of the 19 September
joint statement, in a comprehensive and balanced
manner based on the principle of simultaneous action.
That is what our great leader, the respected Kim
Jong Il, underlined in his recent interview with ITARTASS.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/66/L.6. May I take
it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/66/L.6?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 66/7).

A/66/L.6

was

adopted

The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in exercise of the
right of reply.

11-57701

A/66/PV.48

May I remind members that statements in
exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes
for the first intervention and to five minutes for the
second intervention and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): Thank you, Madam President, for giving me
the floor once again.
The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea categorically rejects the remarks
made by the representatives of Japan and South Korea,
because they have no fundamental reality or truth as
concerns the Korean peninsula, as I said earlier.
I should like to draw the attention of the
representatives participating in this meeting to one
issue: South Korea is under the nuclear umbrella of the
United States, as I mentioned earlier. It has been living
under the nuclear umbrella of the United States, the
largest nuclear-weapon State. With respect to South
Korea, the first thing we want to know is why it
allowed a foreign Power, the largest nuclear-weapon
Power, to bring this to our land — in a move that is
disastrous to our national survival, our national dignity
and our national sovereignty. That is the first question
that the nationals of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea have in their hearts. I think that most of the
participants in this meeting will share this view.
As far as United States nuclear weapons in South
Korea, in 1975 a shocking and surprising media report
came out. A parliamentary debate was ongoing in the
United States on the military budget of that country for
1976, and it was only then that the fact that nuclear
weapons had been deployed to South Korea was
revealed. It was only then that South Korean
authorities learned that there were nuclear weapons in
South Korea. No South Korean authorities or
politicians were aware of that fact.
There is another factor to which the delegation of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea would like
to draw attention: the military alliance. As I said
before, this is a very serious concern for the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the
countries in the North-East Asian region and in our
Asia-Pacific region.
The military exercises, in scope and in nature, are
giving rise to increasingly grave concerns. Even as we
speak, the United States and South Korea are

11-57701

conducting joint military exercises in South Korea.
They began on 27 October and continue through
tomorrow. How many people are participating? How
many troops? A total of 140,000 troops are
participating. The Western media are not reporting this
news. This is causing great concern, as it is taking
place while a dialogue is ongoing. The South Korean
authorities are carrying out this kind of military
provocation even as dialogue is being conducted. As
members are aware, just last week there was a
dialogue.
Yet the South Korean representative, at this
meeting, took a confrontational approach in his
remarks, failing to mention a single word about
dialogue towards the settlement of the nuclear issue on
the Korean peninsula. Therefore, the delegation of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea would like to
urge the representative and the authorities of South
Korea to remove the United States military bases from
South Korea; they have been there for more than six
decades, since 1945, dividing the country and creating
a disastrous risk for the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, its South Korean brothers and the entire
Korean nation. We urge South Korea to remove the
military bases of the United States, which are a haven
for United States nuclear weapons.
As for Japan, the same applies. It is also under
the nuclear umbrella of the United States. Furthermore,
in 1960 the Japanese Government made a secret deal
with the United States to allow American warships
carrying nuclear weapons to enter the territorial waters
of Japan. Since that time, it is everyday business for
United States naval forces carrying nuclear weapons. It
is up to them when they come and go, without
providing any information at all. Furthermore, Japan is
the largest weapons-grade plutonium accumulator in
the world, to the tune of more than 40 tons, and it has
the technology for nuclear weapons. It can assemble a
nuclear weapon at short notice — within one week.
This is known to every expert and every population in
this world. It is an open secret.
Concerning means of delivery, it is also an open
secret that the Japanese Government did not hesitate to
engage in joint research and development in the area of
missile defence with the United States, which it has
been doing since 1999. Now it is reaching the stage of
practical deployment in strategic positions, affecting
the peace and stability of North-East Asia and the AsiaPacific regions and the entire world.

21

A/66/PV.48

Mr. Rim Kap-soo (Republic of Korea): I would
like to exercise the Republic of Korea’s right of reply
in response to the North Korean delegation’s claims,
which clearly run counter to facts that have been
recognized and supported by the international
community.
Let me briefly chronicle what has happened since
the year 1993. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea announced unilateral withdrawal from the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in
1993 and again in 2003. In 1993, the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) reported the
Democratic People’s Republic’s non-compliance with
the safeguards agreement to the Security Council. The
Democratic People’s Republic conducted nuclear tests
in 2006, just a year after the adoption of the 2005 Joint
Statement. In April 2009, the Democratic People’s
Republic kicked the IAEA inspectors out of their
country and, in May of the same year, they again
conducted nuclear tests. Last year, they disclosed
another nuclear programme for uranium enrichment.
The Security Council has adopted three
resolutions, five presidential statements and one press
statement on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea nuclear issue. Council resolution 825 (1993) was
adopted in 1993 when the Democratic People’s
Republic announced its unilateral withdrawal.
Resolutions 1718 (2006) and 1874 (2009) were
adopted right after the Democratic People’s Republic
conducted nuclear tests in 2006 and 2009, respectively.
In resolution 1874 (2009), the Security Council stated
that it “[c]ondemns in the strongest terms the nuclear
test” and decided that the Democratic People’s
Republic should abandon all nuclear weapons and
existing nuclear programmes. Further, the Security
Council called upon the Democratic People’s Republic
to act in strict accordance with its obligations under the
NPT and IAEA safeguards.
Not only did the Security Council act, but the
2005 Joint Statement of the Six Parties clearly stated
that the Democratic People’s Republic undertook to
abandon all nuclear weapons and existing nuclear
programmes. The Final Document of the 2010 NPT
Review Conference reaffirmed that fact and requested
the Democratic People’s Republic to return to the NPT
and to compliance with the IAEA safeguards.
Numerous violations detected by IAEA also confirm
that fact, and further, the South-North Joint Declaration
on the Denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula,

22

signed on 31 December 1991, clearly stipulated that
North Korea should not produce uranium enrichment
facilities.
The North Korean delegation is blatantly ignoring
all of those obligations and now claims the right of
peaceful use. With that right, the international
community, including the United Nations and the
IAEA, would, in their view, be ganging up in a grand
conspiracy against the innocent North Korean
authorities, but the North Korean authorities continue
to confront and violate its international obligations. I
believe that the North Korean position defies common
sense.
Secondly, regarding national security, there have
been a great many unprovoked provocations by North
Korea. Of such provocations, I will give but some
examples of those that were brought to and discussed
at the United Nations. In 1983, bombs exploded and
killed 17 high-level officials of the Republic of Korea,
including our then-Foreign Minister, who were
accompanying our President to Myanmar on a State
visit. In 1987, a civilian Korea Air Lines flight
exploded mid-air on the way home from abroad; all of
the 115 people aboard were killed. In 1996, a North
Korea submarine infiltrated our coastline with heavily
armed military personnel, which led to a Security
Council presidential statement (S/PRST/1996/42).
I will not elaborate any further on what happened
last year — the Cheonan sinking and the Yeonpyeong
shelling, which killed 50 people. Just last year, by my
rough count, over 200 Korean people were killed or
injured. Beside those physical provocations, the
Democratic People’s Republic has also mounted a great
many verbal provocations. In 1994, a senior official of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea made the
threatening remark that “Seoul is not far from the
border. If war breaks out, Seoul will fall into the sea of
fire”. Those same remarks were repeated last year by a
senior military general of the North Korean regime.
Last December, North Korea’s top military general
declared that nuclear war is nearing and that all of
South Korea will be engulfed in nuclear fire.
Now, my question is, once again, who is
threatening? Who is living under a constant threat? Is it
the North or the South? I will leave the answer to this
question to the Assembly’s common sense.
Lastly, after the signing of the South-North Joint
Declaration on the Denuclearization of the Korean

11-57701

A/66/PV.48

Peninsula in 1992, there has not been a single piece of
news about any situation in that connection in South
Korea. That is also a fact.

The Acting President: I remind members that
statements made in exercise of right of reply are
limited to five minutes for the second intervention.

Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would like to exercise the
right of reply to the allegations against Japan made by
the representative of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea at this meeting. Let me set the record straight
on the following three points.

Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): Concerning the remarks by the representatives
of the Republic of Korea and Japan, these
representatives again made remarks that do not convey
the fundamental realities on the Korean peninsula and
in the vicinity, specifically in Japan. The representative
of South Korea tells a different story by not referring to
the nuclear umbrella that it has been using for over six
decades, the world’s largest nuclear-weapon nuclear
umbrella. This is of the greatest concern to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, North-East
Asia and the Asia-Pacific region. In the entire region
there is not a single nuclear weapon threatening the
sovereignty, dignity or national survival of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The only
threat is the United States’ nuclear umbrella, and South
Korea is using that umbrella, though the representative
did not refer to it.

First of all, the Japanese Government’s adherence
to the three non-nuclear principles, namely that
possessing,
manufacturing
or
permitting
the
introduction of nuclear weapons into the territory of
Japan is prohibited, remains unchanged. Japan’s
determination to bring about the total elimination of
nuclear weapons with a view to achieving a world
without nuclear weapons is unshakeable. In that regard,
indeed, there exist no facts supporting any claim that
the Government of Japan has ever allowed the
introduction of nuclear weapons by the United States
on Japanese territories. Based on the United States
nuclear policy expressed to date, such as the
announcement in 1991, it is the judgment of the
Government of Japan that there has currently been no
introduction of nuclear weapons by the United States,
including vessels and/or aircraft, to call at ports in,
land on or transit through Japanese territories.
Secondly, Japan has strictly complied with its
obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards as a State
party to the NPT. The peaceful nature of Japan’s use of
nuclear energy has been confirmed by the IAEA in its
annual conclusion that all nuclear material remains
within peaceful activities. Moreover, beyond its legal
obligations, Japan has, as an international transparency
measure, regularly reported the amount of its
plutonium holdings in accordance with the guidelines
for the management of plutonium, most recently on
29 September 2011.
Thirdly and finally, Japan maintains an
exclusively
defence-oriented
policy. Therefore,
exercises conducted by the Self-Defence Forces of
Japan do not target any particular country or area.
Moreover, the ballistic missile defence system which
Japan has decided to introduce is purely defensive in
nature and does not threaten any country or area
neighbouring Japan.

11-57701

Secondly, concerning the Security Council
resolutions, as I said earlier, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea totally rejects them as reflecting no
fundamental reality on the Korean peninsula. That fact
undermines the mandate of the Security Council and
the credibility of the United Nations Charter, which
stipulates that every country has a sovereign right to
defend itself. Self-defence is indeed at stake in the case
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which
exists under South Korea’s nuclear umbrella provided
by the largest nuclear-weapon State.
Thirdly, concerning the so-called — according to
what was said here earlier — terrorist attacks by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, it was the
dictatorial regime of South Korea that was responsible.
Every time there was a political crisis at that time the
South Korean authorities made up a story, diverting the
attention of the people of South Korea to accusations
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, so
that the authorities could survive the political crisis.
It is the same with the current South Korean
authorities. In the case of last year’s Cheonan incident,
as soon as they came to power the South Korean
authorities stopped all the channels of reconciliation
dialogue between the two sides, which were in place
under and in line with the Joint Declaration of 15 June
2000, adopted at the summit meeting in Pyongyang,

23

A/66/PV.48

which was followed by another summit meeting in
2007. But the South Korean authorities stopped that
entire process, and now they are in a political crisis. So
they fabricated the so-called Cheonan incident. And
how many young soldiers did they kill? It was over 40.
There is much profound scepticism about that incident,
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
strongly insists that the ones responsible for that
incident should be brought to justice. There is much
scepticism about that incident. The so-called
assessment survey results are less than convincing.
There are many questions, even among the South
Korean population. Experts living in the United States
have themselves openly released their own arguments
against the survey results.
In response to the delegate of Japan, Japan has
once again made false remarks under the guise of
so-called three non-nuclear principles. But fortunately,
last year the Foreign Minister of Japan acknowledged
the proven entry of United States nuclear weapons into
the territorial waters of Japan, on the adoption of the
secret nuclear deal in 1960. They never asked what was
coming into their territorial waters. Also, Japan is now
making a lot of territorial plans — on the Korean
peninsula in Dokdo Island, on Chinese territory in the
Diaoyu Islands and on Russian territory in the Kuril
Islands. And one country is encouraging Japan to
continue pressing those claims — and that is the
United States.
Mr. Rim Kap-soo (Republic of Korea):
Regarding the claims made by the representative of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, I will be very
brief. First, Seoul is just 55 miles away from the border
and has a population of 12 million people. Along the
border there are 1 million North Korean troops. They
have made a great many provocations, as I indicated
earlier. Without going into detail, there are over
24 cases. So we are constantly being threatened by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. I live in
Seoul, so I know very well how difficult and dangerous
it is to live in such a situation. So, if the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea claims that they are facing

24

a nuclear threat from the United States, Seoul is just
55 miles away from the hostile nuclear arms of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Secondly, last year our ship Cheonan was sunk,
and 46 young soldiers died. Also, in November one of
our islands was very heavily shelled, killing four
people. There was no response to our complaints from
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. They did
not acknowledge or even refute any wrongdoing. But
then, who did it? Did the “Phantom of the Opera” do
it?
Thirdly, the representative of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea mentioned our dictatorial
regime in 1980 inventing fabrications. Allow me to
advise his delegation that the dictatorial regime in the
North should take care of its own people before
making such allegations.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): I will be very brief.
Whatever allegations the representative of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea made in his
second exercise of the right of reply, my delegation
would like very much to remind the international
community that it was the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea that continued developing its
nuclear and missile programmes, including its uranium
enrichment programme, in violation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions and of the Joint Statement
of 19 September 2005 coming out of the Six-Party
Talks.
It is imperative for the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to take concrete steps to
demonstrate its genuine commitment to complete,
verifiable and irreversible denuclearization and to
improving inter-Korean relations, in order to have
meaningful dialogue among the six parties.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 86?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

11-57701
