General Assembly- Fortieth Sesslon

242

40/127.

United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims
of Torture

The General Assembly.
Reca//ing article 5 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 6 which states that no one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Again recalling the Declaration on the Protection of Ali
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 71
Recalling a/so its resolution 39/46 of 10 December
1984, by which it adopted and opened for signature, ratification and accession the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
Reca/ling further its resolution 36/15 l of 16 December 1981, in which it noted with deep concern that acts of
torture took place in various countries, recognized the
need to provide assistance to the victims of torture in a
purely humanitarian spirit and established the United
Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture,
Convinced that the struggle to eliminate torture includes
the provision of assistance in a humanitarian spirit to the
victims and members of their families,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 160
1. Expresses its gratitude and appreciation to those
Governments, organizations and individuals that have
already contributed to the United Nations Voluntary Fund
for Victims of Torture;
2. Cal/s upon ali Governments, organizations and
individuals in a position to do so to respond favourably to
requests for initial as well as further contributions to the
Fund;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Board of Trustees
of the Fund for the work it has carried out;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the support given to the Board ofTrustees ofthe Fund;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to make use of ali
existing possibilities, including the preparation, production and dissemination of information materials, to assist
the Board of Trustees of the Fund in its efforts to make the
Fund and its humanitarian work better known and in its
appeal for contributions.
I 16th p/enary meeting
13 December 1985

40/128. Status of the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment
The General Assembly,
Recalling article 5 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights6 and article 7 ofthe International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, 7 both of which provide that
no one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment,
Recal/mg a/so the Declaration on the Protection of Ali
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
adoptcd by the General Assembly in its resolution 3452
(XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Recalling further its resolution 39/46 of 10 December
1984. by which it adopte-d and opened for signature. ratifi160 A/40/876.
l6I Resolution J4, ló9, annex
162 Resolution 17 194, annex

cation and accession the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and called upon ali Governments to consider signing
and ratifying the Convention as a matter of priority,
Mindful of the relevance, for the eradication of torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, of the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement
Officials 161 and of the Principies of Medica! Ethics. 162
Convinced of the desirability of early finalization and
subsequent adoption ofthe draft Body of Principies for the
Protection of Ali Persons under Any Form of Detention or
lmprisonment, 163
Seriously concerned about the alarming number of
reported cases of torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment taking place in various
parts of the world,
Determined to promote the ful! implementation of the
prohibition, under international and national law, of the
practice of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment,
Welcoming the decision of the Commission on Human
Rights, in its resolution 1985/33 of 13 March 1985, to
appoint a special rapporteur to examine questions relevant
to torture, 30
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the status of the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment; 164
2. Expresses its satisfaction at the number of States
that have signed the Convention since it was opened for
signature, ratification and accession on 4 February t 985;
3. Requests ali States that have not yet done so to sign
and to ratify the Convention as a matter of priority;
4. Invites ali States, upon ratification of or accession to
the Convention, to consider the possibility of making the
declarations provided for in articles 21 and 22 of the Convention;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Commission on Human Rights at its forty-second session
and to the General Assembly at its forty-first session a
report on the status ofthe Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
6. Decides to consider the report of the Secretary-General provided for in paragraph 5 above at its forty-first session under the item entitled "Torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment".
116th plenary meeting
13 Deffmher 1985

40/129.

Strategy and policies for drug control

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/ l 24 of 16 December 1977, in
which it requested the Commission on Narcotic Drugs to
study the possibility oflaunching a meaningful programme
of international drug abuse control strategy and policies,
Recal/ing a/so its resolution 36/168 of 16 December
1981, by which it adopted the International Drug Abuse
Control Strategy and the basic five-year programme of
action 149 proposed by the C0mmission on Narcotic Drugs
16 3 A/34/146, anne,
164 A/401604
