S/PV.8658

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8658th meeting

Tuesday, 5 November 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Pierce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Duclos
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 25 October 2019 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2019/843)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-35219 (E)
*1935219*

S/PV.8658

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.

In favour:
Belgium, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland, Russian
Federation, South Africa, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 25 October 2019 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2019/843)

The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2496 (2019).

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
Serbia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and Ms. Selma Korjenić, Head of
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Programme for TRIAL
International.
Ms. Korjenić is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Sarajevo.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite His
Excellency Mr. Silvio Gonzato, Deputy Head of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2019/859, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Germany.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/843, which contains the text of
a letter dated 25 October 2019 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting the fifty-sixth report of the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
2/26

05/11/2019

I now give the f loor to Mr. Inzko.
Mr. Inzko: It is my honour to address this body
today. In an ever-changing and frequently turbulent
global environment and with so many important
agenda items facing the Security Council, it is of
utmost importance that Bosnia and Herzegovina not
be forgotten. I sincerely thank the Council for its
continued attention and interest.
In May, I reported to the Council on the many
months of efforts to build a political coalition and
form the Government at the State and Federation
levels following the October 2018 general elections
(see S/PV.8522). At that time, despite clear differences
between the majority political parties, I would not have
believed that I would be standing before the Council
again today, six months later, to report that the process
had failed. While the parties in the Republika Srpska
formed their authorities soon after the elections and
the Government of Republika Srpska is functioning
properly, the State remains without a newly appointed
Council of Ministers, and the Federation remains
without a newly appointed Government.
Furthermore, the Council of Ministers from
the previous mandate continues to function, but it
remains hamstrung by the politically calculated and
unnecessary blockage of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliamentary Assembly, which means that no new
legislation can be adopted, including the State budget.
The State is therefore forced to operate on quarterly
temporary financing, which severely limits the scope
of its activities and its ability to effectively deal with
such emerging issues as the migrant crisis. In this
regard, I would also recall Republika Srpska’s longstanding policy — since 2012 — of starving out
State-level institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina by
putting an unreasonable cap on the State-level budget,
while at the same time increasing its own budget.
I would also like to draw the Council’s attention to
19-35219

05/11/2019

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV. 8658

the clear lack of substantive fiscal coordination in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the related blockade of
the fiscal-coordination body known as the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Fiscal Council.

effects on the State’s sovereignty. I will monitor these
developments and report to the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board and, if necessary, to the
Security Council.

In May, the European Commission delivered its
opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s application to
become a State member of the European Union (EU).
The Commission set out 14 key areas in which Bosnia
and Herzegovina must improve as part of the process
that will open talks on accession. As the goal of EU
membership is one of the very few areas where there
seems to be consensus across the political spectrum,
this should have been a milestone on Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s European path, with political leaders
rallying to meet the challenge. However, the failure
to establish authorities and the continued blockage of
the State parliament hinder any possibility for Bosnia
and Herzegovina to enact the reforms needed to make
improvements in the key areas set out in the opinion.

Also worrying is the fact that these destructive
tactics occur against a backdrop of continuing
divisive and destabilizing rhetoric from many of the
same political leaders who claim to be committed
to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s European path. Some
political leaders from Republika Srpska continue to
make statements expressing separatist tendencies or
predicting the dissolution of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
while some Croat representatives seek a territorial
rearrangement of the country. At the same time, the
biggest Bosniak party adopted, as it had in 2015, a
party platform advocating a Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina if agreed in Parliament, which was also
not helpful under the circumstances.

Also in the EU-related context, I would like to
warmly welcome the newly appointed European Union
Special Representative, Johann Sattler, and wish him
the best of luck.
As Council members will also recall following my
previous briefing to the Security Council, numerous
members rightfully called on the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to implement the 5+2 agenda
consisting of the five objectives and two conditions to
be fulfilled prior to the closure of the Office of the High
Representative and the end of my mandate. However,
the lack of authorities and a functional State parliament
means that not only has there been no progress towards
implementation of the 5+2 agenda, but the same forces
working to block the parliament have also actively
engaged in holding back previous progress and key
reforms in this regard. We are moving away from the
implementation of the 5+2 agenda, not towards it.
Moreover, the Republika Srpska authorities have
announced a session of the National Assembly later
this month, in which they will discuss the decisions
of the High Representative. Senior Republika Srpska
officials have previously questioned the authority of
the High Representative and the validity of decisions
that established or helped to establish State-level
institutions and have suggested that Republika Srpska
might withdraw from those institutions regardless
of their ratification by State and entity parliaments.
Trouble even from a single institution would have grave

In this political environment, we must also be
concerned about the potential militarization of police
forces in Republika Srpska. It sends an alarming signal
to the public. The international community needs to
closely monitor this issue of separatist rhetoric and
actions in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We do not need a
police arms race; rather, we need fewer police, not more.
But what is most reprehensible is revisionism or outright
denial when it comes to the issue of genocide, which, in
the case of Srebrenica, is a legal fact, as confirmed in
judgments of both international and domestic judicial
bodies, including the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), which was established by
this very body in 1993 (resolution 827 (1993)).
I want to take this opportunity to say once again
that, as the ICTY concluded, genocide was perpetrated
in Srebrenica in 1995, and nothing and no one can
change this fact. I would also like to thank all those
individuals and organizations that keep the truth about
Srebrenica alive and continue to search for justice,
particularly the Mothers of Srebrenica. The mothers
deserve our deep appreciation and respect.
To honour the victims of genocide, the Parliamentary
Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina must introduce
legislation that addresses genocide denial and the
glorification and commemoration of war criminals.
That will be a focus of mine in the coming period as we
approach 2020, which will mark the passing of 25 years
since the July 1995 Srebrenica genocide.

19-352193/26

S/PV.8658

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

December 22 will mark the tenth anniversary of the
judgment of the European Court of Human Rights in the
Sejdić and Finci v. Bosnia and Herzegovina case. Dervo
Sejdić, a Roma, and Jakob Finci, a Jew, both citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, contested the provisions of
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution that reserved
posts in the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency and the
Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Peoples exclusively
for Bosniaks, Serbs and Croats, claiming that these
provisions discriminated against them because it made
them ineligible to stand for election for either body.
The contested provisions meant that if a potential
candidate belonged to any of the 16 minorities — there
are 16 minorities in the country — or was the product
of a mixed marriage, or was born in the wrong entity,
that person could not stand for election for the State
Presidency or the House of Peoples, just like the Serbs
in Sarajevo, who cannot run for the State Presidency
there. In the same vein, Bosniaks from Srebrenica
cannot run for the State Presidency because they were
born on the wrong side of the Inter-Entity Boundary
Line. And it is not just a question of 16 minorities, for
it is approximately 10 per cent of the population that is
affected. Regretfully, nothing is being done to alleviate
the situation.
Moreover, recent proposals for electoral reforms,
particularly on the part of Croat political parties,
seek to attain so-called legitimate representation,
through which ethnic representatives in the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Presidency and the State and
Federation Houses of Peoples could be elected only
through constituencies of the same ethnicity. These
proposals move even further away from implementing
the judgment in the Sejdić and Finci case, which
basically holds that every citizen — everybody who
has a Bosnia and Herzegovina passport — can run for
the State Presidency, which is, of course, logical, is
it not? But that is not the case in Bosnia: candidates
have to be Bosniak, Serb or Croat. If a candidate is not
Bosniak, Serb or Croat, he or she cannot run for the
State Presidency. As a result, people filed a complaint
at the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg
nearly 10 years ago, and they obtained a judgment in
their favour, but nothing has changed.
By way of illustration, the Ambassador of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, my respected friend and colleague,
Mr. Sven Alkalaj, who belongs to a minority group,
cannot run either for the State Presidency or for the
House of Peoples. That is a real scandal. There is no
4/26

05/11/2019

equality for him, or for others. But the other scandal is
that we have a 10-year-old judgment from the European
Court of Human Rights that remains unimplemented.
Parties need to do something to celebrate this
anniversary, as it were.
Similarly, 26 November will mark the ninth
anniversary of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court’s 2010 ruling that certain
provisions in the Bosnia and Herzegovina election law
pertaining to the city of Mostar were not in harmony
with the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution.
Unfortunately, as a result of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliament’s failure to adopt necessary changes to the
law, the ruling also remains unimplemented — and has
been for nine years now — and Mostar has not held
local elections since 2008. Can any of us imagine a
city in our own countries not holding an election since
2008? That of course remains a black eye on Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s democratic record: yet another
unimplemented Constitutional Court decision.
Most recently, in another case the European Court
of Human Rights ruled that the failure of the authorities
to act prevented a citizen from voting in or standing
for local elections, which amounts to discrimination
on the basis of her place of residence. Moreover, the
Court found that the authorities’ failure has created
a legal void that has, since 2012, led to Mostar being
governed by a mayor who does not have the requisite
democratic legitimacy, obviously because there have
been no elections there since 2008.
I call on the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary
Assembly and political leaders to implement that
judgment and all other judgments as a matter of
priority, and to do so independently of other issues,
by finding a political agreement to amend the Bosnia
and Herzegovina election law. Bosnia and Herzegovina
must be a State that is based on the rule of law, as stated
and prioritized in the Dayton Peace Agreement.
The rule of law and the fight against corruption
should be priorities for Bosnia and Herzegovina. Public
opinion polls show that three quarters of citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina are extremely or mostly
dissatisfied with the rule-of-law situation and the work
of judicial institutions. Accordingly, I will make the
rule of law and the functionality of judicial institutions
my priority in the coming period, working together, of
course, with the international community.
19-35219

05/11/2019

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Unbridled disrespect for the rule of law does not
occur in a vacuum. A case in point is the tragic and
still unsolved murder of the young David Dragičević in
Banja Luka almost two years ago. But dissatisfaction
with the legal system remains one of the leading
reasons for the brain drain that Bosnia and Herzegovina
is experiencing. The brain drain is not unique to the
country, but the phenomenon is particularly tragic in
Bosnia, which has a small population. Data from the
World Bank Group’s Fall 2019 Europe and Central
Asia Economic Update, Migration and Brain Drain,
suggests that almost half of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
population has permanently emigrated from the country.
According to the World Bank, the main domestic risk
is the challenging political environment, which makes
structural reforms more difficult. In simple terms,
people do not just want jobs: they also want political
stability and justice.
Next year, we will mark the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the Dayton Peace Agreement. Unfortunately, over
these 25 years, the expectations of many citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, or of the international
community, have not been met. Bosnia and Herzegovina
has proven serious problems related to the functionality
of its institutions, the rule of law and the fight against
corruption, the freedom of media and in many other
areas, which are reflected by the pervasive separatism
and divisive policies in the country and the general
lack of focus of the country’s political elite on issues
of real importance to the citizens. Among these issues
are gender equality, bearing in mind that on average
women’s salaries amount to only 50 per cent of men’s
salaries. Women are also severely underrepresented
in the political sphere, despite there being a legal
obligation for them to occupy 40 per cent of positions
in the political institutions, which was mandated by a
law that was passed without incident and with nearuniversal approval, but, of course, it remains to be
implemented. We should remember that women in
conflict situations across the world are experiencing
great suffering, and that it is high time the international
community and, above all, the politicians of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, prioritize gender issues. I will look into
this matter and encourage a more thorough discussion.
The fundamental issue that we must all consider is
not only how to help Bosnia and Herzegovina continue to
face its challenges going forward but, more importantly,
how to prevent Bosnia and Herzegovina from going
backwards. The current trends and various public

S/PV. 8658

pronouncements clearly indicate an ongoing effort to
roll back the reforms that have carried the country thus
far. In this regard, it is now more important than ever
to preserve the Dayton structure and the tools at the
disposal of the international community, including the
authority granted to the High Representative under
the General Framework Agreement for Peace and the
relevant Security Council resolutions, including, of
course, the European Union-led Operation Althea. It is
of utmost importance that the international community
work together to preserve the investments it has made
over the past two decades and, above all, deliver on the
promise of a better future for the citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
As I have previously suggested, we must recognize
backsliding when it occurs, and in such instances,
acknowledge that our mission is not yet complete.
The President: I thank Mr. Inzko for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Korjenić.
Ms. Korjenić: My name is Selma Korjenić, and I
am Head of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Programme
for TRIAL International, a non-governmental
organization that fights impunity for international
crimes and supports victims in their pursuit of justice.
I am also honoured to address the Security Council
as a woman and citizen of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and to speak about my country’s efforts aimed at
reconciliation and dealing with the past. My message to
the Council is based on consultations with several other
representatives of civil society organizations who work
on justice and peacebuilding in my country.
Where is Bosnia and Herzegovina today when it
comes to dealing with the past? For the average tourist
coming for a short visit, we are a country of great natural
beauty with a rich cultural heritage, delicious traditional
food, beautiful music and warm-hearted people. But we
are also a country where some of the worst atrocities in
Europe since the Second World War occurred, a country
where everyday life is profoundly affected by the war,
which ended 24 years ago, and a country still carrying a
heavy burden from the past. Many complicated issues,
including bringing war criminals to justice, satisfying
the needs of victims and their families and reconciling
peoples and communities, are not being handled in a
satisfactory manner.
For many years, a great emphasis was put on the
judicial response to the horrendous crimes committed

19-352195/26

S/PV.8658

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

during the war. We believed that bringing war criminals
to justice would result in reconciliation, including
by acknowledging the suffering of victims and their
families. Although some positive developments were
made, progress has been slow. At the current rate of
prosecution, civil society is very worried that our
judicial institutions will not be able to meet the deadline
of closing all wartime cases by 2023. For the tired and
forgotten victims who are still alive today, this denial
of justice increases the suffering visited upon them
during the war.
The prompt fight against impunity remains of
paramount importance. But to provide a fuller sense
of justice to survivors in particular and to society as
a whole, the prosecution of perpetrators alone will not
be enough. In order to normalize relationships among
individuals as well as communities, we now also
need to fight the denial that such crimes were even
committed. Indeed, a perverse nationalistic rhetoric
is today flourishing and dominating the public space
more than ever. Leading political elites and the media
working at their service now openly propagate the
denial of genocide and other war crimes, at least when
the crimes in question have been committed against the
so-called opposing side. This discourse is accompanied
by the increased glorification of criminals from one’s
own community.
Let me give Council members some examples. Public
spaces, such as streets, memorials and monuments,
have been named after legally convicted war criminals,
thereby justifying the atrocities committed by them.
In the town of Pale, for instance, a student dormitory
has been named after Radovan Karadžić. In another
location, Nevesinje, a mural of Ratko Mladić has been
unveiled. When verdicts are rendered against a member
of a community, nationalist circles often reject it, as
was seen recently in the Prosecutor v. Prlic et al.
case. These groups concentrate their attention only on
the crimes committed against their own community.
This biased celebration of past crimes is a refusal to
acknowledge the full truth and to accept the suffering
of all victims regardless of their community or origin,
and it takes many forms.
International and national courts are often
undermined. During public meetings, photographs of
convicted war criminals are brandished. Some of the
perpetrators released from prison are now welcomed at
gatherings of leading politicians. Some are even elected
to political positions, as was the case with convicted
6/26

05/11/2019

war criminal Fikret Abdić, who became mayor of
Velika Kladuša. Associations are created that bear the
names of war criminals, and even fascist organizations
no longer fear appearing in public, which is comparable
to publicly admitting past crimes.
Moreover, there are almost no monuments or
memorials universally dedicated to war victims.
The initiatives for building memorials for victims
are often politicized, even at the local level, which
further frustrates survivors and their families,
thereby preventing efforts to achieve just satisfaction
and robbing them of their right to commemoration.
In contrast to war veterans, civilian victims — in
particular women survivors of sexual violence — have
been fighting for many years for their voices to be heard
and still have not been granted equal rights.
Efforts aimed at peacebuilding and reconciliation
are fundamentally blocked at all political levels.
Peacebuilding and reconciliation are not a main
concern for most politicians nor, tragically, for many
politically inclined media groups either. It follows that
even positive stories that show the normalization of
relations among individuals and communities are often
silenced and rarely find any place in the public arena.
Sadly, objecting to the nationalist rhetoric entails
risks. Those who dare to look at the past objectively,
with a real concern for the fate of victims, and those
who voice dissenting views about the events of the
war, are often exposed to public attacks. They receive
threats and sometimes have to leave their homes or
even the country in search of protection, because State
institutions are unable to protect their citizens from
such intimidation.
Even schools fall under the influence of such
policies and views about acceptable truths on what
happened during the war. Indeed, some formal
educational programmes create the basis for future
distrust towards other communities, keeping alive the
possibility of conflicts in future. For example, a new
history textbook in the Republika Srpska glorifies one
of the worst war criminals, Radovan Karadžić, as a
poet and the first President of the Republika Srpska,
without providing information about his responsibility
for genocide and numerous crimes against humanity.
Nothing is said of his conviction to life in prison by the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. Such
retrograde narratives are on the rise and cause tensions
among an already divided nation. Three generations
19-35219

05/11/2019

S/PV. 8658

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

have now tasted the poison of hatred. Very little is
being done to prevent the same fate happening to the
next generation.
However, there is still a glimmer of hope. Work
aimed at delivering justice to affected individuals
and communities and providing engagement on
reconciliation and peacebuilding does happen, and
there are even successes to celebrate. But such work and
engagement result from the dedication of civil society
organizations, human rights activists and individuals
who seek to normalize relations among individuals
and communities through their activism. Some victims
and survivors are increasingly active in their quest for
justice and for opportunities to rebuild themselves, with
the support of numerous civil society representatives.
For example, for the past 12 years, my organization has
been working alongside with and supporting victims
of the war, including numerous survivors of sexual
violence. This long-term involvement, coupled with
a constant engagement with authorities to call for
upholding international standards and for guaranteeing
the basic human rights of victims, has made justice
processes a little more efficient, fair and inclusive.
Those results, combined with successes from other
sectors of society, show that the initiatives taken by
human rights activists, local civil society organizations,
war victims, former members of opposed armies, youth
from different ethnic backgrounds and individual
religious leaders to spread messages of peace and
tolerance can really sow the seeds of justice, truth and
reconciliation. Ordinary citizens want nothing more
than to leave the war behind them and look towards
a brighter future. Clearly, ordinary citizens are not
the ones preventing peace, but without the support of
the State and a comprehensive institutional approach,
reconciliation cannot have long-lasting effects. Without
a concerted effort to fight the denial of past crimes and to
combat nationalistic rhetoric, Bosnia and Herzegovina
will continue to be a ticking time bomb.
Next Saturday we will be commemorating the
destruction of the famous Mostar Bridge. The old
bridge was destroyed on 9 November 1993. It has since
been rebuilt, but Bosnia and Herzegovina still needs
the support of the international community to rebuild
numerous bridges between people and communities.
For that, I would humbly like to propose two paths for
the Council’s consideration.

First, do not let denial and hate take stronger root.
The international community should not be afraid to
engage with Bosnia and Herzegovina on stricter terms.
It should not be afraid to demand respect for the verdicts
rendered by international and local courts. It should
make sure that denying, minimizing or justifying any
crime, regardless of its target, should be forbidden.
It should demand that victims can see their right to
justice, truth and reparations fully implemented. Only
these kinds of conditions will enable us to move ahead
as a nation and reconcile with one another.
Secondly, please do not despair of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. As a young Bosnian woman, I will not
despair of my country. I want to leave it to my children
free of the poison of hatred. There are many wonderful
people here, from multiple sectors of civil society,
including many human rights activists who fight on a
daily basis to make their country a better place. Our civil
society needs the trust of the Security Council. We need
it to help and support the initiatives aimed at rebuilding
bridges and delivering justice and reconciliation.
The President:
her briefing.

I

thank

Ms.

Korjenić

for

I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council who wish to make statements. I would like to
remind my colleagues of the time limit and that their
microphones will flash if they go over that time limit.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Let me begin by
welcoming the Council’s unanimous vote on resolution
2496 (2019), extending the mandate of the European
Union-led Operation Althea. We thank all Council
members for their constructive engagement in that
regard. I am grateful to the two briefers for their
presentations. They were very open, honest, sobering
and comprehensive, and I thank them both.
As Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union a bit later, I
will not make a general statement but will rather speak
to some specific points.
First, I have to say that even having an idea of
what is happening, I was shocked, but I was also
shocked at what High Representative Valentin Inzko
and Ms. Selma Korjenić said in their briefings about
the denial of past crimes, including genocide, the
glorification of criminals and the lack of accountability
and reconciliation. In that regard, I again welcome the

19-352197/26

S/PV.8658

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

05/11/2019

fact that reconciliation will be on the agenda of the
British presidency of the Council this month.

to welcome the renewal of the mandate of the European
Union-led Operation Althea.

I have a question for the High Representative. He
mentioned that he wants to make the rule of law and
respect for it a priority. In concrete terms, what does he
think he can do with regard to the question that came
up? How can he do more, so that we are no longer seeing
genocide denied? How can he encourage other actors?

Despite some positive developments, we must
express our concern about the lack of progress being
made in implementing the five objectives and two
conditions — the 5+2 agenda — with a view to ensuring
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s full autonomy. As the High
Representative mentioned, it is particularly worrying
that the delays and setbacks are due to the lack of real
commitment on the part of the political class. The lack
of respect for State institutions and their decisions,
and the exacerbation of belligerent and secessionist
messages contribute to this stagnation. In that regard,
we reiterate how important it is for both the Federation
and the Republika Srpska to renew their willingness
to implement the 1995 General Framework Agreement
for Peace, recognize the authority of the Office of
the High Representative and reaffirm the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It is also essential that they show full respect for the
Constitution and State institutions and competencies at
every level. The cantons of the Federation must adapt
their regulations, especially regarding elections, while
the Republika Srpska must comply with the provisions
of the Agreement regarding the registration of military
properties and the transfer of indirect taxes.

With respect to the Sejdić and Finci case, we all
know that it has been going on for a decade or more,
and many efforts have been undertaken in that regard.
Mr. Inzko also put that on his list of priorities. How does
he think he can make a difference? What instruments
does he have at his disposal? When he returns in six
months, how does he think he can achieve that? We
do not want to lose the Ambassador here, but for him
not to have the possibility of becoming President
is remarkable.
I also very much appreciated the High
Representative’s underlining of gender equality, and
we heard about the victims of sexual violence. My third
question is similar to the previous ones. What does he
think that he can do in terms of tackling that issue?
It has now been a year since the elections were held
and a Government has still not been formed in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It is a nightmare we have had before.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is functioning somehow, but
of course we in the Council cannot implement any
legislation or deal with budget questions. The country
is stuck. To some extent it is actually going backwards.
Something has to be done, and only then can we stop
the brain drain.
Those are the questions that I have. I wanted to
thank Ms. Korjenić for at least concluding on a positive
note and saying that we should not despair. But it is
very difficult not to despair when listening to all of
this. Maybe I can ask the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia when they speak later
if they could also address the question of impunity and
how they can contribute to combating the glorification
of criminals and the denials of genocide.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
Valentin Inzko for his report (S/2019/843, annex), and
both him and Ms. Selma Korjenić for their valuable
briefings. We would also like to take this opportunity
8/26

We welcome the adoption of a series of reforms
by both sides in their efforts to advance European
integration, but it is also crucial to overcome the
political impasse with a view to appointing a Council
of Ministers, which has been pending for a year, and
to resuming parliamentary work. The strengthening of
institutions and the rule of law, like the path to Europe,
should be an area of convergence based on common
interests. Making progress in that reform process, as
well as in addressing migration issues, organized crime
and corruption, must be a priority.
In that regard, we reiterate the importance of
creating a public prosecutor’s office and a specialized
court to combat organized crime and corruption. That
would also contribute to the fight against impunity and
improve the legitimacy of institutions and the people’s
trust in them. In that fight, and as we heard from
Ms. Korjenić, access to justice is key. It is particularly
regrettable that the judicial institutions have been unable
to complete their work on war-crimes cases as planned.
It is a legal and moral imperative for the victims of
those crimes and their families in order to contribute to
reconciliation, in which we also acknowledge the role
19-35219

05/11/2019

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

of civil society, especially women and young people.
In that regard, we deplore and reject speeches and
initiatives that foment division and hatred, particularly
when they are used to restrict freedom of speech and of
the press, as well as the right to association and peaceful
protest. Respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms cannot be conditional.
In conclusion, in underlining the importance of
the full cooperation of the parties and the resources
necessary for High Representative Inzko and Operation
Althea to carry out their duties, we reiterate Peru’s full
support for the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina on
their path towards sustainable peace and development.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his briefing. Poland would
like to convey its full support and appreciation to his
Office for its pivotal role in maintaining stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Consistent with our previous
statements, we also support the use of Bonn powers
if the situation requires it. I would also like to thank
Ms. Selma Korjenić for her briefing.
Poland aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later during this meeting on behalf of the
European Union. In addition, we would like to make
the following general remarks.
We welcome the unanimous adoption today of the
resolution 2496 (2019), which extends the mandate of
Operation EUFOR Althea for another year. We also
welcome the conclusions of the European Council on
14 October confirming its readiness to continue the
mission’s executive military mandate to maintain a
safe and secure environment. As contributors to the
mission since its inception, we are proud to be a part
of that effort.
We regret that, more than a year after the country’s
general elections, Governments are still not formed at
state and federal levels. We call on political leaders
to proceed with Government formation with a sense
of urgency and in a spirit of compromise, so that the
country can continue to move forward.
We note with appreciation the progress that Bosnia
and Herzegovina has made on the path to European
integration and look forward to the issuance of the
European Commission’s opinion on the country’s
application for European Union membership. European
Union integration remains the main unifying objective

S/PV. 8658

shared by all political parties and is seen by a majority
of citizens as a strategic goal for the country.
We would welcome an equal sense of purpose
and unity around the submission of the first annual
national programme under the NATO membership
action plan. It is in the best interest of all citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to be able to enjoy, in the
foreseeable future, stability and security within EuroAtlantic structures.
Also yet to be implemented are the comprehensive
reforms of the electoral law in accordance with the
standing rulings of the European Court of Human
Rights and the Constitutional Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
There are still many concerns regarding the
internal situation in the country. Unemployment
remains high and the outflow of younger generations
continues, depriving the country of future elites while
incoming migration bound for the European Union
swells to alarming levels. Corruption and organized
crime are rampant and are not tackled effectively.
They need to be curtailed and effectively prosecuted to
bring the country up to modern democratic standards.
Its reform agenda must be consistently and vigorously
continued and the new socioeconomic reforms should
be implemented without delay.
Since this is the last time we will speak on this
subject from our seat in the Security Council, let me
once again say that Poland has been and will continue to
be vitally interested in seeing Bosnia and Herzegovina
as a united, prosperous and modern democratic country
strongly rooted in Euro-Atlantic structures.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Valentine Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
his valuable briefing and his latest report (S/2019/843,
enclosure) on the implementation of the Peace
Agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We fully
support him in carrying out his mandate and his efforts
to assist the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in overcoming the challenges they face. We also
thank Ms. Selma Korjenić, Head of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Programme at TRIAL International.
We welcome the Council’s unanimous adoption
today of resolution 2496 (2019), which sends a strong
message to the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina from
the international community that we are committed

19-352199/26

S/PV.8658

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

to maintaining security and stability in the country.
We are committed to providing the necessary support
to Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to promote its
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity.
We commend the efforts made to maintain stability
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and ensure its ethnic
and cultural unity. We also appreciate the important
role played by Operation EUFOR Althea under the
leadership of the European Union. In that regard, we
welcome the adoption by both entities of several reform
measures related to the reform agenda of the European
Union, including the entry into force of an agreement
on the reduction of mobile roaming costs among the
States of the Western Balkans in July of this year.
The General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to be the cornerstone
for achieving institutional stability and the point of
reference for bringing about sustainable peace in the
country. We are therefore concerned about the continued
rhetoric towards incitement and divisive statements. We
call upon all political leaders to prioritize the national
interests of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
They must go beyond the narrow political and ethnic
interests that undermine progress and stability and try
to engage constructively in implementing the outcome
of the elections held in October 2018, including
establishing the state-level Council of Ministers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the federal Government
and the other 10 cantonal Governments. All parties
must participate in a constructive and open dialogue
to ensure the establishment of the authorities at all
levels without delay. That undoubtedly will benefit the
political process.
Efforts must be redoubled so that the Parliament
adopts new legislation that does not leave the judiciary
without the necessary instruments to combat organized
crime, corruption, terrorism and extremism, which pose
a direct threat to the rule of law and undermine efforts
to achieve socioeconomic development and accession
to the European Union.
With regard to the implementation of the 5+2 agenda
for the closure of the Office of the High Representative,
we urge the parties to fulfil their commitments and
meet the requirements of that agenda. We stress our
full support for the Office of the High Representative in
line with the Dayton Peace Agreement and the relevant
Security Council resolutions. We call upon the High
10/26

05/11/2019

Representative to make intensive efforts to implement
the plan fully.
In conclusion, we reiterate the importance that
all parties respect the unity, stability and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, including its
national Constitution and all judgments handed down
by its judiciary, so as to ensure stability in the country.
We also call upon all parties to make concerted efforts
to implement the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and meet their
commitments towards achieving the goal of accession
to the European Union and NATO.
Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): Allow me
to begin by thanking Mr. Valentine Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
his briefing and report (S/2019/843, enclosure) on
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as
Ms. Selma Korjenić for her briefing.
As evident from the High Representative’s briefing
and report, the continued disagreements by the political
parties has negatively impacted the fulfilment of the
5+2 agenda, established by the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board. In addition, the divisive,
provocative and nationalist rhetoric contributes to
undermining the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the State.
South Africa therefore calls on all parties to
recommit to the formation of an inclusive Government
without delay and in line with previously agreed
commitments. In that regard, we also call on all parties
to respect the rule of law and the legal instruments
that underpin the political structures in the country.
That includes swiftly taking the necessary steps to
harmonize the constitutions of some cantons with the
national Constitution.
As my delegation has stated before, direct political
dialogue among parties is critical in order to resolve
outstanding issues. We call for constructive and
open dialogue among all the communities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. In addition to those engagements,
continued cooperation and talks among the various
Bosnian structures and the High Representative is
also of great importance. That is the only way to make
progress in finding agreement on matters vital to
all communities.
I would also like to commend High Representative
Inzko for his continued dedication and efforts in
19-35219

05/11/2019

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

ensuring that the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
retain ownership of the political processes in line with
the work of the Peace Implementation Council.
In conclusion, South Africa encourages all parties
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to recommit to the full
implementation of their obligations under the various
peace accords and agreements. Political will and
national ownership over this process is essential to
making progress towards long-term peace, stability
and reconciliation for all the people and communities
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
I welcome the convening of this debate on the
consideration of the fifty-sixth report of the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2019/843,
enclosure). I thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
Ms. Selma Korjenić, Head of Programme-Bosnia
and Herzegovina for TRIAL International, for their
detailed and particularly enlightening briefings. In the
light of the report, we have some comments to make on
the political, economic and humanitarian situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
On the political front, my delegation notes with
concern that the multi-ethnic State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is still dealing with a political impasse, an
institutional deadlock resulting from the fact that it has
not been possible to form a central Government since
the general elections of 7 October 2018. The fact is that
24 years after the end of the civil war, the belligerent
rhetoric and unconstructive behaviour of various
political leaders is impeding progress towards the
country’s long-desired national reconciliation, which
requires ensuring accountability.
Adding to the legal difficulties and ethnic tensions
that the country has endured for more than a decade,
the prevention of the holding of municipal elections
in Mostar and denials of the Srebrenica massacre
constitute further obstacles and call into question
the meagre gains made so far in terms of national
reconciliation. The multi-ethnic armed forces of Bosnia
and Herzegovina remain the best example of this to
date. Considering the risk of the situation deteriorating
further, my delegation urges the country’s political
leaders to resolutely commit to the noble project of
building a united and prosperous nation integrated
within the European Union space.

S/PV. 8658

With regard to the economic situation, my
delegation welcomes the recent adoption by Republika
Srpska and the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina of
a four-year joint programme of socioeconomic reforms,
which reflects their shared desire to boost economic
growth and strengthen their competitiveness in line
with the recommendations of the European Union. If
this type of reform can inspire a fast-track economic
transformation that increases the chances of integration
into the European Union, there is no doubt that it
could also foster the emergence of a more unified and
competitive economy, creating jobs for young people,
women and other vulnerable groups and reducing
migrant flows towards the richer Western countries.
However, in order to achieve this redeeming economic
transformation, local authorities must rise above their
political differences and commit to promoting the
rule of law and creating a judicial environment that is
attractive to investment.
On the humanitarian front, Côte d’Ivoire is
concerned about the difficult living conditions of
migrants in Bosnia and Herzegovina, whose numbers
continue to grow, according to the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
In addition, the lack of State preparation and measures
that are inadequate to the challenges involved, as well
as the existence of rhetoric that does not foster even
a minimum of social cohesion, are worsening the
situation of migrants in transit centres and making the
work of humanitarian agencies increasingly difficult.
My delegation believes that despite their size and
complexity, the sociopolitical and economic challenges
that Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to deal with
are not insurmountable. We continue to believe that
a convergence of stakeholders’ views and strong
ownership of the national reconciliation process, as
well as economic reforms, will enable the country to
consolidate domestic peace and contribute to stability
and shared prosperity in the Balkans.
In conclusion, my country wishes to commend the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina for
his efforts in coordinating assistance from international
partners. We encourage him to continue his good
offices in working towards the full implementation of
the Dayton Agreement.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): Belgium aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

19-3521911/26

S/PV.8658

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

I would like to thank High Representative Valentin
Inzko and Ms. Selma Korjenić for their briefings.
We welcome the unanimity demonstrated by
the Security Council, which led to our adoption of
resolution 2496 (2019), renewing the mandate of the
European Union-led Operation Althea for a further
year. The mission contributes to the viability of a
united, sovereign and multi-ethnic Bosnian State, as
well as to the stabilization of the region. As a member
of the European Union, Belgium will continue to lend
Bosnia and Herzegovina its full support.
Six months after the High Representative’s last
briefing (see S/PV.8522), we have to acknowledge that the
same challenges persist and that the political stalemate
continues to delay the adoption and implementation
of the reforms that the country desperately needs. We
reiterate that a political or legislative solution to the
electoral process must be consistent with the decisions
of the European Court of Human Rights. Almost 10
years after the decision on the Sejdić and Finci case,
its implementation is a dead letter. In this context,
it is also essential to work urgently to implement
the recommendations of the Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has made a strategic
choice, taking the path of Euro-Atlantic integration.
That is also a choice for a democracy founded on respect
for the rule of law and human rights. We are deeply
concerned about the serious shortcomings we have seen
with regard to respect for the rule of law, as well by the
latest incidents in the High Judicial and Prosecutorial
Council. It is a matter of urgency to ensure that the
necessary reforms are enacted to strengthen justice and
the independence of the judiciary. Given the Council’s
crucial role, it is critical that it respect the highest
ethical and professional standards. We are also deeply
concerned about the increasing attacks on freedom of
expression and assembly and freedom of the press over
the past few months. We reiterate the importance of
guaranteeing those freedoms without discrimination of
any kind.
A just, stable and lasting peace is not possible
if justice is not done. In the context of a transitional
justice process, true reconciliation is only possible if
concrete measures are taken to combat impunity by
guaranteeing the prosecution of war criminals. The
victims and survivors must be at the heart of these
12/26

05/11/2019

efforts. Their rights must be assured, as must their
substantial participation in defining the Government’s
reconciliation efforts. There can be no reconciliation
without reparation. We stress the importance of
including civil-society organizations, young people
and women in this process so that it has broad support
throughout society.
Finally, in that connection, we reiterate our
profound concern about speech that seeks to deny
the Srebrenica genocide, glorify war crimes and their
perpetrators and incite hatred. Such rhetoric reinforces
a climate of mistrust and undermines the reconciliation
process. Rather than sowing seeds of discord, we call
for the planting of seeds to grow a just, stable and
lasting peace.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
High Representative Valentin Inzko for his important
briefing. I would also like to thank Ms. Selma
Korjenić for the information that she has given us
today. Indonesia would like to assure the Office of the
High Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina of its
support in fulfilling its mandate. We also welcome the
extension of the Office’s mandate as provided for in
resolution 2496 (2019), which we just adopted.
Though there has been no significant progress
towards achievement of the five objectives and two
conditions necessary for the closure of the Office of the
High Representative, we hope that it can find a creative
solution that can assist Bosnia and Herzegovina in
addressing the current stagnation on the ground. After
hearing High Representative Inzko’s statement, we
are now quite concerned about the issues of genocide
denial, ethnicity rules for representatives elected to the
Presidency, the lack of commitment to the rule of law
and the ongoing absence of municipal elections. I think
these are very bad indicators for progress. I would like
to focus on several points.
The first is the need to put an end to the
destabilizing rhetoric. All parties should refrain
from such rhetoric and statements, which can lead
to nothing but destruction and instability. We are
quite alarmed by the High Representative’s mention
of separatist statements, expressions of separatist
tendencies and of course support for the dissolution
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. As a country that highly
values sovereignty and territorial integrity, we find
that very alarming. Such allegations and rhetoric will
only make the tensions even more critical, and it is
19-35219

05/11/2019

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina who will pay
the price. It is the people whom we are struggling and
fighting for in the first place, with a view to making
their lives as peaceful and prosperous as they can be
in the world. Indonesia strongly believes that if the
issue is to be resolved, all parties must use peaceful
means and dialogue. But we need more than goodwill
to start a dialogue. We need sincerity to build trust, not
inflammatory accusations that disrespect previously
agreed policies and agreements. Trust and confidence
can be built only if past agreements and commitments
are faithfully implemented.
My second point is on the implementation of the
rule of law. We support the High Representative’s
view on the necessity of maintaining the rule of law,
particularly with regard to the status of the many
unimplemented court decisions. The rule of law
should be respected in order to maintain and further
strengthen the basic structure of democracy. The lack
of commitment to the rule of law throughout Bosnia
and Herzegovina is a fundamental problem that must be
addressed immediately.
My third and last point is unity. Differences in
political views and interests should not cause people
to suffer. We must not forget that our main purpose
is to build a stable and prosperous community, not
the opposite. We have to find strength, stability, and
prosperity in being together. Unity is important, and
although the differences are real, we must act for a
better future. Progress will be a distant prospect until
there is unity in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Indonesia calls on all the parties to respect the
Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the existing
legislation and the integrity of State-level institutions.
And of course we call on the international community
to continue to help Bosnia and Herzegovina to achieve
peace and stability. In that regard we also believe that
regional organizations and neighbours know best what
to do.
I have one question for the High Representative
regarding the concern he expressed about the
possibility of backsliding. The question is what can we,
the Council, do? Does he have a concrete suggestion for
what can be done to avoid further backsliding? I do not
really know, but I wonder whether including regional
organizations, for example the European Union or
other regional organizations in Europe, could improve

S/PV. 8658

stability and peace. That is perhaps another option that
could save more lives.
I would like to conclude by expressing Indonesia’s
long-standing support for the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in their quest to find a lasting solution
that can accommodate the needs of all stakeholders as
peacefully as possible. There is talk of reconciliation.
Reconciliation is not a choice, but the only option
for achieving peace for the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Let us not forget that what our discussion
in this Chamber today is all about is the people.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): As this is the first time in November that I
am taking the floor at a Council meeting, allow me
to begin by congratulating the United Kingdom on its
assumption of the presidency of the Council this month.
I would also like to commend South Africa, one of the
three African members of the Security Council, for its
excellent and very successful presidency of the Council
in October.
My delegation joins others in welcoming
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, back to the Security Council, and
in thanking him for his comprehensive briefing and
his informative presentation on the fifty-sixth report
(S/2019/843, annex) on the implementation of the peace
agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina. Our thanks
also go to Ms. Selma Korjenić for the enlightening
information she provided.
My delegation duly notes the High Representative’s
report on the achievements and progress made over the
past six months in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including
the simultaneous adoption of a package of measures
related to the European Union reform agenda, which
demonstrates the commitment and the remarkable
efforts that have been made towards Euro-Atlantic
integration, as well as mutual interest in the common
objective of stabilizing the country.
While my delegation recognizes and applauds the
positive advances that have been made in Bosnia and
Herzegovina over the reporting period, we are equally
concerned about the lack of progress in the formation
of a Government following the general elections of
7 October 2018. It is in that regard that we urge the
parties to work together for political stability and to
address these problems as soon as possible, with a
view to ensuring a promising future for the country
and achieving reconciliation among its various ethnic

19-3521913/26

S/PV.8658

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

groups and communities. We believe that there is still
much to be done. We must therefore continue to work
to build a common vision of the future that will help
to foster lasting national unity and cement the role of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the Balkans, Europe and
the world. We encourage the parties to amend the laws
relating to the Federation House of Peoples, strengthen
the rule of law, ensure the full implementation of
election results and continue efforts to contain and
eliminate ethnic divisions, crime, corruption, violent
extremism and terrorism, which continue to be the key
issues in the quest for stability and prosperity in the
country and the region.
My delegation advocates full respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We commend the commitment
of the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
within his mandate, and emphasize our support for his
efforts to promote the implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement. Equatorial Guinea stands ready
to work with the international community to support
lasting peace and security and sustainable development
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We would like to conclude our brief statement by
welcoming the unanimous adoption of resolution 2496
(2019) submitted by the Federal Republic of Germany,
which extends the mandate of the European Union-led
Operation Althea by a further 12 months.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
listened carefully to High Representative Inzko’s
briefing and the statement by Ms. Korjenić, the
representative of civil society.
We welcome the Council’s unanimous adoption of
resolution 2496 (2019), on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important country
in the Balkans. China welcomes its successful holding
of general elections in October 2018 and notes that the
Council of Ministers has not been formed. We hope that
all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina will be able to
arrive at a consensus through dialogue and consultations
to form a Cabinet as soon as possible, actively
consolidate the political process, comprehensively
implement the Dayton Peace Agreement and accord
further attention to, and support for, economic and
social development so that that they can all share the
peace and development dividends.
14/26

05/11/2019

Maintaining peace, stability and development in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and ensuring harmony among
its various ethnic groups is in the common interests of
the international community and the countries of the
region. China has always respected the sovereignty,
independence, national unity and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, respected the right of its
people to choose the future of the country and supported
its various ethnic communities living in harmony while
seeking common development.
When it comes to the issue of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the international community should
be attentive to the views and concerns of all parties
and adopt a balanced and prudent approach. While
supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina in advance of the
reform process, the international community should
fully consider the specific characteristics of the country
and its level of resilience, focus on helping people
overcome their problems independently and step up
support for the country’s economic development.
China has noted the efforts of High Representative
Inzko to move the political process forward in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We hope that the High
Representatives will work in strict accordance with
his mandate to play an active role in promoting the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement. We
also hope that the multinational stabilization force led
by the European Union in Bosnia and Herzegovina will
continue to strengthen engagement with the parties
concerned to help maintain security and stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. China stands ready, together
with the rest of the international community, to do its
part in helping Bosnia and Herzegovina achieve lasting
peace, stability and development.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): The
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina gave
a detailed account of the various challenges that Bosnia
and Herzegovina continues to face. I should like to
return to three of them.
First, more than a year after the general elections
of October 2018, the failure to form Governments and
operationalize institutions is of great concern in several
respects. First, it is indicative of an environment of
persistent mistrust among the various communities
that make up Bosnia and Herzegovina. Secondly, it
prevents the implementation of the reforms necessary
for the country, in particular in achieving European
rapprochement, whether in terms of the economy,
19-35219

05/11/2019

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

social aspects or strengthening the rule of law and
human rights.
France calls on all political parties and movements
to allow for the country to function, especially so that
it can form Governments at the state and the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Federation levels, as well as in several
cantons. We also stress the importance of the holding
of local elections in Mostar next year for the first time
in more than 10 years, as the High Representative
underscored. I recall that the European Court of Human
Rights recently ordered Bosnia and Herzegovina to
allow the holding of those elections.
My second point concerns the way in which Bosnia
and Herzegovina is addressing its past, with regard to
which I thank Ms. Korjenić for her very detailed briefing.
What was laid out for us was alarming. France strongly
condemns the glorification of crimes and war criminals,
regardless of their community of origin. National and
international justice has done an outstanding job in
prosecuting and convicting those responsible for the
atrocities committed during the conflict. Any attempt
to call into question or reinterpret the decisions of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia — I am
thinking in particular of those relating to the genocide
in Srebrenica — is unacceptable.
In that regard, I echo the questions asked earlier
by the Permanent Representative of Germany. What
can we do so that all political actors of Bosnia and
Herzegovina rise up to the duty that falls upon them in
that area, and how can we assure that the justice system
of Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to effectively
investigate the many cases left over from the war, in
particular war crimes? The stalling in transitional
justice and reconciliation processes is adding to the lack
of trust among the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in the judicial system and undermining the cohesion of
the country.
Thirdly, I return to the European perspective on
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Western Balkans,
which requires more than ever redoubling efforts
to adopt the reforms that the country needs. In that
regard, France aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union. The
prospect of integration into the European Union, when
the conditions are met, is an indication of the European
Union’s massive and multifaceted engagement in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The European Union-led Operation
Althea, the one-year extension of the mandate of which

S/PV. 8658

was authorized by the Security Council’s adoption of
resolution 2496 (2019) today, attests to that support.
Beyond that support, it is the responsibility of the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to adopt farreaching reforms to make progress on European
rapprochement. Such reforms in the areas of the rule
of law and economic and social development will make
it possible to provide new opportunities to the younger
generations and encourage them to contribute to the
country’s development.
At the summit held on 29 April in Berlin,
President Emmanuel Macron, together with Chancellor
Angela Merkel, reaffirmed France’s willingness to
contribute to the stability of the Western Balkans.
That re-engagement focuses on economic and social
development, security, justice and defence — four
pillars of the French strategy, which was presented prior
to the summit. Bosnia and Herzegovina has its rightful
place in that strategy, which supports the actions of the
European Union. It is to this European future that the
political leaders must turn their attention.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
High Representative Inzko for joining us today. I also
thank Ms. Selma Korjenić. I really appreciate the
cautious optimism that she shared with us.
The United States is fully committed to the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina as they strive towards a
more just, free and democratic society. A generation
has passed since the historic signing of the Dayton
Peace Agreement, but we must continue to think about
today’s young people to give them a glimmer of hope,
no matter what side they are born on.
The present generation faces challenges that have
plagued Bosnian society and the Balkans for decades.
Nationalistic rhetoric sows troubling divisions. Leaders
exploit a fragile political landscape for personal and
financial gain, and young people leave the country on
a daily basis seeking the economic opportunity that
they wish they could find at home. If it wants to move
forward, Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot tolerate the
destructive narratives that have foreclosed stability
and opportunity for so many years. Its leaders must
embrace political reconciliation to move beyond the
legacy of war, and they must accept the necessary
reforms to set the country on the path towards EuroAtlantic integration. The Bosnian people deserve
democratically elected leaders who will govern with
integrity, practice accountability and deliver on their

19-3521915/26

S/PV.8658

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

promises. They deserve leaders who will put the needs
of their people first.
The United States is actively strengthening those
endeavours in several ways. We support the Dayton
framework to ensure peace and stability in the region.
We support programming and non-governmental
organizations that promote media freedom, equal
access to education and a judicial system free from
corruption. And we support efforts aimed at reducing
air pollution and fostering sustainable economic
development. But beyond support for institutions and
economic opportunity, we seek accountability for those
who threaten peace and stability in the region. I agree
with the representative of France that convicted war
criminals being honoured in any way is very disturbing.
We anticipate a strong partnership with the
country’s Government and leaders, but we also expect
them to do their part to implement reforms now. I say to
High representative Inzko that we strongly affirm the
role of his Office, especially as the country implements
electoral reforms and prepares for the holding of the
2020 municipal elections. We also commend the
continuing and essential contributions of European
Union-led Operation Althea, which plays a crucial role
in preserving a stable environment, and we support the
renewal of its mandate for another year.
We will know that we have achieved something of
lasting significance when all generations and ethnicities
in Bosnia and Herzegovina are able to enjoy the
blessings of a democratic, stable and prosperous nation.
The United States looks forward to that day’s arrival for
its people, and we will not cease in our efforts to hasten
its coming.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Valentin lnzko and
Ms. Selma Korjenić for their briefings.
The Dominican Republic expresses its recognition
for the unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also acknowledge
the efforts of the High Representative and his Office
in the implementation of the civilian aspects of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. At the same time, we regret that
no progress has been made in meeting the objectives
and conditions of the 5+2 agenda for the definitive
closure of the Office of the High Representative. This
slowdown in the process has become a matter for the
Council’s consideration.
16/26

05/11/2019

It should be remembered that where there is a unified
will for the benefit of the great majority, differences
take second place. The political representatives are
determined to make their positions more flexible so
that they can provide Bosnia and Herzegovina with the
tools to carry out reforms that will strengthen the rule
of law, pave the way for integration into the European
Union and expedite the path towards the consolidation
of unity, peace and development.
We support the mandate and management of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. In that regard, we understand that all
efforts should focus on consolidating the progress
made, redirecting efforts towards integration with the
European Union and, at the same time, overcoming
challenges such as the fight against organized crime
and corruption, among others.
We understand that the mere action of refraining
from any unilateral measure that could stall or jeopardize
the process of reconciliation and peacebuilding is a sign
of goodwill and cooperation to improve the situation in
the country and support the efforts of the international
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is appropriate
for the political leadership to act openly in favour
of unity, accepting that Bosnia and Herzegovina is a
single, sovereign State.
A year ahead of the elections, it is important
to complete the process of establishing the new
authorities. In that regard, we recommend taking the
necessary steps to strengthen the rule of law, support
multilingualism, ensure the participation of young
people and women in the political processes and protect
the rights of refugees and internally displaced persons
in order to create the conditions for their voluntary and
safe return to their homes.
It is necessary to acknowledge the important role of
the press in a free and democratic society. To that end,
it is vital that the relevant measures be taken to ensure
those freedoms in a safe environment.
In conclusion, we welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2496 (2019), which extends the
mandate of the European Union-led peacekeeping
force EUFOR-Operation ALTHEA. Furthermore, the
Dominican Republic takes this opportunity to call
on all political leaders and stakeholders to cooperate
in a genuine spirit of commitment with the Office
of the High Representative so that together we can
achieve a Bosnia and Herzegovina that will enable an
19-35219

05/11/2019

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

atmosphere of inclusion, the reconciliation of ethnic
and religious diversity, accountability, access to justice,
the empowerment of young people and women, the
security of civilians and effective policies to reduce
poverty to prevail.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would to thank today’s briefers. We listened
carefully to the briefing by the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina and must once again note
that the information he provided, as well as the report
(S/2019/843, annex) circulated in the Security Council,
do not provide an objective and balanced picture of what
is happening on in the country. There is continuing bias
against Bosnian Serbs and Croats, whose leaders the
High Representative unjustifiably blames for all the
difficulties that the country is facing.
The report mentions only briefly the correct
notion that the main reason for most of the Bosnian
problems are the serious differences in views on the
way forward in development the statehood of Bosnia
and Herzegovina between the three sides — the
Bosnians, Serbs and Croats. In such circumstances, the
efforts of the Office of the High Representative should
focus on promoting a culture of dialogue, providing, if
necessary, good offices to resolve disputes among the
Bosnians themselves.
Instead, almost all the time, the energy and
resources of the Office of the High Representative
are spent on attempts to justify the labelling Bosnian
Serb and Croat leaders as anti-Dayton. In that regard,
we cannot fail to note that both the current Serbian
member of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Dodik, and the President of the Croat Democratic
Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Čović, have
repeatedly publicly stated their commitment to the
peace agreement and regularly confirm that in practice.
It is important to be guided by the Dayton principles of
equal rights for the three constituent peoples of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and to provide the two entities with
broad powers to respectfully conduct a proper dialogue
with their Bosnian partners.
We are concerned about the report’s reference to an
alleged setback in the implementation of the 5+2 agenda
established by the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board, which contains the conditions for
closing the Office of the High Representative. Despite
the difficulties, we do not share this interpretation of the
situation in the country. Rather, it is to further artificial

S/PV. 8658

arguments to preserve the outdated international
protectorate in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In that regard, we call on our colleagues in the
Security Council and the Steering Committee to
step up their efforts for closing the Office of the
High Representative. A positive example is the
Brčko District of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
has been functioning normally since 2012, when the
Steering Committee supported the decision to freeze
international supervision of the region.
We draw attention to the urgent need for the Office
of the High Representative to respect its mandate.
Mr. Inzko is not authorized to lobby for the European
and Euro-Atlantic integration of Sarajevo, of which
much mention is made in the report. We have spoken
about that more than once.
The new head of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe mission to Bosnia and
Herzegovina hastened to do the same by organizing
a seminar at which she advocated for country’s
early accession to NATO. It seems that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has no other concerns but to join NATO
as soon as possible.
Ironically, the European agenda has been
overshadowed. Surely, it is clear that there is no
consensus in the country on that issue. We consider
it unacceptable to ignore the principle of consensusbased decision-making by the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the area of foreign policy.
I would like to say a few words about the work of
the independent international commissions established
by the Republika Srpska Government to investigate
crimes against all peoples in the Srebrenica region and
against Serbs in Sarajevo in 1991-1995. It is unclear
why the High Representative almost demonizes them.
We assume that their formation is the direct result of
known shortcomings in the work of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, about which the Russian Federation has
repeatedly voiced serious concerns. The conclusions
of the commissions are intended to shed light on many
of the most serious war crimes, which, for inexplicable
reasons, were not dealt with by the ICTY. I would like
to take advantage this opportunity to urge all members
of the Council to read the next report of the Republika
Srpska Government on the situation in Bosnia and

19-3521917/26

S/PV.8658

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Herzegovina, which contains important information on
that and other relevant topics.
For our part, we will continue to do our utmost
to ensure that the Serbs, Croats and Bosnians address
all the problems in Bosnia and Herzegovina together,
in line with the robust and balanced Dayton Peace
Agreement, which provides for the equality of the
three constituent peoples, all of whose interests it is
important to represent. Assurances were specifically
given in that regard by Prime Minister Dmitry
Medvedev of the Russian Federation during his meeting
in Belgrade on 19 October with Mr. Milorad Dodik,
member of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We are open to mutually respectful cooperation with
the representatives of all political forces, and we hope
that our joint work with the Bosnians will help to
promote the post-conflict settlement, socioeconomic
development and preservation of cultural diversity in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the Balkans as a whole.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I thank the High Representative and Ms. Korjenić
for their briefings.
I think we take a different view of the importance
of the Office of the High Representative than the
Russian representative has just set out. We believe that
the Office of the High Representative continues to play
an essential role in Bosnia and Herzegovina; it has the
United Kingdom’s full support, including, as other
countries around the table have mentioned, for the use
of the Bonn powers if and when the situation requires.
I think that the reason for that is obvious. Some people,
including some leaders, in Bosnia and Herzegovina
want to do all they can to stop Bosnia and Herzegovina
from being a flourishing, normal State.
Dayton requires Bosnia to be an independent
State with two entities, the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Republika Srpska, but it does not place
the entities above the State. Therefore, as long as there
are leaders in Bosnia who refuse to acknowledge or
who work against that very important statehood aspect
of Bosnia and Herzegovina — which is enshrined in
the Dayton agreements, codified by the Council and
implemented for very many years through the Peace
Implementation Council and its Steering Board — and
as long as that antagonistic approach to Bosnia as a
State continues, the Office of the High Representative
will continue to be necessary, as will the Bonn powers.
18/26

05/11/2019

I therefore want to put on record the United
Kingdom’s very firm support for the High Representative
and his team. I also want to thank Ms. Korjenić, of
TRIAL International. We in the United Kingdom
support TRIAL’s work to secure justice for survivors
of conflict-related sexual violence, and we pay tribute
to all the work that it does; I will come back to that in
a minute, if I may.
We join other colleagues in welcoming the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2496 (2019), which
authorizes, for a further 12 months, the European Union
to continue Operation Althea. This demonstrates the
continued commitment of the international community
to Bosnia’s security and stability, but, as the French
representative said, it also underscores Bosnia’s
European and Euro-Atlantic direction and trajectory.
I want to say in that regard that it is my understanding
that there are certain laws in Bosnia and Herzegovina
that codify this Euro-Atlantic integration, both in
respect of the European Union and in respect of NATO,
and there are certainly resolutions of the Council that
codify it as well. There are also numerous decisions by
the Peace Implementation Council and by its Steering
Board that codify such integration. That desire on the
part of the Bosnian people has never been overturned
in law, so while leaders may argue against that because
they have changed their minds or it does not suit their
political rhetoric, the law of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the corpus of decisions supported and adopted by
the international community are in favour of supporting
Bosnia for as long as it wants to go down the road of
Euro-Atlantic integration. These are battles that need to
be fought democratically, not undemocratically through
polemic and demagoguery.
I wish to recall that nearly 30 years ago, Bosnia
and Herzegovina was the big issue for the Council; our
predecessors adopted many resolutions day after day to
try to stop the fighting and restore stability and peace to
the country. The war lasted for four dreadful years and
changed forever the way in which the United Nations
does peacekeeping. As we heard today, in 1995, during
the war, the massacre in Srebrenica claimed the lives
of 9,000 Muslim men and boys, the worst massacre in
Europe since 1945.
These are not insignificant events for Europe
or for Bosnia and the Balkans. The reason why the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) was set up was to try people for
19-35219

05/11/2019

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

those crimes. We therefore very much agree with
Ms. Korjenić that people should not be trying to
undermine what the ICTY discovered. The ICTY was a
legitimate Tribunal, established by the Council, and its
judgments still stand.
I am running out of time, so I will simply say
that on reconciliation, I endorse what the German and
Indonesian representatives said; that is a very important
part of what is happening. I also want to stress the
vital importance of the rule of law for all Bosnia and
Herzegovina citizens.
Ms. Korjenić exhorted us not to despair. I do not give
up on Bosnia. I have worked on the issue of the Balkans
since 1991. We are not going to despair, because if we
despair of Bosnia, it fundamentally means that the bad
guys have won, and we are not going to let that happen.
So the United Kingdom and Euro-Atlantic institutions
can be relied on to continue to help Bosnia as long as all
of Bosnia’s citizens want such help.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I am going to invite the High Representative and
then Ms. Korjenić to respond to any points they have
heard from Council members. A number of questions
were asked, and then, if the rule 37 or rule 39 speakers
will forgive me, we will come to them in a few moments.
I give the floor to Mr. Inzko.
Mr. Inzko: Mr. Heusgen asked me some very
difficult questions about the rule of law, the Sejdić and
Finci case and other issues, and on how to improve
the situation. Of course, there is no magic wand or
magic solution, but I think that certain procedures
can be simply copy-pasted from our experience. Who
is on the Supreme Court in our countries? Who sits
on the constitutional courts in our countries? The
best. That should also be a simple solution for Bosnia
and Herzegovina; for example, the High Judicial and
Prosecutorial Council should appoint simply the best
people — not party people, not people who are related
to someone, but based on merit.
I think that we will soon learn about the report of
Mr. Priebe, a highly respected German lawyer who also
worked in the European Union. Mr. Priebe will make
some recommendations; he made some for Macedonia
a few years ago, and now he is working on the issue of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I believe that once we have
a better High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council and

S/PV. 8658

a better and more independent judiciary, we will be
speaking about a different country. It is not only about
money or about the economy; it is about the rule of law
and justice.
One of the methods that has also been used by the
international community is vetting. In Albania, judges
and candidates for the Prosecutor’s Office underwent
a vetting procedure, and quite a few were eliminated
because they were not competent enough. We now have
a situation where the Constitutional Court of Albania
has only one person, because after the vetting procedure
only one person was left who was competent enough and
who was not involved in a conflict of interest or in any
corruption. But we hope that by next April, Albania will
have a normal Constitutional Court once again, through
vetting procedures and Mr. Priebe’s recommendations.
One anniversary that I did not mention: exactly
10 years ago, regretfully, I would say, we sent home
international judges and prosecutors. I can say that
because the Allied Forces were present in my own
country, Austria, for 10 years. We had a large number
of Nazis. We also had no Parliament before the Second
World War, as it had been eliminated. All of that then
changed. We introduced democracy under the control
of the Allied Forces; the Nazis did not return and the
Marshall Plan was a success. The Allied Forces then left
after 10 years. They stayed longer in other countries.
That is a good model that could work.
That also touches on other issues, which we
discussed, such as war criminals, gratitude marches
when Mr. Kordić returned. I am Catholic, but I am
ashamed that a gratitude march was held for him. As we
know, he is a convicted war criminal. We have heard that
a student dormitory has been named after Karadžić. We
have heard about concerts being held in support of war
criminals in Bosnia and Herzegovina. All of that must
stop. There is no place for convicted war criminals in
public life. There are quite a few countries around the
table that solved that issue after 1945.
With regard to the Sejdić-Finci issue, Mr. Stephan
Fuller is the former European Union Commissioner
who worked for three years in an attempt to resolve it.
Regrettably, he did not succeed, but, needless to say,
every citizen who has a passport can be elected for any
function. The President of Romania, Klaus Werner
Iohannis, is of German heritage. There is a Mayor in
London with foreign roots, but he is a citizen. In Bosnia
and Herzegovina it is not enough to be a citizen. There

19-3521919/26

S/PV.8658

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

05/11/2019

is no égalité — one of the most sacred principles of the
civilized world.

law. Nonetheless, it exists. It is codified and must
be implemented.

As I said earlier, Mr. Alkalaj, a respected
Ambassador of Bosnia and Herzegovina, cannot even
be a candidate, in theory, for the Presidency of the State.
That is outrageous. It is equally outrageous that for 10
years the decision of the European Court of Human
Rights has still not been implemented. I also believe
that we, as the international community, must be
ashamed that we are turning a blind eye to the situation.
We should ensure that human rights are implemented in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and that double standards are
not allowed. If in our own countries any citizen can be
a candidate for any job, it must be the same in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. That is the essence of Sejdić-Finci.
Of course, to a certain extent, it would also change the
Dayton Peace Agreement. But we have a judgment from
the European Court of Human Rights, and we must
respect it. In that connection, I would like to mention
two minor issues. First, it is about implementation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina; we have so many verdicts
now. Secondly, there is a sense of urgency.

As far as the Office of the High Representative is
concerned, I agree with the Russian Ambassador that
it should be shut down. However, after a successful
mission, we should not repeat the mistake we made
in other countries when the international presence
left too early. We should leave behind a monitoring or
supervision mechanism. We should not leave too early
or abruptly, as the foreign judges and prosecutors did 10
years ago. Withdrawal should be done gradually.

With regard to women and development and women
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, I am fully in favour of not
only 40 per cent, which is provided for in law in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, but of 50 per cent. However, that
quota must be implemented. It is not enough if there
is a mention of 50 per cent only on paper. The quota is
now 40 per cent, but even that is not implemented. If
a year after a Government is formed I say that women
should be part of the Government, people would say
that Valentin Inzko is a disturbing factor and a nuisance
in asking for women to be in the Government. But there
are no women — only men — in the Government, and
that is a great injustice.
I will not comment on Euro-Atlantic integration. I
would just like to say that it is the self-declared foreign
policy goal of Bosnia and Herzegovina. As you, Madam
President, have said, article 84 of the Law on Defence
refers to the future of NATO. I am not the one speaking
about the future of NATO; it is in the Law on Defence.
Of course, one could change the Law on Defence and
declare neutrality at the State level, but that law does
not yet exist. It exists in my own country; we have
declared neutrality. But in Bosnia and Herzegovina it
is the Law on Defence and its article 84 that address
NATO membership. It is true that, politically, there
are those who disagree and those who agree with the
20/26

The President: I thank the High Representative for
his response.
I now give the floor to Ms. Korjenić to respond to
questions and comments.
Ms. Korjenić: There were no questions directed
at me, but I would like to say that I agree with what
the High Representative just said. I would like to
add, very briefly, that the rule of law is the only way
towards justice and a peaceful future. It is critical that
the country’s elected political leaders start defining
an environment of dignity and mutual respect for
everyone, especially for all of the survivors and victims
of genocide and war crimes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to congratulate you, Madam President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of November and wish you and your delegation
great success. We also welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
took note of his report on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (S/2019/843, enclosure) and his briefing.
We welcome the unanimous adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 2496 (2019), which extends the
mandate of the European Union-led Operation Althea,
which has been present in Bosnia and Herzegovina for
many years. It is important to emphasize that Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as a host country, has enjoyed
respectable and fruitful cooperation with Operation
Althea, in particular in the areas of capacity-building
and the training of its armed forces.
Bosnia and Herzegovina seeks to play an
indisputably constructive role in the United Nations
and other multilateral institutions, and we aspire to
19-35219

05/11/2019

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

membership of the European Union (EU) and bilateral
partnerships with their individual member States.
Having said that, I would like to inform the Council that
the Presidency agreed on a number of issues, including
the path of Bosnia and Herzegovina to EU accession
and the disposition of State property in Croatia and
other issues. Numerous challenges lie ahead on our
path towards integration in European and Euro-Atlantic
structures. However, our commitment and dedication
to facing and overcoming those challenges remain.
EU membership remains one of main strategic goals
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and is a subject of focus by all
political actors in the country. The authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina are fully committed to overcoming
challenges and implementing reforms required for
full-fledged integration into the European Union. We
have increased efforts in a number of areas relevant to
achieving that goal, including the implementation of the
reform agenda and socioeconomic reforms as a matter
of priority, as well as our continuing determination to
strengthen the rule of law and good governance.
As we heard today, the rule of law is extremely
important for Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as
for any other country, established by the principle of
equality before the law for every citizen in the country,
without exception. With regard to processing war crimes
in domestic courts, we would like to reiterate that the
effective processing of all war crimes, regardless
of the national or religious origin of the perpetrators
and victims, is essential for reconciliation and longterm stability.
The fostering of friendly and constructive
cooperation among the countries of the region on issues
of mutual interest remains a top priority of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s foreign policy. Bosnia and Herzegovina
plays an active role in regional initiatives through the
South-East European Cooperation Process, the Western
Balkan Fund, the Central European Initiative, et cetera.
The summit of the Heads of State and Government of
the participating countries of the South-East European
Cooperation Process was held in Sarajevo on 8 and
9 July. The Cooperation Process is one of the leading
political formats for dialogue in the region. As a good
example of regional cooperation among three partner
countries, namely, Serbia, Turkey and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, I would also like to mention the SarajevoBelgrade highway construction project.

S/PV. 8658

During the reporting period, Bosnia and
Herzegovina continued to fulfil its international
obligations with regard to countering terrorism and
violent extremism. The framework action plan to
implement the strategy of Bosnia and Herzegovina for
preventing and combating terrorism for the period 2015
to 2020 is being implemented.
With regard to the economic situation, it is always
important to emphasize that Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
economy, like those of other countries in the region,
has been increasingly dependent on global economic
performance. We must also emphasize that our focus
and top priority in economic reform programmes
remains the creation of a legal framework to improve
the business environment and job creation for young
people. Currently, the main concern is the significant
outflow of young, skillful and educated people, which
could have a very negative impact on future economic
development. Massive investments in infrastructure,
health care and education are needed to reverse
that trend.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has also started a very
important planning, monitoring and evaluation process
in the field of social and economic development that
is fully in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. In that regard, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
voluntary national review was presented at the
High-level Political Forum in July. Allow me also to
express our gratitude to the United Nations country
team in Bosnia and Herzegovina for its outstanding
contributions and tireless efforts in assisting our
institutional development agenda.
I would like to draw the attention of the Council
to the issue of illegal migrants. During the reporting
period, Bosnia and Herzegovina experienced a
significant increase in refugees and migrants on its
territory, most of whom crossed the border illegally. In
response, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities have
undertaken a set of comprehensive measures, including
in the humanitarian and security areas.
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to contribute
actively to international peace and security by
deploying its military and police personnel to United
Nations peacekeeping missions. Currently, we have
approximately 45 personnel serving in United Nations
peacekeeping missions worldwide.
In his report, High Representative Inzko notes that,
in the face of significant obstacles to accomplishing his

19-3521921/26

S/PV.8658

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

mission, he has declined to fully invoke the executive
powers of his Office. We realize that such an approach
can broaden confidence in his judgment for the benefit
of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a democratic nation and
for peace, stability and security.
I would like to address a few words to Ms. Selma
Korjenić, following her deep and thorough analysis of
the situation and positive perspective on the future of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. To her, I would like to say that
yes, we can do it — together and with the help of our
friends from around the world.
In conclusion, we would like to express the
readiness of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities to
continue their work in securing a better and prosperous
future for its citizens, as well as our gratitude to our
international partners for supporting Bosnia and
Herzegovina on that path.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Gonzato: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (European Union) and
its 28 member States. The candidate countries Turkey,
Montenegro and Albania, as well as Ukraine, align
themselves with this statement.
I join other speakers in welcoming High
Representative Valentin Inzko back to the Security
Council and in assuring him of the European Union’s
continued support. I also welcome the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina and thank
him for his statement.
A year has now passed since the holding of the
country’s general elections, and we note with grave
concern that governments are still not formed on the
state and Federation levels, and that the state Parliament
is not fully functioning. This state of affairs seriously
hinders the implementation of much-needed reforms,
which would allow Bosnia and Herzegovina to move
forward on its EU path. It further raises questions
regarding the willingness of political leaders to fulfil
the aspiration of their fellow citizens to join the
European Union.
In that context, the European Union once again
urges all political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina
to uphold their responsibilities and proceed with
government formation without further delay. We
strongly encourage them to start showing a spirit of
compromise and a determination to reach an agreement
22/26

05/11/2019

on the remaining areas of discord. The agreement
reached last August contained positive elements in
that regard.
Moreover, we reiterate our call on all political leaders
to refrain from nationalist and provocative rhetoric. We
also recall that revisionism and glorification of war
criminals contradicts EU values and is incompatible
with the prospect of integration into the European
Union. The European project is built on reconciliation;
Bosnia and Herzegovina institutions and leaders need
to uphold their commitment to lasting reconciliation.
(spoke in French)
We recall once again that Bosnia and Herzegovina
was clear in its desire to become a member of the
European Union. The publication of the European
Commission opinion in May, with its key priorities
covering
the
Copenhagen
political
criteria,
demonstrates our profound commitment to Bosnia and
Herzegovina as long as it resolutely pursues the reform
agenda. The European Union expects the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities, once in place, to actively and
seriously proceed with those reforms.
(spoke in English)
The European Union insists on the need for the
authorities to work towards strengthening the rule of
law, in particular the independence and impartiality
of the judiciary, fighting corruption and organized
crime, countering radicalization, guaranteeing the
independence of the media and the safety of journalists,
promoting youth employment and education, and
ensuring the full and effective implementation of
socioeconomic reforms.
In order to prevent a humanitarian crisis during
the winter ahead, Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to
take urgent measures to ensure the management of
migration and access to the asylum system, including
closing the unsuitable site of Vucjak and increasing
reception capacities across the territory on the basis of
technical feasibility and security criteria. Coordination
among all competent authorities is key in order to make
good use of all the resources made available by the
European Union.
The European Union also reiterates that
election-related issues, including provisions for holding
local elections in Mostar and for the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Presidency, should be addressed as soon
as possible, while taking into account the situation in
19-35219

05/11/2019

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV. 8658

the country and in line with European standards and
decisions of the Constitutional Court in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The European Union underlines that no
legislative or political steps should be taken that would
make the implementation of the European Court of
Human Rights Sejdić-Finci ruling and related rulings
more challenging. Bosnia and Herzegovina also needs
to implement the recommendations of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights in order to
improve the democratic quality of its electoral processes.

as well as entity level. This increases the risk of legal
insecurity and also contributes to additional political
and institutional instability, thus seriously imperilling
much-needed reforms. Regrettably, that means that
a year has been lost for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
EU integration path, a process in which the country
was already lagging behind its neighbours in the
Western Balkans. Bosnia and Herzegovina should, as
a priority and without further delay, proceed with the
formation of a Council of Ministers and other State and
Federation governing bodies.

The European Union reiterates its unequivocal
commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s EU
perspective as a single, united and sovereign country.
With regard to the political and security situation on the
ground and the importance of maintaining a safe and
secure environment, the European Union also reiterates
its firm support for Operation Althea and the mandate
entrusted to it by the Security Council.

A spirit of consensus, dialogue and compromise
should finally prevail over the infighting with a zerosum based logic. This complex process requires political
vision oriented towards the future of the country for the
benefit of its peoples and citizens. The current situation,
as well as the rhetoric by some of the politicians, is
counterproductive. It is holding the country back,
and political leaders must finally acknowledge their
responsibility. They owe it to their country, its peoples
and citizens. They need our wholehearted support in
that endeavour.

In conclusion, five months after the Commission
adopted its opinion, the focus is now on Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the credibility of its commitment to
the EU path. To make that commitment credible, we
need counterparts with whom to speak and engage
concretely on the reforms needed to advance towards
the EU. Beyond words, we now need tangible proof that
Bosnia and Herzegovina is willing to do what it takes
to become, one day, a member of the European Union.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Dogan (Croatia): At the outset, allow me to
welcome High Representative Valentin Inzko and
thank him for his comprehensive briefing today, as well
as for his report (S/2019/843, enclosure). I also thank
Ms. Selma Korjenić for her valuable contribution to
today’s meeting.
Croatia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union (EU). I
would like to take this opportunity to make some
remarks in my national capacity.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is for Croatia not only a
neighbouring State with which we share our longest
border but also a friendly State where Croats of Bosnia
and Herzegovina are one of the three constituent peoples.
The political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
since the October 2018 elections has been dominated
by unsuccessful government formation on a state level

Croatia remains the staunchest supporter of the
European path of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We truly
believe that progress in European and Euro-Atlantic
integration is the only fruitful and possible path for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. That path guarantees security,
stability and economic prosperity for all. We see no
viable alternative for Bosnia and Herzegovina or other
countries in the region.
Croatia strongly supports Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
ambition to accelerate progress on its European path.
We must be aware that for Bosnia and Herzegovina
progress in European integration is also a way of
achieving full State functionality. Of course, it will be
necessary to carry out a series of reforms along that
path in order to build a truly functional State, with
structures of Government and competencies enabling
a more efficient decision-making process and its
implementation, especially in the context of the ability
to adopt and implement the acquis communautaire.
In that context, the Republic of Croatia has been
providing technical and expert assistance to Bosnia
and Herzegovina on an ongoing basis. Croatia has also
supported the submission of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
application for membership to the European Union.
In that regard, Croatia is looking forward to the

19-3521923/26

S/PV.8658

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

next step — the granting of candidate status for
EU membership.
Our commitment to the European path of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the whole Western Balkans region
is visible through the priorities of the forthcoming
Croatian presidency of the Council of the European
Union during the first half of 2020. We will strive
to keep the enlargement of the European Union as a
key topic on the European agenda. In that regard, The
EU-Western Balkans summit in May 2020, in Zagreb,
will take place exactly 20 years after the first Zagreb
summit, which opened the European perspective to the
Western Balkans region.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a historically
multinational country with a long-standing constitutional
concept of the equality of its three peoples, which
has been a part of its constitutions since 1963. The
Republic of Croatia was the first country to recognize
the independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and has
always been the strongest and most sincere advocate
of its sovereignty as a State of three equal constituent
peoples and all its citizens. The full equality of three
constituent peoples and all Bosnia and Herzegovina
citizens should undoubtedly remain the basis of the
institutional set-up of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as it is
an issue of the highest importance for the future of the
country. Croatia, as a neighbouring State and guarantor
of the implementation of the Dayton Agreement, will
certainly continue to insist on proceeding on that basis.
The principle of legitimate political representation
is an important element that contributes to Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s internal political stability. We therefore
consider it crucial for Bosnia and Herzegovina to
embark, without delay, upon a comprehensive reform
of the election law in order to ensure legitimate
representation in institutions at all levels. This is
becoming an even more pressing issue with local
elections taking place next year.
In that context, it is necessary to find relevant
legislative solutions that adequately address this
issue. Those solutions should aim at preventing the
imposition of the election of political representatives
of one constituent people by others at all levels of
Government. That should be done in accordance with
the judgments of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in the Ljubić case and in the case of
the city of Mostar. It is of the utmost importance that all
political parties and actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina
24/26

05/11/2019

reach agreement on the issue based on the principles of
inclusiveness and in a spirit of dialogue and consensus
in the State Parliament.
In addition to those structural problems, Bosnia
and Herzegovina faces a new challenge. The migration
wave on the Western Balkans route has increased
significantly in 2019 and the EU’s longest external
land border is under significant pressure from
illegal migration.
The President: Could I ask the Croatian
representative to bring his remarks to a close in order
to keep within the time limit? I would ask him to take
one more minute to finish his statement.
Mr. Dogan (Croatia): Croatia remains determined
to continue its constructive approach of partnership
towards Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the occasional
unconstructive slandering and divisive rhetoric of
some individuals will not affect that. Such attacks, as
the EU statement stresses, only raise doubts regarding
the real commitment of those politicians to the EU
integration process of Bosnia and Herzegovina and its
European future.
Let me conclude by stressing that Croatia remains
a staunch supporter of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
building a better future for its citizens.
I am sorry for a lengthy statement.
The President: The full statement of the Croatian
delegation has been circulated. I am sorry that I had to cut
off the Croatian representative due to time constraints.
I now give the floor to the representative of Serbia.
Ms. Ivanovic (Serbia): I thank the members of
the Security Council, the High Representative and the
other speakers for their statements today.
Serbia’s position in respect of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina
is widely known, confirmed time and again and not
in dispute. So is its position in respect of the Dayton
Peace Agreement — after all, Serbia is a guarantor
of that Agreement. My country supports Bosnia and
Herzegovina as one State with two entities — the
Republic of Srpska and the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina — just as it supports the decisions taken
by that country in accordance with the competencies
and agreements of its three constituent peoples, namely,
the Serbs, the Croats and the Bosniaks.
19-35219

05/11/2019

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

On many occasions, Serbia expressed its support
for the speedy formation of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
institutions at all levels, in accordance with the results
of the parliamentary elections held in October 2018,
which would make a significant contribution to the
stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region.
As more than a year has elapsed since the elections,
there is no justification for postponing the formation
of its institutions any longer, especially its Council
of Ministers, which should be constituted without
preconditions, on the basis of the Constitution of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the democratic will of its citizens.
Serbia shares the concerns of the High
Representative over the destabilizing rhetoric in
statements of many political leaders in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and calls on all the actors, inside and
outside the country, to demonstrate the necessary level
of responsibility and to refrain from mutual accusations.
We are worried in particular by the taking of, or the
threat to take, one-sided actions contrary to the letter
and spirit of the Dayton Agreement. I note that the
Agreement is the result of a compromise and reflects a
delicate balance, achieved painstakingly, from among
opposing concepts of the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Therefore, attempts to unbalance the
model set up 25 years ago are hardly conducive to this
country’s full and lasting stabilization.
Serbia calls on all participants in the political
processes in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as on
the representatives of the international community, to
demonstrate greater responsibility and refrain from the
use of rhetoric aimed at disqualifying other political
actors, especially those elected democratically. Dialogue
within the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina is the
only way to raise the level of confidence and achieve
a compromise solution to the issues relevant for the
future development of Bosnia and Herzegovina and, by
extension, to the stability of the region. As in the past,
my country will do all it can to make a constructive
contribution in that regard.
Bilaterally, Serbia continues to intensify political
dialogue with Bosnia and Herzegovina. A number of
visits have been made recently in the context of my
country’s endeavours to promote cooperation with its
neighbours, including Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
two countries have thus demonstrated their commitment
to building bilateral relations and upgrading regional
ones while proceeding from European and universal

S/PV. 8658

values and based on understanding, compromise
and cooperation.
For many years now, Bosnia and Herzegovina has
been one of Serbia’s most important foreign trading
partners. From January to September of this year, the
trade exchange amounted to over €1.5 billion, which is
indicative of the rising trend in strengthened economic
cooperation between the two countries. With over
€1. billion, Serbia is the largest foreign investor in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. That cooperation takes place
in accordance with the Central European Free Trade
Agreement (CEFTA). In that context, I would like to
point out that the two countries have been affected by
the 100 per cent increase of the destabilizing tariffs
on their goods by the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment in Pristina. It is a senseless act contrary
to all regional processes and commitments, including
CEFTA. The international community is expected to
exercise influence on the Provisional Institutions of
civil Self-Government in Pristina to remove the tariffs
and normalize trade in the region.
Regional cooperation and European integration
based on stability, democratization, economic
development and social prosperity are Serbia’s
pre-eminent foreign policy priorities. Bosnia and
Herzegovina is among my country’s key bilateral
partners and, in that context, Serbia is firmly
committed to the vision of good neighbourliness. As
an EU candidate-country, Serbia renders selfless
support to other candidates and potential candidate
countries on their reform road towards the European
Union. We welcome each and every one of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s successes along that road, in line
with the European Commission’s establishment of 14
priorities that Bosnia and Herzegovina must meet in
order to open accession negotiations.
In that connection, Serbia is ready to share its
experience accumulated from its own accession
negotiations in hopes that our neighbour, too, will
commence those negotiations soon. We believe that,
just like with other aspiring countries in the region,
the negotiation process will not be burdened by the
ongoing challenges within the European Union, and
that the EU will instead demonstrate its firm resolve
to continuing the process by keeping the question of
the Western Balkans’ accession high on its agenda.
Serbia has a lasting commitment to peace, stability,
security and cooperation at both the regional and
international levels. To that end, it continues to

19-3521925/26

S/PV.8658

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

contribute to strengthening stability, democratization,
economic development and social prosperity, based on
the principles of reconciliation, good neighbourliness,
dialogue and compromise. We trust and believe that
those can be achieved by way of mutual respect and the
exclusion of counter-productive partisan politicking.
The President: The representative of the Germany
has asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I do not want to prolong
the meeting — but briefly. During my intervention, I
took up what the High Representative had said earlier
with regard to the atmosphere in the region concerning
the denial of genocide and the glorification of war
criminals. I also asked how much the neighbours could
really contribute to the fight against genocide denial
and the glorification of war criminals. I did not hear
any anything about that in their responses. My question
to the representatives of Serbia and Croatia concerns
what they think can be done from their perspective. Can
they make a contribution to the points that I mentioned?
I would also like to say, concerning the representative

26/26

05/11/2019

of Serbia, that the Serbian President, Mr. Vučić, made
the gesture of going to Srebrenica. With the influence
that he has, would he be ready to publicly ask for the
Karadžić dormitory in Pale to be renamed, for instance?
The President: The representative of Serbia has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give her the floor.
Ms. Ivanovic (Serbia): I thank the Permanent
Representative of Germany, Mr. Heusgen, for his
question. Related to the statement we heard today
by Ms. Korjenić, one of our briefers, I would like to
express my support of what was said by the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
message was that all the war crimes committed in
Bosnia and Herzegovina should be prosecuted and all
victims and survivors respected, regardless of their
ethnicity or religious affiliation. We believe that that
is the right path, that of approaching perpetrators and
victims in an impartial and unbiased way. That is the
right path to reconciliation.
The meeting rose at 12.15 pm.

19-35219
