S/2015/331

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 May 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 15 of Security Council
resolution 2158 (2014), in which the Council requested me to keep it regularly
informed of the implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) through written reports delivered every 120 days.
The report covers the period from 1 January to 30 April 2015.

II. Political and security overview
A.

Political developments
2.
Following resolution of the political crisis that paralysed the Federal
Government of Somalia for four months, Somalia’s political process regained
momentum from February onwards. The formation of a new Cabinet dominated the
Government’s agenda for the month of January. After protracted delays, Parliament
on 9 February approved the Cabinet of Prime Minister Omar Abdirashid Ali
Sharmarke, consisting of 1 Deputy Prime Minister, 25 Ministers (three female),
26 Deputy Ministers (two female) and 14 State Ministers (none female).
3.
In April, the Ministry of the Interior and Federal Affairs initiated the selection
process for members of the National Independent Electoral Commission and the
Boundaries and Federation Commission. Electoral preparations remain behind
schedule, however.
4.
On 20 January, the Interim Jubba Administration, with support from the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the Federal Government,
launched a process to establish a regional assembly. The assembly, to be inaugur ated
in May 2015, comprises 65 assembly representatives chosen from their districts
through nominations from clan elders, and 10 more selected by the leadership of the
Interim Jubba Administration. Some subclans however criticized the process for
lack of transparency and inclusivity.
5.
In the Interim South-West Administration, President Sharif Hassan Sheikh
Adan named a 63-member Cabinet on 3 March. Appointees included two former
leaders of the rival “six-region” South-West State supporters, four women, and
representatives of minority communities. However, formation of the regional

15-07112 (E)

140515

*1507112*

S/2015/331

assembly was delayed by differences over its size and whether representation would
be based on region or clan. Meanwhile on 27 January, in Afgooye, the Interim
South-West Administration brokered a ceasefire between the Bimal and HabarGhidir subclans as part of a wider agreement to end protracted armed conflict in the
Merca area.
6.
In the central regions, a two-month reconciliation conference, initiated by clan
representatives in Dhuusamarreeb, Galguduud Region, was concluded by the
Federal President, Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, in March. The President launched a
state formation conference in Adaado on 16 April. One faction of Ahl al-Sunna
wal-Jama‘a announced that it would boycott the process until the Federal
Government and Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a resolved their differences.
7.
In Puntland, President Abdiweli Mohamed Ali “Gaas” signed a law establishing
the region’s Election Commission on 6 January, as part of an effort to restart the
democratization process suspended in July 2013. On 12 April, following two days of
talks, the Federal Prime Minister and the President of Puntland issued a statement
including an agreement that Puntland would contribute 3,000 troops to the Somali
national army. They also recommitted the Federal Government and the “Puntland
Administration” to the implementation of earlier agreements, and acknowledged the
need for the Federal Government to consult the states on federal legislation and
commissions.
8.
On 27 February, scheduled talks between the Federal Government and
“Somaliland” in Turkey failed to start, owing to the rejection by “Somaliland” of
members of the Government delegation born in “Somaliland”. Opposition parties
formed an alliance on 4 March to oppose the bid by President Ahmed Mohamed
Mohamoud “Silanyo” to extend his term of office beyond June 2015. Tension with
the government heightened after the National Electoral Commission announced on
9 March the indefinite postponement of presidential and parliamentary elections.
The ruling Kulmiye party expressed its readiness to consult the opposition on the
way forward, and urged Parliament to approve important legislation on the political
participation of women and minorities. The Commission subsequently further
announced that the elections should be possible in June 2016.

B.

Security developments
9.
The security situation remained volatile with sporadic attacks and continued
use of suicide bombers and improvised explosive devices by Al -Shabaab in
Mogadishu and the regions. On 20 April 2015, a minivan belonging to the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) carrying United Nations national and
international personnel was attacked by a suicide bomber in front of a United
Nations compound in Garoowe, Puntland. Four UNICEF staff members, two
security guards, and the suicide bomber died as a result of the explosion, while five
other UNICEF staff members, four security guards, and one bystander sustained
various degrees of injuries. An Al-Shabaab military spokesperson, Sheikh Abu
Muscab, and the official spokesperson, Sheikh Ali Dhere, claimed responsibility for
the latest attack against their “enemy the United Nations” in media outlets.
10. The massacre of 147 students at Garissa University College, Kenya , on 2 April
is a tragic reminder that the threat posed by Al-Shabaab is not confined to Somalia,

2/20

15-07112

S/2015/331

but regional. At the same time, the crisis in Yemen has the potential to further
destabilize the region and open a corridor for jihadist movements through Som alia.
11. In Mogadishu, Al-Shabaab attacks continued. Casualties included government
officials, civilians and security personnel. On 20 February, 28 people, including the
Deputy Mayor of Mogadishu and two Members of Parliament, were killed in an
attack on the Central Hotel. On 27 March, Al-Shabaab fighters stormed the Maka
al-Mukarama Hotel after a suicide car bomb explosion; the attackers held hostages
during a 17-hour siege before the Somali national security forces regained control of
the location. At least 14 people were killed, including Yusuf Mohamed Ismail, the
Somali Permanent Representative to the United Nations Office at Geneva. On
14 April, Al-Shabaab carried out another complex attack at the Ministry of Culture
and Higher Education, which resulted in eight fatalities and at least 12 people
injured. Targeted assassinations of government officials and security personnel also
continued.
12. In southern and central Somalia, Al-Shabaab continued to target pro-government
forces and regional administrations, and also to hinder civilian movements along
main supply routes. In Baidoa, three Muslim clerics critical of Al -Shabaab were
assassinated in January and February. On 12 March, the residence of the President
of the Interim South-West Administration in Baidoa was attacked, resulting in the
death of three attackers and one soldier of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM).
13. Al-Shabaab’s Chief of External Operations, Yusuf Dheeq, and his immediate
successor, Adan Garaar, were reportedly killed in separate drone strikes in the Bay
and Gedo regions on 1 February and 12 March. On 22 March, AMISOM and Interim
Jubba Administration forces recaptured Kudhaa Island in Juba Hoose Region. In
Puntland, security forces continued an intense offensive against Al-Shabaab in the
Galgalo mountains area, attracting reprisal attacks. On 10 January and 3 February,
two police stations in Boosaaso were attacked by Al-Shabaab fighters, resulting in
injuries to three police officers.
14. In February, attacks by Dulbahante militia supporting the separatist “Khatumo”
movement against “Somaliland” forces in the Sool and Sanaag regions resulted in
the death of one “Somaliland” and two Khatumo combatants; the security situation
stabilized in March, however.
15. In the central regions, the establishment of federal administrations led to
clashes between pro-Federal Government forces and Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a, and
also between clan militias. In Galguduud, clashes between Ahl al -Sunna wal-Jama‘a
and pro-Federal Government militias on 10 and 12 February in Guriel town resulted
in at least 25 fatalities and 56 injuries; a ceasefire was signed on 5 March.
Separately, inter-clan clashes were reported in Hiraan Region between the Xawadle
and Dhir/Fiqi-Omar clans on 20 and 21 January, and the Jajeele and Makane
subclans on 6 and 7 February. These incidents and other clan violence, particularly
in Hiraan, Shabelle Hoose and Juba Hoose regions, resulted in 60 civilian deaths
and 63 injuries.

15-07112

3/20

S/2015/331

III. Support to peacebuilding and State-building efforts
A.

Provision of United Nations good offices
16. My Special Representative, Nicholas Kay, continued to provide good offices,
political support, and strategic and policy advice to the Federal Government and to
Somali regional leaders. He regularly engaged with federal institutions in
Mogadishu, visited Garoowe, Kismaayo and Baidoa for consultations with regional
leaders, and provided good offices to relevant parties in the contentious central
regions state formation process. He also focused on advocating a common approach
to the implementation of the Federal Government’s “Vision 2016”. In a public
statement on 18 March, he noted the commitment of all the leaders to deliver on
“Vision 2016” and not to extend the current mandate of the Federal Government
beyond September 2016, as well as to fast-track important milestones, including the
appointment of members of the National Independent Electoral Commission and the
constitutional review process.

B.

Coordination of international support and alignment of
international efforts
17. The “New Deal” Compact remains the primary mechanism for coordinating
international efforts in Somalia. The Federal Government reasserted its commitment
to ensuring that 2015 would be “the year of delivery”. Following the formation of
the new Federal Government Cabinet, a Cabinet committee was established under
the Prime Minister to advance implementation of the Compact. On the basis of the
conclusions of the committee, the Federal Government undertook visits to Baidoa,
Kismaayo and Garoowe to discuss the role of the New Deal in addressing the needs
of the interim regional administrations.
18. On 23 March, the Steering Committee of the Somalia Development and
Reconstruction Facility approved six United Nations joint programmes submitted to
the United Nations Multi-Partner Trust Fund and five programmes submitted to the
World Bank Partner Trust Fund on peacebuilding and State -building goals, a crucial
step towards accelerating delivery of tangible results through the C ompact. The
participation of emerging regions in this endeavour is a noteworthy and constructive
development.
19. My Special Representative continued to coordinate international support to
Somalia’s political progress. UNSOM coordinated several joint state ments by
international partners and facilitated international participation at key events, such
as the launch of the Central Regions state formation process in Cadaado. He held
bilateral discussions with the Governments of the United States of America and
Qatar during visits to Washington, D.C. (4-6 February) and Doha (16-17 February).

C.

Stabilization
20. In a positive development, the Ministry of the Interior and Federal Affairs
established a new “stabilization unit” to oversee support to the 13 districts most
recently liberated from Al-Shabaab. Monthly coordination meetings with stabilization
partners focused on how to hold relevant Somali and international partner entities

4/20

15-07112

S/2015/331

more accountable for their contributions, and on improving research and anal ysis.
To the latter end, participants collectively developed political, gov ernance, rule of
law, and socioeconomic profiles for each district. UNSOM continued to encourage
the creation of a Cabinet committee on stabilization, as well as outreach to interim
regional administrations.
21. As at the end of April 2015, all of the 13 districts had some level of caretaker
administration. In four districts, there were reports of police deployment, although
this was confirmed by the Federal Government in only two, Xuddur and Baraawe. In
several districts, there were reports of civilian volunteers and militia acting as police
and, in two other districts, of the presence of judges, prosecutors, lawyers or judicial
chairs. Meanwhile, UNSOM received reports of human rights violations in 6 of the
13 districts (Baraawe, Buloburde, Jalalaqsi, Tayeeglow, Waajid and Xuddur)
including 11 cases of extrajudicial killings.
22. Some form of health service was reported in 7 of the 13 districts, and
functioning primary schools in 5. In all districts where there has been food
distribution, there were reports of the population returning to urban areas and food
prices decreasing. In Buloburde, however, starvation attributed to economic
blockage by Al-Shabaab reportedly caused six deaths. Access to water and
sanitation remained a concern in all districts. Some economic activity was reported
in most districts, owing to community mobilization and sometimes capital from the
diaspora. Quick-impact projects were reported in five districts targeted for
stabilization.

D.

Inclusive politics
Development of a federal system
23. The Federal Government initiated dialogue with leaders of existing and
emerging regional administrations. From 4 to 6 February 2015, the first meeting of
senior federal and regional leaders on federal issues was held in Mogadishu. In
attendance were the Federal President, the Federal Prime Minister, the Speaker of
the Federal Parliament, Mohamed Sheikh Osman Jawaari, the President of Puntland,
the President of the Interim South-West Administration, and the Leader of the
Interim Jubba Administration, Sheikh Ahmed Mohammed Islam “Madobe”.
Discussions focused on building the federal system, centre -state relations, the New
Deal Compact, the “Vision 2016” programme, state participation in key national
bodies, and the national security forces. A second meeting was held in Garoowe
from 29 April to 1 May. Meanwhile, UNSOM, in partnership with the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the Ministry of the Interior,
launched the first phase of a nation-wide civic education communications campaign
to inform Somali citizens about federalism and the State -building process. The
campaign will continue for the rest of 2015 and also focus on reconciliation, the
constitutional process and democratization.
Constitutional review process
24. The constitutional review process saw new momentum following the
inauguration of the new government in February 2015. The new Ministry of
Constitutional Affairs, the Parliamentary Oversight Committee, and the Independent
Constitutional Review and Implementation Commission held several meetings in

15-07112

5/20

S/2015/331

February to finalize their respective roles and responsibilities. The three institutions
signed a memorandum of understanding on 9 March. On 19 Marc h the Oversight
Committee formally initiated the constitutional review process, by instructing the
Constitutional Review and Implementation Commission to review chapters 1 and 4
of the Provisional Federal Constitution. The Oversight Committee also initiate d
work on its own report on contentious issues in the Provisional Federal Constitution
that will need to be considered in more detail.
25. The United Nations integrated constitutional team provided support for the
above-mentioned processes, including facilitating planning activities, and began to
provide capacity-building support for the establishment of the Independent
Constitutional Review and Implementation Commission. UNSOM, the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women)
and UNDP formed a working group to ensure that Somali women’s voices are heard
during the review process.
Preparations for elections
26. On 11 February, Parliament adopted the bill on the National Independent
Electoral Commission, which it drafted with expert advice from the UNSOM
integrated electoral support group. The law establishes an independent electoral
management body comprising nine commissioners, of whom at least two should be
women, and a secretariat. The bill stipulates that the Commi ssion will have its own
budget to be drawn from the national budget and the powers to appoint its staff, set
up local offices in the country as appropriate, and determine the electoral timeline.
27. Following the issuance of a vacancy announcement for positions on the
National Independent Electoral Commission, on 6 April, the Ministry of the Interior
and Federal Affairs set up a seven-member selection committee that will select and
submit 27 candidates to the Council of Ministers, from which the latter wil l draw a
short list of nine names to be tabled in Parliament for vetting and confirmation.
UNSOM, together with UNDP Somalia, is setting up interim office space for the
Commission in order to ensure that it becomes operational upon its appointment.
28. UNSOM is also in discussions with the Federal Parliament and the Ministry of
the Interior and Federal Affairs on providing technical support in relation to the
drafting of the electoral law and the consultations process. A draft Political Parties
Law is due to be tabled in Parliament in May.

E.

Rule of law and security institutions
Security sector assistance and reform
29. On 26 March, the Defence Working Group under the New Deal structure held
its first meeting since November 2014. Discussions focused on the Guulwade
(Victory) Plan of the Federal Government, developed with technical assistance from
UNSOM. The plan outlines the Somali national army’s arms and equipment needs
for improved joint operations, consistent with the AMISOM concept of operati ons,
and provides a framework for the first phase of longer-term development of the
national army. The plan was presented by the Ministry of Defence and endorsed at
the meeting of the Working Group on Peacebuilding and State -building Goal 2
(security) in Mogadishu on 23 April.

6/20

15-07112

S/2015/331

30. At the same meeting, the strategic plan of the Commission on Regional Militia
Integration, established on 26 March, was presented, outlining the proposed
integration of regional forces into federal security structures. UNSOM is pr oviding
strategic advice and support to the work of the Commission to facilitate the
development of institutional links between the Federal Government and the interim
regional administrations.
31. Under the Guulwade Plan, a total of 10,900 national army t roops, comprising
units from the regions, will receive support from international partners for
participation in joint operations with AMISOM and capacity-building as part of
development of the army. The figure does not include the 3,000 troops from
Puntland due to be integrated into the national army, which are fighting Al -Shabaab
in the Galgalo mountains. Alternative arrangements will be needed to enable those
troops to receive international support.
32. UNSOM provided advice on a recruitment strategy for female officers, a
general order prohibiting the recruitment of underage personnel, legal frameworks
governing the defence institutions, and a Ministry of Defence development plan.
UNSOM also coordinated international assistance for the Somali national ar my, and
continued to urge security sector donors to align their offers of assistance with the
priorities of the Federal Government.
33. A total of 13,829 Somali national army and 5,134 Somali police force
personnel are now biometrically registered in the human resources system. The
payment of 9,495 army stipends, funded by the United States, began in April.
34. With UNSOM support, Puntland authorities initiated a capacity-building
project to establish unified, capable, accountable and rights -based security
institutions, and to develop security links with the Federal Government. A Somali
security and justice sector public expenditure review was undertaken by the
Government, the World Bank and UNSOM.
35. UNSOM assisted the Federal Government in its first steps towards establishing
a comprehensive weapons and ammunition management system, in accordance with
international standards and sanctions obligations. Construction of armouries and
facilities for the safe storage of weapons and explosives continued, togeth er with
efforts to develop personnel capacity in record-keeping and physical management of
weapons. The Federal Government received support in drafting their arms control
report, submitted on 30 March to the Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009).
Police
36. In an important development, in March the Federal Government signed a
memorandum of understanding with the Interim Jubba Administration and the
Interim South-West Administration on the establishment of regional police in their
respective regions. UNSOM and AMISOM police will provide technical advice and
monitor the recruiting, vetting, training and deployment of 600 officers for each
region. The joint undertaking by UNSOM and AMISOM police followed a joint
visit by the United Nations Police Adviser and the African Union Police
Commissioner to Somalia in February, which led to consensus on shared priorities
and closer collaboration between AMISOM and UNSOM police personnel.

15-07112

7/20

S/2015/331

37. As part of efforts to operationalize the Somali police force headquarters, and
with support from the Government of Japan, the United Nations continued to
implement a project to provide reliable radio communications in Mogadishu and
parts of the southern and central regions. This included t wo 10-day training courses
and donation of a final shipment of communications equipment and 56 vehicles,
funded by the Government of Japan at a cost of US$5.75 million. Equipment
provided was distributed to the Interim Jubba Administration, Puntland, the I nterim
South-West Administration, the Central Regions and Mogadishu, consistent with
agreements made between the Federal Government and the interim regional
administrations to cooperate in establishing regional police organizations.
38. The United Nations Mine Action Service also supported the Somali police
force in the building of counter-improvised explosive device capacities. As of
February, two Somali police force teams were able to respond independently to
improvised explosive devices in Mogadishu. The police force also maintained
10 explosive ordnance disposal teams in Beledweyne, Baidoa and Mogadishu and
conducted a temporary deployment to Beledweyne to respond to explosive hazards.
The Mine Action Service also provided counter-improvised explosive device and
mine awareness support for police and justice personnel led by the United Kingdom
in “Somaliland”, aimed at improving police and judiciary coordination in compiling
evidence and preparing legal cases.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
39. The Federal Government continued to implement its national programme for
disengaging combatants. Major donors, including Germany and the United
Kingdom, Norway and Denmark, pledged funding to support three existing
transitional facilities in Mogadishu, Baidoa and Beledweyne until early in 2016.
UNSOM continued its efforts to identify additional funding for the establishment of
the transitional facility in Kismaayo. In the meantime, 150 former Al -Shabaab
members remain in a temporary facility supported by the Interim Jubba
Administration. The appointment of human rights monitors for all transitional
centres for disengaged combatants in January 2015 marked an important step
towards ensuring compliance with international standards in line with the nat ional
programme. UNSOM continued its efforts to seek support for safe houses for female
disengaged combatants in Baidoa, a project that has become urgent in the light of
threats to some of the prospective beneficiaries.
Maritime security
40. UNSOM helped the Federal Government to re-energize donor support for a
maritime security regime that can fight transnational maritime crime and administer
Somali waters for the benefit of the Somali people. UNSOM is also providing
technical assistance to develop a Coastguard Establishment Law by May 2015,
while engineering mentors from the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
support maritime security in “Somaliland” through the refurbishment of a
coastguard patrol boat and in-class engineering and maintenance training. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), alongside
the International Organization for Migration and others, continued to provide
training to border and migration authorities in “Somaliland” and Puntland on
international protection of migrants arriving by sea.

8/20

15-07112

S/2015/331

Mine action
41. A strategy for the management of explosive hazards was developed with
United Nations support to facilitate compliance with national and international
obligations, and is pending Federal Government approval. In February, the Mine
Action Service and partners facilitated Federal Government and “Somaliland”
representation at the 18th International Meeting of Mine Action National
Programmes in Switzerland, providing an advocacy platform for inter national
assistance. Local Mine Action Service explosive hazard risk educators provided
targeted risk messaging to internally displaced persons, returnees and youth in the
newly recovered areas.
Justice and corrections
42. Following months of political instability, on 23 March the Steering Committee
of the Somalia Development and Reconstruction Facility endorsed the Somalia Joint
Rule of Law Programme 2015-2016. UNSOM and UNDP collaborated with the
Federal Government in finalizing a mapping of existing court facilities, prisons and
police stations throughout Somalia. Upon the request of the Attorney General’s
Office, UNSOM provided technical assistance for the drafting of the Office’s
Establishment Act and held a briefing in March on guidelines and other international
standards on the role of prosecutors.
43. On 31 March, the Ministry of Justice and Judicial Affairs adopted the Somalia
Corrections Service Strategic Plan and training curriculum for the Custodial Corps,
developed with UNSOM support. UNSOM, UNDP and the United Nations Office
for Project Services continue to facilitate the training of Somali police force and
Custodial Corps staff in the protection of judicial personnel and court buildings,
parallel to efforts to improve infrastructure and procure security equipment as part
of the Banaadir court complex pilot project. From 1 to 5 March, the United Nations
provided the Custodial Corps with biometric registration equipment and related
training. This enabled the launch, on 18 March, of a process to register some
3,000 members of the Custodial Corps in the 10 prisons in southern and central
Somalia in the coming months, with a view to enhancing efficiency and
accountability.

F.

Economic foundations
44. UNDP, the International Labour Organization, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the United Nations Human
Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) developed a joint programme to promote
youth employment, focusing on sectors including agriculture, fisheries and
livestock. The programme also focuses on creating short-term jobs through
infrastructure rehabilitation, promoting youth literacy, numeracy and life skills, and
vocational and business training. The programme was approved by the Steering
Committee of the Somalia Development and Reconstruction Facility in March 2015
and implementation is expected to commence shortly.
45. The Federal Government, in partnership with UNDP and the Global
Environment Facility (GEF), commenced a $9.5 million initiative aimed at
enhancing the climate resilience of vulnerable communities. GEF financing will be
used to support ministries, districts, not-for-profit organizations and community-

15-07112

9/20

S/2015/331

based organizations to integrate climate change risks in natural resource management
and disaster preparedness, considered crucial for long-term development and
peacebuilding.
46. On productive sectors, there was progress in increasing and diversifying
production in agriculture, livestock and fisheries. FAO distributed 1,500 animals
and vaccinated 2.6 million animals nationwide. Work continues on improving milk
production, hygiene and quality in “Somaliland” and the Gedo Region. Farmers
benefited from improved agriculture input distribution, training in good agriculture
and pest management practices, marketing skills and asset management. Seventeen
sluice gates for the Shabelle River were constructed or rehabilitated, irrigation
programmes continued, and 14.6 km of primary and secondary canals were built in
Burao.
47. Across the sectors, lack of human and financial capital remains the biggest
challenge. Continued funding is needed to sustain productive sectors and scale up
youth employment activities in areas where needs are the greatest. Concessionary
project financing for large-scale productive infrastructure is likely to be limited until
Somalia qualifies for heavily indebted poor country status. Security problems and
related access limitations will continue to hamper implementation. A key priority is
providing equitable economic opportunities to Somali women, who mostly occupy
low-paying jobs in the informal sector.

G.

Revenue and services
48. The World Bank continued to provide support and advice to the Federal
Government to strengthen public financial management and financial governance. In
the first quarter of 2015, the Federal Government established an interim
procurement board, which will review all contracts with a value of more than
$5 million and submit them to the Financial Governance Committee for advice.
Approved budget and fiscal performance reports are now being published on the
website of the Ministry of Finance.
49. The web-based version of the Somalia Financial Management Information
System became operational. Revenue collection will now be recorded at source and
reconciled against banking at the Central Bank. Alerts are provided to the Minister
of Finance and senior officials for certain thresholds of payment and dashboards on
fiscal performance are also available.
50. The terms of reference for the second year of the Financial Gove rnance
Committee’s mandate were revised and endorsed by the Steering Committee of the
Somalia Development and Reconstruction Facility on 23 March, resulting in a slight
revision of the scope of the Financial Governance Committee and confirming its
oversight role in relation to asset recovery and concessions. The membership of the
Financial Governance Committee was expanded with additional seats for the Chair
of the Parliamentary Finance Committee, the Solicitor General and a donor delegate.
51. Scaling-up the delivery of basic services remains a priority of the United
Nations support to the Federal Government. The delivery of the essential package of
health services was rolled out in 39 districts, covering 76.7 per cent of the target
population and benefiting more than 25,000 pregnant women and 118,000 children
under 5.

10/20

15-07112

S/2015/331

52. The school census data for 2013/14, which was finalized and analysed during
the first part of 2015, showed enrolment of school-aged children in both formal and
non-formal education increased by 10 per cent in Puntland, but remained static in
“Somaliland”. Gross primary enrolment is now 56 per cent in Puntland, and 43 per
cent in “Somaliland”. No data were available for southern and central regions.

H.

Cross-cutting issues: promotion and protection of human rights
Human rights
53. Journalists continued to be intimidated and threatened. On 1 March, Shabelle
News Network journalists had to pay excessive fines, in addition to prolonged
illegal detention, after being charged with public incitement and publishing false
news. After UNSOM intervened, the Somalia National Intelligence and Security
Agency released their equipment pursuant to a court order. In April, two Radio
Shabelle journalists were again arrested without warrant and its media activities
suspended.
54. UNSOM continued to advocate against the death penalty and executions. On
13 April, “Somaliland” executed six individuals, ending a nine-year-old de facto
moratorium. Also in March, UNSOM verified six executions carried out i n
Mogadishu and Puntland, all following military court trials.
55. UNSOM advocated for civilian protection and investigations into deaths
caused by inter-clan conflict, notably in the Hiraan Region, where 20 people died in
a single incident in which the security forces reportedly supported one of the clans.
56. In addition, UNSOM facilitated two cross-ministry consultations on the
Human Rights Road Map Action Plan, which will inform the Ministry of Human
Rights’ implementation of the Compact and serve as a basis for its national report
under the universal periodic review. UNSOM continues to support Somalia -wide
civil society in preparations for the universal periodic review, facilitating three
consultations.
Gender equality and women’s empowerment
57. Ensuring women’s participation in the clan-based political structure of Somalia
remains a major challenge. Sustained advocacy and increased support to women’s
initiatives bore some fruit in the reporting period. In January, women’s
representation in the Cabinet increased and the National Independent Electoral
Commission law provided for at least two female commissioners.
58. The United Nations also continued to work to support members of Somali civil
society who advocate for women’s representation. In March, UNSOM facilitated a
Somali Women’s Leadership Initiative-led solidarity mission to Kismaayo,
supporting local women’s groups to negotiate with the regional authority and local
elders for participation in the regional assembly process in the Juba regions. To
mark International Women’s Day, UNSOM facilitated an Open Day, which enabled
Somali women to raise their concerns with my Special Representative and the
Federal Ministers of Health and Education.

15-07112

11/20

S/2015/331

Child protection
59. On 20 January, in Mogadishu, President Mohamud announced his intention to
ratify the Convention on the Rights of the Child, which would make Somalia the
196th State party, following Parliament’s endorsement of the Convention the
previous month. President Mohamud expressed his Government ’s commitment to
implementing the Convention and ensuring that the rights of all Somali children are
protected; he stressed that no child would be allowed to join the security forces,
including the army. The ratification process will be finalized after the Government
of Somalia deposits the instruments of ratification with the United Nations in New
York.
60. The United Nations country task force continues to document cases of grave
violations of children’s rights. During the reporting period a total of 705 incidents
were recorded affecting 673 children (552 boys, 121 girls), which mostly involved
allegations of recruitment and use, killing and maiming of children by Al -Shabaab
and the Somali national army. Of major concern is the continuing arrest and
detention of children by several parties to the conflict. Currently, 61 children
(52 boys, 9 girls) are enrolled in United Nations-supported community-based
reintegration programmes for children formerly associated with armed forces or
groups in Baidoa. In addition, children are facing protection risks from being
separated from families, including gender-based violence, psychosocial stress and
support, mine risk education, child labour and early marriage.
61. On 1 March, management of the “Serendi” transitional facility in Mogadishu
for former Al-Shabaab fighters was transferred to Adam Smith International, a
non-governmental organization. UNSOM continued to advocate for children held
there to be released and referred to protection agencies. The numbers of childre n
held in the Mogadishu site could not be confirmed, as the UNSOM -supported local
human rights monitor for the facility was injured during an Al -Shabaab attack on
27 March. On 25 April, the First Instance Military Court of Mogadishu ordered a
minor accused of Al-Shabaab-related activity to be transferred to the “Serendi”
centre for rehabilitation.
Prevention of sexual violence
62. Sexual violence continues to be reported in Somalia in 2015 at about the same
rate as in 2014. According to UNHCR, in January and February 2015, over
200 cases of rape were reported, mainly in Banaadir Region, and incidents of sexual
violence were reported in Bay and Juba Hoose regions. The main perpetrators were
reported as unidentified armed men. There were also reports imp licating the Somali
national army and police force, Al-Shabaab, and some AMISOM contingents. The
survivors are mostly women and girls who were displaced from their areas of origin,
members of minority clans being at greatest risk.
63. The Federal Government, with the support of the United Nations, developed a
national action plan to combat sexual violence in conflict in May 2014. A Sexual
Offences Bill, aimed at criminalizing rape and other sexual offences, is pending
parliamentary consideration. In a panel discussion organized by UNHCR and Legal
Action Worldwide on 3 March, the Federal Government, my Special Representative
and the Special Representative of the Chair of the African Union Commission
expressed their commitment to work jointly to combat sexual exploitation and abuse
by peacekeepers and to realize the “zero tolerance” policy of the United Nations.

12/20

15-07112

S/2015/331

IV. Humanitarian situation
64. During the reporting period, relatively good rains in October-December 2014
and reprioritized humanitarian assistance averted a most acute humanitarian crisis,
according to post-harvest findings by the Food Security and Analysis Unit, managed
by FAO. However, about 730,000 Somalis, of whom 76 per cent are displaced
people living in urban areas, are still unable to meet their basic daily food needs. An
additional 2.3 million people are at risk of sliding into the same situation where
assistance is not provided. Meanwhile, nearly 203,000 acutely malnourished
children require emergency nutrition supplements, access to clean water, sanitation
infrastructure and better hygiene services.
65. More than 1.1 million Somalis, the majority of whom are women and children,
remain displaced. During the first two months of 2015 over 40,000 people were
evicted, mainly in Mogadishu, and moved further into the outskirts of the city,
where access to basic services is limited. Against this dire humanitarian backdrop,
there is a risk that remittances, estimated at $1.3 billion annually, could be shut
down as a number of banks in many countries have started to close down the
accounts of money transfer organizations that enable the Somali diaspora to send
money home to family and friends for food, water, health and education.
66. Measles remains a public health concern. More than 1,200 suspected measles
cases have been reported in 2015. Of these, 77 per cent (931 cases) were reported
from the southern and central regions, where most of the unvaccinated children live.
The outbreak of polio that has affected 199 people since 2013 was curbed, and no
polio case has been registered since August 2014. Owing to the low level of routine
immunization, however, health specialists advised that the eradication campaign
continue in 2015.
67. Predictable and unimpeded access to vulnerable communities continues to be a
challenge because of the fluid security situation. The deadly attack on a United
Nations vehicle in Garoowe on 20 April, which claimed the lives of four UNICEF
staff members and two guards, underscores the dangerous operating environment.
Roadblocks and checkpoints in southern and central Somalia manned by armed
actors continue to severely hamper delivery of aid. The two main roads most
affected by roadblocks remain Beledweyne-Mogadishu and Mogadishu-BaidoaDoolow. Road access limitations increase operational and transportation costs for
humanitarian agencies delivering food to affected towns. They also increase
commercial food prices as traders transfer the high cost of operating in insecure
areas to consumers, making it difficult for vulnerable people to access food. Despite
these challenges, humanitarian partners continue to find solutions to deliver food
assistance, such as agreements with local authorities to open up roads, local
partners, and by air in isolated areas. However, some of these mea ns are costly and
unsustainable in the long term. Road access is therefore required to enable
humanitarian partners to deliver life-saving assistance.
68. In reference to paragraph 29 of resolution 2182 (2014), humanitarian partners
are engaging with AMISOM through the application of the principle of last resort,
pursuant to the civil-military guidelines signed by the United Nations and AMISOM
in November 2014. Aid organizations continue to call on AMISOM to strengthen the
implementation of its mandate to facilitate humanitarian access, particularly in
relation to securing the roads to enable humanitarian partners to address urgent needs.

15-07112

13/20

S/2015/331

69. During the reporting period, humanitarian partners reached 541,000 people
with activities aimed at building livelihoods and 331,000 people with food
assistance. About 128,000 people were reached with livelihood seasonal inputs,
including seeds, tools, fishing equipment, irrigation vouchers, livestock
redistribution and livestock vaccination. About 43,000 children under 5 were treated
for acute malnutrition. Through emergency response, 29,000 learners were
supported with temporary learning spaces, teacher incentives, school supplies,
training, capacity-building and rehabilitation, while protection partners reached
13,000 people with protection activities. About 265,000 Somalis have been reached
with basic health services while 314,000 people were provided with temporary or
sustainable access to safe water. Since the start of the year, about 47,000 people
have access to newly constructed sanitation facilities (latrines) and 162,000 people
benefited from hygiene promotion sessions or distribution of hygiene kits.

V. Targeted sanctions
70. On 28 January 2015, I appointed the three remaining experts of the Somalia
and Eritrea Monitoring Group (see S/2015/67). During the informal consultations of
the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
on 13 February, the Monitoring Group presented its workplan and its preliminary
views on a possible exemption to the arms embargo for weapons on board vessels
engaged in commercial activity in Somali ports. During the Committee’s informal
consultations on 8 April, the Monitoring Group presented its midterm br iefing. The
Federal Government submitted its first report pursuant to paragraph 9 of resolution
2182 (2014) to the Security Council on 30 March. The Monitoring Group is actively
working with the Federal Government on enhancing its reporting to the Security
Council and the Committee.

VI. Implementation of resolutions 2124 (2013) and 2182 (2014)
71. In accordance with Security Council resolution 2182 (2014), a joint African
Union-United Nations team visited Somalia and the African Union headquarters in
Addis Ababa from 15 to 25 April for a joint review mission to review the
benchmarks for the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping operation in
Somalia and review the impact of the temporary surge authorized in resolution 2124
(2013). The conclusions from the benchmarking exercise will be issued shortly and I
will transmit them to the Security Council for its consideration.
Support to AMISOM and the Somali national army
72. The United Nations Support Office for AMISOM (UNSOA) continued to
provide logistics support to AMISOM and the Somali national army during joint
operations, as authorized by the Security Council in resolution 2124 (2013).
73. During the reporting period, UNSOA repatriated 850 Sierra Leonean troops
and contingent-owned equipment following their withdrawal from AMISOM. The
additional troops from Kenya and Ethiopia to replace the Sierra Leonean troops
have not yet been deployed, pending guidance from the African Union. UNSOA also
facilitated the deployment of an additional 900 Djibo utian troops and the rotation of
troops from Burundi, Uganda and Kenya, and the Ugandan formed police unit.

14/20

15-07112

S/2015/331

74. UNSOA faced limitations in its distribution of supplies to frontline troops
because the major supply routes remain insecure and sometimes impas sable owing
to poor road conditions. As a result, sustenance of frontline troops remained reliant
on air support at a very high cost. The acquisition of a C-130 aircraft under longterm contract helped UNSOA to increase its capacity to resupply all sectors and to
reduce dependence on other missions in the region. UNSOA received engineering
equipment worth $6 million to support the construction of new sector hubs and
23 armoured vehicles to enhance staff security. With the arrival of spare parts,
UNSOA continued to conduct extensive repairs on AMISOM armoured vehicles.
However, its ability to maintain effectively the AMISOM fleet was challenged by
the requirement to fuel and maintain donated vehicles, which is sometimes
unforeseen and unbudgeted. UNSOA also conducted in-mission and predeployment
training for 634 AMISOM personnel.
75. UNSOA issued a complete set of Level I equipment, drugs and other medical
consumables to the Somali national army to equip the military hospital in
Mogadishu, which is expected to be upgraded to a Level II hospital when the
required medical personnel become available. Level II hospitals were also
completed at Baidoa and Beledweyne. UNSOA continued to replace and repair
medical equipment at the AMISOM Level II hospital in Mogadishu, and issued
3,000 individual first aid kits and 20 emergency trauma bags to the national army to
assist in minimizing the mortality and morbidity rates during combat operations.
UNSOA further supported training of the national army on the use of the kits. In
addition 109 air medical evacuations were conducted for AMISOM and national
army frontline personnel. UNSOA is working with the Department of Field Support
to procure 24-hour medical evacuation capacity, which is essential to save lives in
combat.
76. A total of 8,205 Somali national army troops benefited from UNSOA logistics
and training support. UNSOA incurred expenditure of $11 million from the Trust
Fund in support of the Somali national army in joint operations with AMISOM, in
areas authorized by the Security Council in resolution 2124 (2013). The Trust Fund
received total contributions of $16.1 million from the United States, the United
Kingdom, Italy, New Zealand, Denmark and Sweden. Support to the Somali national
army was challenged by the dearth of viable roads for the movement of supplies, as
well as the wide distribution of army elements and the need to verify their numbers
and positions.
77. As part of the UNSOA logistical support package, the Mine Action Service
provided force protection and force mobility support by training, equipping and
mentoring AMISOM counter-improvised explosive device and explosive ordnance
disposal teams in all sectors. The Service also helped AMISOM to provide convoy
protection in response to explosive hazards on main supply routes. At the request of
AMISOM, the Service began delivering improvised explosive device awareness
sessions as a component of the AMISOM general security package.
78. UNSOM continued working with AMISOM to improve coordination between
the two Missions, including UNSOA. Following a joint African Union-United
Nations retreat on Somalia in Kampala on 9 and 10 January, the Missions agreed to
establish several joint working groups and to continue to review their progress
through a monthly Senior Leadership Coordination Forum, co-chaired by my
Special Representative and the Special Representative of the Chair of the African
Union Commission for Somalia.

15-07112

15/20

S/2015/331

Human rights due diligence policy
79. On 22 April, the African Union issued a report on key findings of its
investigations into allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by AMISOM
personnel. On the same day, AMISOM and UNSOM held the third meeting of the
Working Group on the human rights due diligence policy and reviewed a joint
mapping report on mechanisms to implement the policy.
80. UNSOM and UNSOA continued to deliver training on human rights for Somali
national army soldiers benefiting from the support package authorized in resolution
2182 (2014). Since December 2014, a total of 348 soldiers o f different ranks have
been trained on human rights in Sectors 1 and 5. UNSOM also facilitated mandatory
predeployment training on human rights, child protection and gender, for
80 Ugandan soldiers in Kampala. Meanwhile, UNSOM and AMISOM have jointly
prepared a report mapping existing measures and mechanisms for AMISOM
compliance with the human rights due diligence policy and identifying gaps that
should be addressed.

VII. United Nations presence in Somalia
A.

Expansion of United Nations presence
81. During the reporting period, the international staff figures averaged 430 across
Somalia, while national staff figures averaged 1,006. The international staff average
for Mogadishu was 277, including a total of 91 UNSOM and 124 UNSOA
international staff. The new UNSOM headquarters adjacent to the Mogadishu
International Airport, Villa Nabad, became ready for occupation at the end of
March; this will enhance the Mission’s ability to engage with government officials
and other Somalia interlocutors outside the Mogadishu International Airport area.
As part of its ongoing efforts to open its planned office in Hargeysa, UNSOM
submitted a proposal to the “Somaliland” administration regarding priority areas of
engagement.

B.

Integration
82. The integrated Senior Management Group, chaired by my Special
Representative, met three times during the reporting period to provide strategic
direction to United Nations activities in Somalia and to review and monitor progress
made on the Integrated Strategic Framework for Somalia. The Framework in turn
reflects United Nations contributions to national priorities, set out in the Somali
Compact. Of the six United Nations programmes approved under the Compact
framework in March, four are implemented jointly by UNSOM and Uni ted Nations
agencies, including support to the state formation process, constitutional review,
preparation for the 2016 elections and the joint rule of law programme.

C.

Staff safety and security
83. In the light of the evolving threat of infiltration demonstrated in recent attacks
by Al-Shabaab, the security management system focused on measures to deter,

16/20

15-07112

S/2015/331

detect and defend against threats to the layered perimeter security system at the
Mogadishu International Airport and in other high-risk areas. Discussions continued
with AMISOM with respect to mitigating threats to United Nations convoys.
Discussions also continued with donors to address a severe funding shortage
affecting the Department of Safety and Security, which threatened the stoppage of
vital security services and projects.
84. In response to growing security needs, following an internal assessment and
further to the exchange of letters between the Secretary-General and the President of
the Security Council dated 31 March and 2 April 2015 ( S/2015/234 and
S/2015/235), steps were taken to expand the United Nations guard unit by
120 troops from the current strength of 410. The new troops are expected on t he
ground by late July.
85. The United Nations continued to negotiate amendments to the status -ofmission agreement with the Federal Government, which are essential for the
operations of the United Nations guard unit. Memorandums of understanding also
remain under negotiation with the African Union and the Federal Government,
aimed at coordinating the guard unit’s operations with those of AMISOM and the
Somali security forces.
86. Other security measures included the establishment of an area security
management structure in Baidoa and increased presence of the Department of Safety
and Security through Field Security Coordination Officers in Hargeysa, Baidoa (Bay
Region) and Doolow (Gedo Region). UNSOA/UNSOM permanently assigned
security officers to Kismaayo, Baidoa and Beledweyne, bringing the United Nations
staff ceiling inside Somalia to 580.

VIII. Observations
87. I am deeply saddened by, and condemn, the terrorist attack in Garoowe that
claimed the lives of four UNICEF staff and their two Somali guards. Al-Shabaab
targeted committed individuals who were working tirelessly to improve the lives of
Somali children and families.
88. I remain greatly concerned about security in Somalia, and about the threat
posed by Al-Shabaab to the wider subregion, demonstrated by the heinous attack on
Garissa University College in Kenya in April. Counter-terrorism requires a
comprehensive strategy beyond military operations, encompassing political,
development, communications and human rights efforts. I encourage Member States
to cooperate more closely over the coming months in addressing the threat at a
subregional level, including measures to prevent and counter violent extremism. The
increasing Al-Shabaab activities in Puntland and the security implications of
developments in Yemen for Somalia are also of concern.
89. It is essential that the AMISOM-Somali national army joint military campaign
continue, and be properly supported to achieve its goals. I look forward to
presenting to the Security Council the findings of the review, conducted jointly with
the African Union, of progress against the benchmarks established under Council
resolution 2124 (2013), and presenting recommendations for the next phase of the
campaign. Meanwhile, I urge Member States to replenish the AMISOM Trust Fund,
in order to allow UNSOA to provide the self-sustainment support authorized in

15-07112

17/20

S/2015/331

resolution 2010 (2011). I commend the European Union for its invaluable support to
AMISOM in covering the allowances of civilian and military personnel and call
upon Member States with the capability to help to shoulder this burden.
90. I am encouraged that Somalia’s political process has regained momentum in
recent months. Despite the challenges facing the country, Somalia’s federal, regional
and local leaders, parliamentarians, and people from all walks of life are building a
federal state, step by step, through dialogue and reconciliation. The task is difficult
and painstaking, but it must continue, and deserves our full and sustained support.
91. I welcome the firm commitment expressed by the Federal President, Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud, as well as the Prime Minister, the Speaker and the leaders of
Puntland and the Interim Jubba and South-West Administrations to deliver
Somalia’s “Vision 2016” plan, without any extension of the term of the Federal
Parliament or President in August and September 2016 respectively.
92. It is now important to focus on achieving the important milestones ahead,
including completing the formation of interim regional administrations and
assemblies; advancing the constitutional review; operationalizing the National
Independent Electoral Commission and the Boundaries and Federation Commission;
and finalizing priority legislation on political parties, citizenship, and elections.
93. Political inclusion is essential if these processes are to be sustainable. I
welcome the efforts being made by the Interim Jubba and South -West
Administrations to foster greater inclusion in their political institutions, and to
tackle longstanding grievances between communities. Women, minorities and youth
should be well represented in these processes. I encourage international partners to
continue to support local reconciliation efforts, which are critical to underpin the
wider “Vision 2016”.
94. Debate about the modalities for an electoral process in 2016 has commenced in
Somalia. Later in 2015, I anticipate the need for broad consultation on the issue,
Somali owned and led, which should engage all stakeholders across the country,
including civil society. For now, I hope that Somalis will continue to give priority to
creating conducive conditions for elections, by continuing to advance the political,
security and peacebuilding goals they have set for 2015. For international partners,
the High-level Partners’ Forum in Mogadishu in July 2015 will provide an important
opportunity to take stock of progress.
95. I am concerned at the breakdown of talks between the Federal Government and
“Somaliland”. I call upon the Federal Government and “Somaliland” to end the
impasse without unnecessary preconditions, and resume dialogue. My Special
Representative will be following up with the Federal Government and “Somaliland”
on next steps in the process.
96. I am seriously concerned by the spike in executions, in the light of S omalia’s
commitment to a moratorium on the death penalty and the challenges facing the
justice system. Implementation of the human rights due diligence policy remains
very important. I call on the Somali authorities to undertake thorough investigations
when responding to alleged violations of international law, including in the context
of military operations. I welcome the release of the key findings and
recommendations from the report of the African Union -commissioned independent
investigation team into allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by AMISOM
soldiers. I urge that those recommendations be implemented.

18/20

15-07112

S/2015/331

97. The humanitarian situation in Somalia remains of serious concern, in spite of
the progress made at the beginning of the year. I urge the donor community to
honour the $863 million request that the humanitarian community has put forward to
meet the needs of 2.8 million Somalis who are in dire need of humanitarian
assistance. If implemented, the humanitarian response plan will sustain the
emergency response, strengthen resilience activities, and help to offset the effect of
unforeseen environmental shocks that could reverse the positive gains of the past
few months.
98. I remain concerned about the impact of measures against money transfer
companies on the flow of remittances to Somalia. Remittances are a lifeline for
millions of Somalis; an estimated 40 per cent of the population depends on them for
basic needs such as food and medicine. I call on Member States to work with their
financial sectors to put in place a credible transitional remittance mechanism
pending creation of formal banking arrangements in Somalia.
99. These challenges require our concerted efforts. As the mandate of UNSOM is
due to expire on 2 June 2015, I strongly recommend its extension for an additional
12 months, to 2 June 2016.
100. I pay tribute to my Special Representative, Nicholas Kay, his deputies and the
staff of UNSOM, UNSOA and the United Nations agencies, the United Nations
guard unit, funds and programmes, and other international organizations in Somalia.
Their continuing hard work in difficult and dangerous circumstances is a credit to
the Organization.

15-07112

19/20

S/2015/331

20/20

15-07112
