xv
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE
SIXTH COMMITTEE
Without prejudice to any initiative which Member States may take in this respect,
6. Requests the Secretary-General to carry out
appropriate studies and to submit, at such times
as he may consider appropriate, suitable proposals
for the improvement of the methods and procedures of the General Assembly and its committees, including proposals to extend the use of
mechanical and technical devices ;
7. Requests, in particular, the Secretary-General to make the "thorough legal analysis", suggested by the Special Committee, of the questions
raised in paragraph 34 of the report of the Special
Committee, taking into account the proposal submitted to the Sixth Committee by the Belgian
delegation4 and the discussions in the Sixth Committee and in the plenary meeting, and to submit
a report to the fifth regular session of the General
Assembly.
236th plenary meeting,
22 October 1949.

361 (IV). Approval of a supplementary
agreement with the Universal Postal
Union concerning tbe use of the
United Nations laissez-passer
The General Assembly
Approves the supplementary agreement 1 between the United Nations and the Universal
Postal Union signed on 13 and 27 July 1949
concerning the use of the United Nations laissez;asse,-.
235th plenary meeting,
22 October 1949.

362 (IV). Methods and procedures of
the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Having regard to its resolution 271 (III) 2 of
29 April 1949 relating to the appointment of a
Special Committee on Methods and Procedures
of the General Assembly,
Having considered the report3 of the Special
Committee and the conclusions reached therein,
Mindful of the importance of adapting its organization and procedures to its increasing responsibilities,
1. Expresses its satisfaction with the work
performed by the Special Committee on Methods
and Procedures of the General Assembly;
2. Approves the amendments and additions to
its rules of procedure, as set forth in annex I to
the present resolution ;
3. Decides that these amendments and additions
shall enter into force on 1 January 1950;
4. Approves the recommendations and suggestions of the Special Committee, as set forth in
annex II to the present resolution ;
5. Considers these recommendations and suggestions to be useful and worthy of consideration
by the General Assembly and its committees, and
requests the Secretary-General to prepare a document embodying the above-mentioned recommendations and suggestions in convenient form
for use by the General Committee and the delegations of Member States in the General
Assembly;
Considering that the study of factors affecting
the duration of General Assembly sessions should
be pursued by making use of the experience gained
during future sessions of the General Assembly,

Annex I

Amendments and additions to the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly
NEW RULE 1 (a)

Duration of session
On the recommendation of the General Committee.
the General Assembly shall, at the beginning of each
session, fix a target date for the closing of the session.
REVISED RULE 14

Additional items

Additional items of an important and urgent character, proposed for inclusion in the agenda less than
thirty days before the opening of a regular session or
during a regular session, may be placed on the agenda,
if the General Assembly so decides by a majority of
the Members present and voting. No additional item
may be considered until seven days have elapsed since
it was placed on the agenda, unless the General Assembly, by a two-thirds majority of the Members
present and voting, decides otherwise, and until a
committee has reported upon the question concerned.

REGULAR AND SPECIAL SESSIONS'
NEW RULE 19

Explanatory memoranda

All items proposed for inclusion in the agenda shall
be accompanied by an explanatory memorandum and,
if pos~ible, by basic documents or by a draft resolution.
3
See Official Records of the fourth session of the General Assembly, Supplement No. 12.
• See Official Records of the fourth session of the General Assembly, Sixth Committee, 156th meeting, paragraph 65.
• Existing rule 19 will become 19 (a).

See Official Records of the fourth session of the General Assembly, Annex to the Si:rlh Committee, document
A/944.
2 See Official Records of the third session of the General Assembly, Part II, Resolutions, page 17.
1

59

N11.w RULE 19 (b)
Amendments and deletions of items
Items on the agenda may be amended or deleted
by the General Assembly by a majority of the Members present and voting.

the General Assembly in drawing up the agenda for
each plenary meeting, in determining the priority of
its items, and in the co-ordination of the proceedings
of all committees of the General Assembly. It shall
assist the President in the general cond'uct of the work
of the General Assembly which falls within lhe competence of the President. It shall not, however, decide
any political question.

NEW RULE 19 (c)
Debate on inclusion of items
Debate on the inclusion of an item in the agenda,
when that item has been recommended for inclusion
by the General Committee, shall be limited to three
speakers in favour of and three against the inclusion.
The President may limit the time to be allowed to
speakers under this rule.

NEW RULE 35

REVISED RULE 31
General powers of the President
In addition to exercising the powers which are
conferred upon him elsewhere by these rules, the
President shall declare the opening and closing of
each plenary meeting of the session, shall direct the
discussions in plenary meeting, ensure observance of
these rules, accord the right to speak, put questions and
announce decisions. He shall rule on points of order,
and, subject to these rules, shall have complete control
of the proceedings at any meeting and over the
maintenance of order thereat. The President may, in
the course of the discussion of an item, propose to the
Assembly the limitation of the time to be allowed to
speakers, the limitation of the number of times each
representative may speak on any question, the closure
of the list of speakers or the closure of the debate.
He may also propose the suspension or the adjournment of the meeting or the adjournment of the debate
on the item under discussion.
NEW RULE 31 (a)
The President, in the exercise of his functions,
remains under the authority of the General Assembly.

X(a). MINUTE OF SILENT PRAYER OR
MEDITATION
NEW RULE 56

(a)

Immediately after the opening of the first plenary
meeting jlnd immediately preceding the closing of the
final plenary meeting of each session of the General
Assembly, the President shall invite the representatives
to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer
or meditation.
REVISED RULE 59
Biscussion of Committee reports
Discussion of a report of a Main Committee in a
plenary meeting of the General Assembly shall take
place if at least one-third of the Members present and
voting at the plenary meeting consider such a discussion to be necessary. Any proposal to this effect shall
not be debated, but shall be immediately put to the
vote.
REVISED RULi!. 64
Points of order
During the discussion of any matter, a representative may rise to a point of order, and the point of
order shall be immediately decided by the President
in accordance with the rules of procedure. A representative may appeal against the ruling of the President. The appeal shall be immediately put to the vote
and the President's ruling shall stand unless overruled by a majority of the Members present and voting. A representative rising to a point of order may
not speak on the substance of the matter under dis•
cussion.
REVISED RULE 65
Time-limit on speeches
The General Assembly may limit the time to bt
allowed to each speaker and the number of times each
representative may speak on any question. When de
bate is limited and a repre.sentative has spoken hi!
allotted time, the President shall call him to orde1
without delay.

REVISED RULE 33
Composition
The General Committee shall consist of fourteen
members no two of whom shall be members of the
same delegation, and shall be so constituted as to
ensure its representative character. It shall comprise
the President of the General Assembly, who shall
preside, the seven Vice-Presidents and the Chairmen
of the six Main Committees. Chairmen of other committees upon which all Members have the right to be
represented and which are established by the General
Assembly to meet during the session, shall be entitle<l
to attend meetings of the General Committee and
may participate without vote in the discussions.
REVISED RULE 35
Functions
The General Committee shall, at the beginning of
each session, consider the provisional agenda, together
with the supplementary list, and shall make recommendations to the General Assembly with regard to
each item proposed, concerning its inclusion in the
agenda, the rejection of the request for inclusion, or
the inclusion of the item in the provisional agenda of
a future session. It shall, in the same manner, examine
requests for the inclusion of additional items in the
agenda, and shall make recommendations thereon to
the General Assembly. In considering matters relating to the agenda of the General Assembly, thJ General Committee shall not discuss the substance of any
item, except in so far as this bears upon the question
of whether the General Committee should recommend
the inclusion of the item in the agenda, the rejection
of the request for inclusion, or the inclusion of the
item in the provisional agenda of a futtire session,
and what priority should be accorded to an item the
inclusion of which has been recommended.
NEW RULE 35

(l!)

The General Committee shall meet periodically
throughout each session to review the progress of
the General Assembly and its committees and to make
recommendations for furthering such progress. It
shall also meet at such other times as the President
deems necessary or upon the request of any other of
its members.

REVISED RULE 67

Adjournment of debate
During the discussion of any matter, a representative may move the adjournment of the debate on the
item under discussion. In addition to the proposer of
the motion, two representatives may speak in favour
of, and two against, the motion, after which the mo•
tion shall be immediately put to the vote. The Presi•
dent may limit the time to be allowed to speakers
under this rule.
REVISED RULE 68
Closure of debate
A representative may at any time move the closure
of the debate on the item under discussion, whether
or not any other representative has signified his wish
to speak. Permission to speak on the closure of the
debate shall be accorded only to two speakers opposing
the closure, after which the motion shall be immediately put to the vote. If the General Assembly is in
favour of the closure, the President shall declare the

(a)

The General Committee shall make recommendations to the General Assembly concerning the closing
date of the session. It shall assist the President and

60

He shall rule on points of order and, subject to these
rules, shall have complete control of the proceedings
of the committee and over the maintenance of order
at its meetings. The Chairman may, in the course of
the discussion of an item, propose to the committee
the limitation of the time to be allowed to speakers,
the limitation of the number of times each representative may speak on any question, the closure of the list
of speakers or the closure of the debate. He may also
propose the suspension or the adjournment of the
meeting or the adjournment of the debate on the item
under discussion.
NEW RULE 97 (a)
The Chairman, in the exercise of his functions,
remains under the authority of the committee.

closure of the debate. The President may limit the
time to be allowed to speakers under this rule.
REVISED RULE 69
Suspension or adjournment of the meeting
During the discussion of any matter, a representative may move the suspension or the adjournment of
the meeting. Such motions shall not be debated, but
shall be immediately put to the vote. The President
may limit the time to be allowed to the speaker moving
the suspension or adjournment of the meeting.
REVISED RULE 72

Decisions on competence
Subject to rule 70, any motion calling for a decision
on the competence of the General Assembly to adopt
a proposal submitted to it shall be put to the vote
before a vote is taken on the proposal in question.

REVISED RULE 98
Quorum
One-third of the members of a committee shall
constitute a quorum. The presence of a majority of
the members of the committee is, however, required
for a question to be put to the vote.

REVISED RULE 80
Conduct during voting
After the Pres;dent has announced the beginning of
voting, no representative shall interrupt the voting
except on a point of order in connexion with the
actual conduct of the voting. The President may permit Members to explain their votes, either before or
after the voting, except when the vote is taken by
secret ballot. 1ht: President may limit the time to be
allowed for such explanations. The President shall
not permit the proposer of a proposal or of an amendment to explam his vote on his own proposal or
amendment.
REVISED RULE 81
Division of proposals and amendments
A representative may move that parts of a proposal or ot an amendment shall be voted on separately. If objection is made to the request for division, the motion for division shall be voted upon. Permission to speak on the motion for division shall be
given only to two speakers in favour and two speakers
against. lf the motion for division is carried, those
parts of the proposal or of the amendment which are
subsequently approved shall be put to the vote as a
whole. If all operative parts of the proposal or of the
amendment have been rejected, the proposal or the
amendment shall be considered to have been rejected
as a whole.

REVISED RULE 102
Points of order
During the discussion of any matter, a representative may rise to a point of order, and the point of
order shall be immediately decided by the Chairman
in accordance with the rules of procedure. A representative may appeal against the ruling of the Chairman. The appeal shall be immediately put to the vote
and the Chairman's ruling shall stand unless overruled by a majority of the members present and voting. A representative rising to a point of order may
not speak on the substance of the matter under
discussion.
REVISED RULE 103
Time-limit on speeches
The committee may limit the time to be allowed
to each speaker and the number of times each representative may speak on any question. When debate is
limited and a representative has spoken his allotted
time, the Chairman shall call him to order without
delay.
REVISED RULE 105
Adjournment of debate
During the discussion of any matter, a representative may move the adjournment of the debate on the
item under discussion. In addition to the proposer of
the motion, two representatives may speak in favour
of, and two against, the motion, after which the motion shall be immediately put to the vote. The Chairman may limit the time to be allowed to speakers
under this rule.
REVISED RULE 106
Closure of debate
A representative may at any time move the closure
of the debate on the item under discussion, whether
or not any other representative has signified his wish
to speak. Permission to spbk on the closure of the
debate shall be accorded only to two speakers opposing
the closure, after which the motion shall be immediately put to the vote. If the committee is in favour
of the closure the Chairman shall declare the closure
of the debate. The Chairman may limit the time to be
allowed to speakers under this rule.

REVISED RULE 82

Voting on amendments
When an amendment is moved to a proposal, the
amendment shall be voted on first. When two or more
amendments are moved to a proposal, the General
Assembly shall first vott! on the amt!ndment furthest
removed in substance from the original proposal and
then on the amendment next furthest removed therefrom, and so on, until all the amendments have been
put to the vote. Where, however, the adoption of one
amendment necessarily implies the rejection of another amendment, the latter amendment shall not be
put to the vote. If one or more amendments are
adopted, the amended proposal shall then be voted
upon. A motion is considered an amendment to a
proposal if it merely adds to, deletes from or revises
part of that proposal.
NEW RULE 89

(a)

Priorities
Each Main Committee, taking into account the target date for the closing of the session fixed by the
General Assembly on the recommendation of the General Committee, shall adopt its own priorities and
meet as may be necessary to complete the consideration of the items referred to it.

REVISED RULE

107

Suspension or adjournment of the meeting
During the discussion of any matter, a representative may move the suspension or the adjournment of
the meeting. Such motions shall not be debated, but
shall be immediately put to the vote. The Chairman
may limit the time to be allowed to the speaker moving
the suspension or adjournment of the meeting.

REVISED RULE 97

Functions of the Chairman
The Chairman shall declare the opening and closing
of each meeting of the committee, shall direct its discussions, ensure observance of these rules, accord the
right to speak, put questions and announce decisions.

REVISED RULE 1 J 0
Decisions on competence
Subject to rule 108, any motion calling for a decision on the competence of the General Assembly or

61

fore favours the retention by the General Assembly
of the necessary freedom of action.
The Special Committee therefore confines itselt to
recommending that, when conventions have been negotiated by international conferences in which aU the
Members of the United Nations have been invitM to
take part, and on which they have been represented,
not only by experts acting in a personal capacity but
by representatives of Governments, and when these
conventions are subseqnently submitted to the General
Assembly for consideration, the Assembly should not
undertake a further detailed examination, but should
limit ibelf to discussing them in a broad manner and
to giving its general views on the instruments submitted to it. After such a debate, the General Assembly
could, if desirable, adopt the conclusions reached by
the conferences and recommend to Members the acceptance or ratification of such conventions.
This procedure might be applied in particular to
conventions submitted to the General Assembly as a
result of conferences of all Member States convened
by the Economic and Social Council under Article
62, paragraph 4 of the Charter.
14. Furthermore, when it is proposed that the
General Assembly should consider conventions prepared by groups of experts not acting as governmental
representatives, or by conferences in which all Members of the United Nations have not been invited to
take part, it would be advisable for the General Committee and the General Assembly to determine whether
one of the Main Committees, especially the Legal Committee, would have enough time during the session
to examine these conventions in detail, or whether it
would be possible to set up an ad hoe committee to
undertake this study during the session.
lf this is not possible, the Special Committee recommends that the General Assembly should decide, after
or without a general debate on the fundamental principles of the proposed convention, that an ad hoe committee should be established to meet between sessions.
Alternatively, the General Assembly might decide to
convene a conference of plenipotentiaries between two
of its own sessions, to study, negotiate, draft, and
possibly sign, the convention. The conference of
plenipotentiaries might be empowered by the General
Assembly to transmit the instruments directly to Governments for acceptance or ratification. In this case
too, the General Assembly might, at a subsequent session, express its general opinion on the convention
resulting from the conference, and might recommend
to Members its acceptance or ratification.
With regard to the drafting of legal texts, the
Special Committee strongly recommends that small
drafting committees should be resorted to whenever
possible.

the committee to adopt a proposal submitted to it shall
be put to the vote before a vote is taken on the proposal in question.
REVISED RULE

117

Conduct during voting
After the Chairman has announced the beginning
of voting, no representative shall interrupt the voting
except on a point of order in connexion with the actual conduct of the voting. The Chairman may permit
members to eicplain their votes, either before or after
the voting, except when the vote is taken by secret ballot. The Chairman may limit the time to be allowed for
such explanations. The Chairman shall not permit the
proposer of a proposal or of an amendment to explain
his vote on his own proposal or amendment.
REVISED RULE

118

Division of proposals and amendments
A representative may move that parts of a proposal or of an amendment shall be voted on separately.
If objection is made to the request for division, the
motion for division shall be voted upon. Permission to
speak on the motion for division shall be given only to
two speakers in favour and two speakers against. If
the motion for division is carried, those parts of the
proposal or of the amendment which are subsequently
approved shall be put to the vote as a whole. If all
operative parts of the proposal or of the amendment
have been rejected, the proposal or the amendment
!hall be considered to have been rejected as a whole.
REVISED RULE

119

Voting on amendments
When an amendment is moved to a proposal, the
amendment shall be voted on first. When two or more
amendments are moved to a proposal, the committee
shall first vote on the amendment furthest removed in
substance from the original proposal and then on the
amendment next furthest removed therefrom, and so
on, until all the amendments have been put to the
vote. Where, however, the adoption of one amendment
necessarily implies the rejection of another amendment, the latter amendment shall not be put to the vote.
If one or more amendments are adopted, the
amended proposal shall then be voted upon. A motion
is considered an amendment to a proposal if it merely
adds to, deletes from or revises part of that proposal.

Annex II
Recommenda~ions and suggestions of the
Special Committee on Methods and Procedures approved by the General Assembly
13." The Special Committee found that in the past
some of the Main Committees of the General Assembly had devoted a particularly large number of meetings to the detailed consideration, article by article,
of texts of international conventions. This was even
the case where the text of a convention had been
drawn up by an international conference on which all
Member States had been represented. It was pointed
out in this connexion that experience had shown that
a Main Committee, by the very fact of its size, was
not particularly fitted to draft conventions, and that
when it was entrusted with the detailed study of conventions, it often did not have time to deal satisfactorily with the other questions for which it was
responsible.

20. In order that more frequent meetings of the
General Committee ~hould not delav the work of
plenary and committee meetings, the Special Committee wishes to mention that it would be desirable for
the General Committee to be enabled to meet, whenever necessary, at the same time as the plenary or the
Main Committees. ( In such cases, one of the VicePresidents could take the chair at plenary meetings
and the Vice-Chairman could replace the Chairman
at Main Committee meetings.)
The Special Committee also considers that in order
to save time at the beginning of the session, some of
the Main Committees should not wait until the end
of the general debate before starting their work.

The Special Committee recognizes the importance
of the sponsorship of conventions by the General
Assembly. It believes that the authority of the General Assembly and the powerful influence its debates
have on public opinion should, in many cases, be used
for the benefit of international co-operation. It there-

22. In the past, some of the Main Committees have
been allocated more items requiring prolonged consideration than have others. This has especially been
the case for the First Committee. The Special Committee noted, however, that, during the third session
of the General Assemhly. exception had been made to
the principle laid down in rule 89, that "items relating
to the same category of subjects shall be referred to
the committee or committees dealing with that category of subjects".

• The paragraph numbers refer to the paragraphs of the
report of the ~ecial Committee on Methods and Procedures. See Official Records of the fourth session of the
General Assembly, Supplement No. 12.

62

The Special Committee feels that the allocation of
items to committees might be effected in a less rigid
manner and that questions which may be considered
as falling within the competence of two or more committees, should preferably be referred to the committee with the lightest agenda.

stresses the value of having, as in the past, a legal
adviser from the Secretariat in attendance at meetings
to give the Chairmen or the committee such advice as
they may need for the conduct of their business and
the interpretation of the rules of procedure.

23. Another means of lightening the task of any
given Main Committee would be to consider directly
in the plenary meeting, without preliminary reference
to committee, certain questions which fall within the
terms of reference of the Main Committee. This procedure would moreover have the great advantage of
reducing to a notable extent repetition of debate.

363 (IV). Application of Liechtenstein
to become a party to the Statute
of the International Court of Justice
Whereas the Government of the Principality
of Liechtenstein, by a letter5 dated 6 March 1949
addressed to the Secretary-General, has expressed
the desire to learn the conditions under which
Liechtenstein could become a party to the Statute
of the International Court of Justice.

It is felt that the amount of time saved by this
method would be considerable, especially if the Main
Committee and plenary meetings could be held
concurrently.
If the Main Committee could not meet at the same
time as the plenary meeting, the fact that the Committee was not meeting would enable another Main Committee to meet in its place.

Whereas Article 93, paragraph 2, of the Charter
provides that a State which is not a Member of
the United Nations may become a party to the
Statute of the Court on conditions to be determined in each case by the General Assembly
upon the recommendation of the Security Council,

The consideration of questions in plenary meetings
would have the benefit of the attendance of leaders
of delegations and of greater solemnity and publicity.
The slightly higher cost to the United Nations oi
plenary meetings, due in particular to the distribution
of verbatim records of the meetings, would undoubtedly be compensated by the shorter duration of the
session.

Whereas the Security Council has adopted a
recommendation 6 on this matter,
The General Assembly
Determines, in pursuance of Article 93, paragraph 2, of the Charter and upon the recommen-

The General Committee would be responsible for
suggesting to the General Assembly which items on
the agenda might be dealt with in this manner. The
Special Committee recommends that this method
should be introduced on an experimental basis at
future sessions.

dation of the Security Council, the conditions on
which Liechtenstein may become a party to the
Statute of the International Court of Justice, as
follows:

The Special Committee is of the opinion that this
procedure would be especially appropriate for certain
questions the essential aspects of which are already
familiar to Members, such as items which have been
considered by the General Assembly at previous sessions and which do not require either the presence of
representatives of non-member States or the hearing
of testimony.

"Liechtenstein will become a party to the Statute on the date of the deposit with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations of an instrument,
signed on behalf of the Government of the Principality of Liechtenstein and ratified as may be
required by the constitutional law of Liechten stein, containing:

"(a) Acceptance of the provisions of the Statute of the International Court of Justice ;

39. At this point the Special Committee desires to
stress once more the importance of the role of the
President of the General Assembly and of the Chairmen of committees. The satisfactory progress of the
proceedings depends essentially on their competence,
authority, tact and impartiality, their respect for the
rights both of minorities as well as majorities, and
their familiarity with the rules of procedure. The
General Assembly, or the committee, as the case may
be, is the master of the conduct of its own proceedings. It is, however, the special task of the Chairmen
to guide the proceedings of these bodies in the best
interests of all the Members.

" ( b) Acceptance of all the obligations of a
Member of the United Nations under Article 94
of the Charter ;

" ( c) An undertaking to contribute to the expenses of the Court such equitable amount as
the General Assembly shall assess fr6m time to
time after consultation with the Liechtenstein
Government."
262nd plenary meeting,
1 December 1949.

The Special Committee considers that everything
possible should be done to help Chairmen in the discharge of these important functions. The President
of the General Assembly and the General Committee
should assist the Chairmen of committees with their
advice. The Secretary-General should place his experience and all his authority at their disposal.

364 (IV). Registration and publication
of treaties and international agreements
A

The Special Committee is happy to note the Secretariat's valuable practice of holding daily meetings
of the committee secretaries, under the chairmanship
of the Executive Assistant to the Secretary-General,
where the procedural questions arising from day to
day in the General Assembly and committees are thoroughly examined. Furthermore, the Special Committee

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report 7 of the SecretaryGeneral on the registration and publication of
treaties and international agreements,
1. Notes with satisfaction the progress achieved
in regard to the registration aIJd publication of
treaties;

• See Official Records of the Srcurity Council, Fourth
Year, Supplement for April 1949, document S/1298 and
Corr.l.
8 See Official Records of the fourth session of the Gen-

7
See Official Records of the fo11rth session of the Geti·
era/ Assembly, Anne.r to the Si:.th Commit/er, document
A/9S8.

eral Assembly, Aunex to the Sixth Committee, docu-

ment A/967.

63
