General Assembl}'-Fnrt}-second Session

224

governmental organizations for their dforts to assist the
refugees in the Sudan;
4. Expresses grave conccm at t he serious and far
reaching consequences of t he rnassive prcsence of refugees
in the country for its security, stability and development,
as reflected in the reports of the inter-agency missions;
5. Also expresses grave concern at the shrinking re
sources available for refugee programmes in the Sudan
and the serious consequence~ of this situation for the
country's ability to continue !() act :I', hcl',t ,tnd provide assistance to refugees:
6. Requests the Secretary-lieneral, i11 following up n11
the reports ofthe inter-agency missions and furthering thc
integration of developmental and refugee aid, to take concrete steps, in collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, for the early
implementation of the recommendations contained in thc
report of the 1987 inter-agency mission: 14Q
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to mobilize the
necessary financia! and material assistance for the full implementation of ongoing projects in thc areas affected by
the presence of refugees:
8. Appeals to Member States, the appropriate organs,
organizations and bodies ofthe United Nations system, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
and the international financia! institutions to provide the
Government ofthe Sudan with the necessary resources for
the implementation of development assistance projects in
regions affected by the presence of refugees:
9. Requests the High Commissioner to continue coordination with the appropriatc specialized agencies in order to consolidate and ensure the continuation of essential
services to the refugees in their settlements:
10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session, through thc
Economic and Social Council. on the implementation of
the present resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
7 Dect'mbcr J987
42/130.

Enlargement of the Executive Committee of the
Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assemb/y,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1987/89 of 9 July 1987 on thc enlargement of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees,

1. Decides to increase the membership of the Executive
Committee ofthe Programme ofthe United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees from forty-one to forty-three;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to elect
the two additional membcrs al it~ first regular session nf
1988;
3. Notes with satisfaction that the Executive Committee of the Programme of the High Commissioner has
begun to consider ways and mea ns of improving the possibilities for observers to participatc dfcctively in its work
93rd plcnary meeting
7 Dccembcr l987

42/131.

Fortieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights

/'he General Asscmbly,
Considering that the year 1988 will mark the fortieth anrnversary ofthe Universal Declaration ofHuman Rights, 2
which, conceived as a common standard of achievement
for ali peoples and ali nations and having provided the bas1s for the develorment of the lnt~rnational ~ovenants on
Hu man Rights, 1 has been and nghtly contmues to be a
fundamental source of inspiration for national and international efforts for the protection and promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling, in this respect, its resolution 217 A (III) of
10 December 1948, by which it officially proclaimed the
L;niversal Declaration of Human Rights, its resolutions
Jb/169 of 16 December 1981 and 38/57 of 9 December
1983, relating to the thirty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration, as well a~ its resolution 41/1 SO of 4 December
1986. rclating to the fortieth anniversary of the Declaratlon.

Convinced of thc continuing need to promote the universal observance and enjoyment of human rights, which
contribuk to peaceful and friendly relations among nations,
Reca/ling that in its resolution 41/150 it decided to celebrate in 1988 thc fortieth anniversary of the Declaration,
1. Reso/ves that the celebration in 1988 of the fortieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights shall be used as an occasion to highlight the
achievements of the United Nations in its efforts to promote and protect human rights universally, to renew the
commitment of the Organization in this area and to encourage Member States to ensure the promotion and protcction of the rights cnshrined in the Declaration;
2. Once' again invites Member States, the specialized
agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations and
non-governmental organizations to take appropriate measures, such as those set forth in the annex to resolution
41/150, and to support appropriate activities aimed atencouraging the promotion of the universal observance and
cnjoyment of civil and political rights, as well as economic,
social and cultural rights:
3. Urges the Secretary-General to carry out the activities indicated in t he annex to resolution 41/ 1SO in order to
assure the success of the activities commemorating the
fortieth anniversary of the Declaration:
4. Reiterates its request to the Department of Public
lnformation of the Secretaria! to disseminate appropriate
public information, broadcasting and audio-visual
material designed to draw attention to, and emphasize the
1mportance of, the Declaration and the role played and the
work done by the United Nations to ensure the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
5. Urges the United Nations Postal Administration to
give special attention to the issuance of commemorative
postage stamps on the occasion of the fortieth anniversary
of the Declaratinn;
6. Confirms its decision to include in the provisional
agenda of its forty-third session the item entitled "Fortieth
anniversary of t he Universal Declaration of Human
Rights";
7. Further co11firms its decision to devote one plenary
meeting during its forty-third session to the celebration of
t he fortieth anniversary of the Declaration, which falls on
1O December 19S8, and requests the Secretary-General to

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

make the necessary preparations for the programme of
that meeting;
8. Encourages Governments in a position to do so to
include in their delegations participating in the abovementioned commemorative plenary meeting of the General Assembly persons from their respective countries who
were associated with the drafting of the Declaration.
93rd plenary meeting
7 Dccember 19R7

42/132.

Assistance to refugees and displaced persons in
Malawi

The General Assembly,
Having heard the report of the United Nat1011s High
Commissioner for Refugees regarding the rcfugee situation in Malawi, 151
Expressing its appreciation for the effort;. of the Government of Malawi in providing shelter and asylum to thousands of refugees and displaced persons,
Recognizing the consequences of the social and economic burden placed on the Government and people of
Malawi as a result of the influx of refugees and displaced
persons and the subsequent impact on national development and the infrastructure of that country,
Noting with appreciation the action airead y taken by the
Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other international humanitarian organizations
in establishing a programme of emergency assistance to
the refugees and displaced persons in Malawi,
Noting that a United Nations inter-agency tcam is currently visiting Malawi to discuss with the Government
ways and means of strengthening its capacity to cope with
the burden imposed on its economy, vital resources and
public services by the presence of refugees and displaced
persons and to prepare a comprehensive programme of assistance, which will respond both to refugee-related
humanitarian and to development needs for eventual submission to the international community,
l. Commends the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations Development Programme for their timely action in sending
an inter-agency mission to Malawi to ascertain the needs
of the refugees and displaced persons in Malawi and the
magnitude of assistance required;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in close cooperation with the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the Administrator ofthe United Nations
Development Programme, to give the report of the interagency mission the widest possible circulation to ali
States, ali pertinent international organizations and voluntary agencies;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General, in close cooperation with the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the Administrator ofthe United Nations
Development Programme, to mobilize international assistance and to launch an international appeal for generous
contributions to the projects and programmes recommended in the report of the inter-agency mission;
4. Appeals to Member States, the High Commissioner,
the organizations concerned within the United Nations
system and voluntary agencies to render maximum finan151 See Official Records "frhc General Asscmhl,. hir1v-1<·,<11ul Ses.\/OI/
Third Committee, 45th and 50th mee1ing,. and u,rngendum. ,ee al," A.

AC.96/693 (Part 1) ami Corr 1 and Add 1 para, 1 10 1-1 10.7

225

cial and material assistance to the Government of Malawi
in its efforts to provide shelter, food and other services to
the grnwing numher of refugees and displaced persons in
that country;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Economic and Social Council at its first regular session of
1988 and to the General Assembly at its forty-third session on the implementation of the present resolution.
93rd p/enary meeting
7 December 1987

42/ 133.

Status of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 40/142 of 13 December 1985
and 41/147 of 4 December 1986,
Recalling a/so Commission on Human Rights resolutions 1986/18 of 10 March 198661 and 1987/25 of
10 Man:h 1987,26
Recallingits resolution 260 A (111) of9 December 1948,
by which it approved and proposed for signature, ratification or accession the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
Rea.fjirming once again its conviction that genocide is a
crime under international law, contrary to the spirit and
aims ,1f the United Nations,
Taking note with sati.1:faction of the report of the Sccretary-General, 152
1. Once again strongly condemns the crime of genocide:
2. Reaffirms the necessity of international cooperatíon in order to liherate mankind from such an odious cnme;
3. Notes with satisfaction that many States have ratified
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide or have acceded thereto;
4. Expresses its conviction that implementation of the
prov1sions of the Convention by ali States is necessary for
t he prevention and punishment of the crime of genocide;
5. Urges those States which have not yet become parties tn the Convention to ratify it or accede thereto without further delay;
b.
Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its forty-third session a report on the
<;latu~ of the Convention.
93rd p/enary meeting
7 December J9R7

42/134.

Need to enhance international co-operation in
the field of the protection of and assistance for
the family

Thl' General Assembly,
Mmdful of the resol ve of the peoples of the United Nat1ons to promote social progress and better standards of
life in larger freedom, with a view to the creation of conditiofü of stability and well-being, which are necessary for
peaccful and friendly relations between nations,
Recalling that, in accordance with the International
Cownant on Economil·, Social and Cultural Rights, 1:1 the
