S/PV.9132

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9132nd meeting

Thursday, 15 September 2022, 10.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Rivière. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Kamboj
Ms. Moran
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2022/688)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-59200 (E)
*2259200*

S/PV.9132

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

violations of the ceasefire brokered by Russia in 2020
and of their territorial integrity.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the
Permanent Representative of Armenia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2022/688)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Armenia and
Azerbaijan to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Miroslav
Jenča, Assistant Secretary-General for Europe,
Central Asia and Americas, Departments of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Jenča.
Mr. Jenča: I thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting and for providing me this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on recent developments in
the South Caucasus.
On the evening of 12 September, the authorities
in Armenia and Azerbaijan reported heavy fighting
on their international border. According to reports,
heavy artillery, drones and large-calibre weapons
were used. The exchange of fire reportedly continued
through 13 and 14 September. Yesterday evening, it was
announced that a cease-fire had been agreed starting at
8 p.m. local time. We welcome that agreement and hope
the ceasefire will hold.
Earlier this week, the Armenian Ministry of Defence
stated that the Azerbaijani side was targeting Armenian
military positions, as well as civilian infrastructure, in
the Gegharkunik, Vayots Dzor and Syunik regions of
the country. Armenia reported 105 of its servicemen
killed and six civilians wounded as of last night. While
Armenia called the events a deliberate attack, Azerbaijan
countered that they were retaliatory measures made in
response to provocations from Armenia. Azerbaijan,
for its part, reported 71 servicemen killed and two
civilians wounded. Both countries have written to the
Secretary-General and to the Security Council alleging
2/16

15/09/2022

The United Nations is not in a position to verify
or confirm the specifics of those reports. We remain
deeply concerned, however, about this dangerous
escalation, including its possible impact on civilians,
and have urged the sides to take immediate and
concrete steps to de-escalate the tensions. The United
Nations country teams in both Armenia and Azerbaijan
maintain open channels with the authorities and stand
prepared to respond to emerging humanitarian needs, if
requested and as conditions allow.
The fighting this week was the latest and most
extensive in a series of incidents since 2020. It
highlights the fact that the process of normalizing the
relations between Armenia and Azerbaijan continues
to encounter serious obstacles. The escalation also
underscores the urgent need for the parties to advance
the ongoing process of delimitation and demarcation
within the framework of their mutual recognition of
their respective territorial integrity and sovereignty.
We urge the parties to take advantage of that important
mechanism as an essential step towards alleviating
tensions at the border. This week’s events are also a
stark reminder that the tensions between Armenia and
Azerbaijan also have the potential to destabilize the
region. They highlight the need for all actors, in the
region and beyond, to act constructively and press the
sides to work for a peaceful settlement.
In that regard, a number of international mediation
efforts, which we fully support, have been ongoing in
the region, including those of the Russian Federation
and the European Union. They can lay the groundwork
for enabling the parties to resume a dialogue aimed at a
long-term peace. At Armenia’s request, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization will send a mission to
Armenia to assess the situation on the border and report
back to its member States. The United Nations remains
in close contact with the parties and organizations
concerned, including the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. During my recent visit to the
region, I was able to assess first-hand the challenges
that the parties are facing in resolving this longlasting conflict. I returned with the belief that while
differences and mistrust persist between the sides, they
are surmountable.
The international community must remain fully
committed to a peaceful settlement between Armenia
and Azerbaijan and spare no effort to de-escalate the
22-59200

15/09/2022

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

current tensions, bring the parties back to the negotiating
table and help them achieve peace and stability in the
region. In the immediate term, the parties must abide
by their obligations to fully implement the trilateral
statement on the ceasefire of 9 November 2020. We
urge them to return to the negotiating table and take
steps towards the signing of a lasting peace treaty. It is
also important that the Security Council send a similar
united message in order to enable the parties to focus
on a diplomatic solution.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Jenča
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Miloslav Jenča for
his statement on the military clashes between Armenia
and Azerbaijan and the situation on the ground.
The resurgence of clashes between the armed forces
of Armenia and Azerbaijan brings back sad memories
of the 2020 conflict, in which thousands of people died.
My country deplores the loss of life on both sides and
condemns the use of armed force to settle disputes
between States. We reiterate that there can be no viable
military solution to the conflict. Any escalation of
violence will only deepen the resentment and tensions.
This is a complicated situation that calls for the
engagement of all partners in the region and beyond,
including all those with influence over the belligerents.
We welcome the ceasefire reached yesterday and call on
the parties comply with the agreement on the ground.
The international community must work
collectively to ease the tensions and prevent escalation
in order to ensure that the conflict does not flare up
again. The numerous calls in recent days for an easing of
tensions between the parties is a sign of a shared desire
to see the fighting end. We need to ensure support for
the subregional, regional and international initiatives
aimed at bringing the parties back to the negotiating
table. In addition, the parties involved must refrain
from any action that could fuel tensions and undermine
a political settlement. It will be vital to maintain the
ceasefire in Nagorno Karabakh and along the border
between Azerbaijan and Armenia and to re-establish
diplomatic channels at all levels. My country supports
the Secretary-General’s call to the parties to de-escalate
and return to the negotiating table. We must focus all of
our efforts on achieving that essential objective.

S/PV.9132

In conclusion, we urge the parties to show restraint
and encourage the Security Council to speak with
one voice in support of re-establishing the diplomatic
channels so as to ensure a restoration of peace between
the two countries.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): Let me join others in
thanking Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav Jenča
for updating us on the latest developments in the
situation at the Armenia-Azerbaijan border.
I thank the presidency for scheduling an open
meeting today. The informal deliberations held by the
Security Council yesterday were a timely beginning
for us to seriously consider why the situation in the
Caucasus, and specifically the border between Armenia
and Azerbaijan, continues to be tense. The violent
hostilities in Nagorno Karabakh in September 2020 are
still fresh in our minds. The recent reports of attacks
along the Armenia-Azerbaijan border, including the
targeting of civilian settlements and infrastructure,
are a matter of deep concern. We call on the aggressor
side to immediately cease hostilities and exercise
restraint. These actions are a serious threat to peace and
stability in the region. The Council therefore simply
cannot afford to stand by silently and let the situation
deteriorate any further.
The 9 November 2020 ceasefire brokered by Russia,
as well as the peace processes being mediated by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), the OSCE Minsk Group and the European
Union, provide useful mechanisms for resolving all
the outstanding issues. It has been our consistent view
that such disputes should be settled through diplomacy
and dialogue. There can be no military or violent
solution to any conflict. We encourage both sides to
pursue diplomatic pathways to arrive at a lasting and
peaceful solution.
In conclusion, we continue to reiterate that the
global order must be anchored in international law,
the Charter of the United Nations and respect for the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of States.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I too thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Jenča for his briefing. I also welcome the
presence here today of the representatives for Armenia
and Azerbaijan.
Tensions have been on the rise again in recent
weeks and we are deeply concerned about the ongoing
military hostilities along the Armenia-Azerbaijan
border, including the reported artillery strikes that have

22-592003/16

S/PV.9132

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

hit civilians and civilian infrastructure inside Armenia.
Reports indicates that it is the worst fighting seen since
the 2020 war over the disputed Nagorno Karabakh
region. The accounts of civilian deaths and injuries on
both sides of the conflict are most disturbing. The use
of military force to settle disputes is unacceptable.
Humanitarian actors are worried about the upsurge
in military activity and its potential humanitarian
consequences. That activity affects the lives and safety
of people residing in border areas and blocks their
access to essential infrastructure.
We are, however, encouraged by the news
about an agreement on a cessation of hostilities. We
welcome that initiative and call on both sides to take
immediate steps to de-escalate tensions and to exercise
maximum restraint.
Norway recognizes the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of both Armenia and Azerbaijan within their
internationally recognized borders. And we continue to
support the dialogue between Armenia and Azerbaijan
to implement the ceasefire agreement of 9 November
2020. We also welcome the efforts of the European Union
and the United States to help advance negotiations.
We urge Azerbaijan and Armenia to fully
implement previously reached agreements and to
return to the negotiating table in good faith and
without preconditions. Any outstanding issues must
be resolved peacefully through dialogue and within
existing formats.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Jenča for his briefing and welcome the
Permanent Representatives of Armenia and Azerbaijan.
Ireland is deeply concerned by the serious
fighting that has broken out along the ArmeniaAzerbaijan border in recent days, including reports
of attacks directed at critical civilian infrastructure
inside Armenian territory, which are prohibited under
international humanitarian law. We regret the reported
loss of life.
Ireland welcomes the update by Assistant
Secretary-General Jenča on a cessation of hostilities.
It is vital that the sides exercise maximum restraint and
refrain from a further escalation of violence. We urge
them to commit to the ceasefire and to respect prior
international agreements.
We emphasize the absolute need to adhere to
the Charter of the United Nations. Violations of the
4/16

15/09/2022

sovereignty and territorial integrity of States are
never acceptable.
All forces must urgently return to the positions they
held before this regrettable escalation in hostilities.
No forces should remain on the territory of another
sovereign State.
In Armenia and Azerbaijan, as elsewhere, violence
can never be the answer. A sustainable resolution
to the conflict is possible only through dialogue and
diplomacy. We know that inclusive dialogue and
diplomacy, with women at the table and with their
meaningful participation ensured, delivers stronger
and lasting peace. There can be no alternative path to
lasting peace and security in the region.
We welcome the United Nations readiness, as
indicated by Assistant Secretary-General Jenča, to step
up its mediation efforts upon request.
The European Union (EU) is undertaking immediate
efforts to support the necessary de-escalation in
hostilities. The European Union remains committed
to acting as an honest broker between Armenia and
Azerbaijan, including through the Brussels dialogue
process. Ireland, together with our EU partners,
continues to support renewed efforts towards a
negotiated, comprehensive and sustained settlement
of the broader conflict, particularly on the longer-term
status of Nagorno-Karabakh.
We support the common goal of a South Caucasus
that enjoys peace, security and prosperity. That is what
its people deserve.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Miroslav Jenča for his briefing
on the most recent developments. I also welcome the
participation of Armenia and Azerbaijan in this meeting.
Kenya is gravely concerned by the recent reports
of renewed fighting along the Armenia-Azerbaijan
border, with both sides trading accusations of shelling
and the amassing of heavy weaponry, as well strikes
against settlements and civilian infrastructure, leading
to civilian casualties.
We recall that this conflict has previously led
to multiple deaths and many injured and displaced
persons. It has also led to the destruction of critical
civilian infrastructure, including schools and markets,
as well as water supplies. Clearly, every effort must be
expended to avoid another cycle of violence.
22-59200

15/09/2022

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

In that regard, Kenya urges the parties to refrain
from further escalation of the situation. They should
exercise maximum restraint and strictly observe
the ceasefire agreement made in their statements of
November 2021.
Kenya supports any efforts to mediate a resolution
of the conflict, especially the important role of the
co-Chairs of the Minsk Group of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. In that regard, we
urge all relevant regional and international actors to
actively work with the sides to achieve an urgent end
to the fighting and return to negotiations towards a
comprehensive and sustainable settlement — a settlement
that would lead to the normalization of relations between
the two neighbouring countries based on mutual
recognition and respect for each other’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity.
In conclusion, I reiterate that dialogue should be
pursued as the primary option in resolving conflicts.
The two countries should engage in good faith for their
mutual benefit, as well as regional peace and stability.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Jenča for
his briefing.
China is concerned about the recent armed conflicts
and casualties in the border areas of Armenia and
Azerbaijan. Maintaining regional peace and stability
is in the common interests of the two countries. We
call on the two countries to exercise restraint, persist
in resolving problems and differences through political
dialogue and take measures to avoid further escalation
of the situation.
As confirmed by the briefing we just heard, both
sides recently reached a ceasefire agreement. We hope
that both parties will abide by that agreement in a
common effort to ease the situation.
Armenia and Azerbaijan set up a border
demarcation commission last May, which recently held
a joint meeting. We hope the two sides will continue to
interact positively on the border issue.
The normalization of relations between Armenia
and Azerbaijan is inseparable from the proper settlement
of the Nagorno-Karabakh issue. China acknowledges
the historical development of the issue, and its position
has been consistent. We support the resolution of
problems and differences through political dialogue
and hope that all parties will find a proper solution

S/PV.9132

as soon as possible in accordance with universally
recognized the international law and norms governing
international relations.
China welcomes and supports the tripartite joint
statement reached by Russia, Armenia and Azerbaijan
in November 2020 and will continue to support the
pursuit of positive progress on the Nagorno-Karabakh
issue under the framework of the Minsk Group and
with the good offices of Russia.
Armenia and Azerbaijan are inseparable
neighbours. Maintaining stable bilateral relations and
developing forward-looking friendly cooperation is not
only in the fundamental interests of the two countries
and the two peoples, but also conducive to the peace
and stability of the whole region. We hope and believe
that both countries possess full political wisdom and
are able to resolve problems and differences through
dialogue and consultation, restore peace and stability
and achieve common security.
China is willing to work with the international
community on constructive efforts aimed at easing
the situation.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Assistant Secretary-General Jenča
for the valuable information he shared with us, and we
welcome the representatives of Armenia and Azerbaijan
to this meeting.
Mexico expresses its deep concern about the
clashes that took place on the border between Armenia
and Azerbaijan, which left dozens of people dead on
both sides and — regrettably, as we heard today — have
impacted the civilian population. We call on both sides
to respect the ceasefire.
The conflict between the two countries in 2020
took a heavy toll on the civilian population and basic
infrastructure. The international community must seek
to avoid a repetition of such an episode. The parties
must respect and fully implement the agreements
signed, including the provisions of the 9 November
2020 agreement, and resolve their differences
through dialogue.
We urge the international actors with the greatest
leverage over both parties to urge them to return to the
negotiating table and maintain an ongoing dialogue.
We echo the Secretary-General’s message of support
for the mediation efforts currently under way in the

22-592005/16

S/PV.9132

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

region, particularly the ongoing efforts of the Russian
Federation and the European Union.
Mexico calls on Armenia and Azerbaijan to show
their political will to put an end to hostilities and to
return to the path of diplomacy in order to settle their
unresolved differences.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I wish to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Miroslav Jenča for his briefing on
the renewed clashes between Armenia and Azerbaijan
and express our support for the engagement of the
United Nations with the parties in order to help find a
lasting solution to the long-standing conflict that has
engulfed the region. I also welcome the representatives
of Armenia and Azerbaijan to this meeting.
Like other members of the Security Council,
Ghana regrets the hostilities that erupted between
Armenia and Azerbaijan early this week, which each
side has blamed on the other. The fighting, which is
the most intense since November 2020, has resulted
in military and civilian casualties on both sides, as we
heard today. We are concerned that further escalation
of hostilities would have adverse consequences for the
region and beyond.
We therefore welcome today’s meeting as an
opportunity for the Council to focus its attention
on how this centuries-old conflict, which was again
triggered in 1988, can be peacefully resolved on the
basis of established international principles that are
mutually acceptable to the parties.
We strongly believe that the use of violence cannot
be the final arbiter for the settlement of this dispute, and
we welcome reports of the agreement reached by the
parties on the evening of 14 September for a cessation
of hostilities.
We urge them to sustain the truce and renew
our call for the complete cessation of hostilities and
the de-escalation of tensions. We urge the parties to
remain committed to existing ceasefire arrangements,
including the trilateral statement of November 2020,
made by the leaders of the two countries and the
Russian Federation. As we know, the recent clashes did
not happen in a vacuum, but have come on the back
of the unresolved Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. In our
view, that speaks to the need for the intensification
of negotiations on all unresolved issues in order to
move the parties closer to a conclusive resolution that
must be based on the principles of international law,
with due regard to the Charter of the United Nations
6/16

15/09/2022

and its provisions relating to the mutual recognition of
territorial integrity, the non-use or threat of use of force
in the acquisition of territory and the pacific settlement
of disputes.
We believe that international mediation efforts
are critical at this juncture in order to help remove
the mutual distrust and discontent between the parties
and facilitate an effective political process for peace.
In that regard, we encourage the Secretary-General’s
good-offices role, urge the reactivated engagement
of the Minsk Group co-Chairs of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and note the
invitation by Armenia to the Collective Security
Treaty Organization.
We also encourage the resumption of talks between
the parties following the discussions held under the
auspices of the Council of the European Union. We
believe that the outcomes of the discussions relating
to the demarcation and delimitation of borders will
help to reduce tensions, facilitate the normalization
of relations and set the stage for negotiating a future
Armenia-Azerbaijan peace treaty.
In conclusion, we wish to emphasize that at the
heart of finding a solution to the dispute should be the
willingness of both parties to make the hard sacrifices
necessary for the cause of peace. We urge them to
work courageously to guarantee the security, rights
and freedoms of all ethnic populations and the right of
return for all who have been displaced.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Miroslav Jenča for his briefing, and
I welcome the delegations of Armenia and Azerbaijan
to this meeting.
The border clashes between Armenian and
Azerbaijani forces in the past few days are contrary
to the spirit and letter of the trilateral statements of
9 November 2020, 11 January 2021 and 26 November
2021. There is a risk that these incidents could
undermine the needed trust between Armenia and
Azerbaijan and thereby jeopardize the progress made
in the peace process over the past two years.
Brazil calls on the parties to respect international
law and the Charter of the United Nations and to
resolve their disputes through dialogue and diplomacy.
We urge both sides to avoid actions that could escalate
tensions and threaten the security of the civilian
population, particularly in the districts affected by
this week’s clashes. We add our voice to that of other
22-59200

15/09/2022

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

members of the Security Council in favour of a lasting
diplomatic solution to the territorial issues between the
two countries within the framework of the commission
established to demarcate the bilateral border.
Brazil will continue to support further political
and diplomatic efforts for a lasting and comprehensive
peace in the region. We greatly value the moderating
influence that the regional actors can exert in preventing
violence, and we encourage initiatives to that end. I also
deeply regret the loss of life and express my sympathies
to those who lost family and friends.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Mr. Miroslav Jenča for his thorough
briefing on recent developments between Armenia
and Azerbaijan, and I welcome the participation of
the representatives of Armenia and Azerbaijan in
today’s meeting.
We welcome the ceasefire agreement reached
between the two parties yesterday evening, and
we appreciate the negotiation efforts that led to
that agreement.
The United Arab Emirates has expressed its deep
concern about the recent military confrontations,
including fighting in border areas, and about reports
of casualties and damage to civilian infrastructure. As
we are keen to avoid further escalation, there is a need
to make concerted efforts for a lasting ceasefire. We
urge both parties to demonstrate restraint, echoing the
Secretary-General’s call on 13 September concerning
that issue. My country looks forward to building on
this positive development so that both parties are able
to reach more comprehensive agreements for achieving
lasting peace and avoid endangering civilian lives
because of war.
We note that any new escalation under the
current circumstances, whereby recurrent crises and
humanitarian suffering are becoming increasingly
difficult to curb, would pose a threat to the current
fragile world situation. Therefore, we must shoulder
our responsibilities in the Security Council to prevent
any exacerbation of the ongoing crisis. We also must
encourage both parties to return to the negotiating table
and to settle their differences through peaceful and
diplomatic means.
The tripartite agreement of 2020 constitutes a
basis for ensuring stability in the region. We witnessed
positive and promising developments at the beginning
of the year towards continued negotiations between

S/PV.9132

the two parties. We have also seen the emergence
of encouraging prospects for the settlement of the
outstanding issues between them. It is essential to take
advantage of that momentum to make tangible progress
in the peace process. In that connection, we hope that
the two parties will continue with mediation efforts
constructively and in good faith in order to achieve
a lasting peaceful solution and to spare the region
repercussions of any further escalation that threatens
regional peace and stability.
The United Arab Emirates stresses once again the
importance of preserving the ceasefire and the parties
continuing their efforts to achieve a peaceful resolution
in accordance with international law and the Charter of
the United Nations.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Jenča for his update.
Like others here, we are deeply concerned by the
reports of heavy fighting that has taken place along
the Armenian-Azerbaijani border during the past few
days. Exchanges of fire with many casualties, including
civilians, have been reported by both sides. We express
regret for the loss of life.
It was the worst escalation of hostilities between the
two countries since 2020. We welcomed with optimism
the positive developments during the past few weeks
between Armenia and Azerbaijan, especially the fourth
high-level meeting organized on 31 August in Brussels
under the auspices of the President of the European
Council. The recent armed clashes run counter to and
undermine such efforts. We hope that those incidents
will not undo the progress achieved.
As we know, dealing with difficult and complex
issues in post-conflict situations requires trust,
resolve and continued efforts. We carefully read the
communications from both countries and listened to
Assistant Secretary-General Jenča’s briefing here today.
In such a volatile situation and with the information
we have, it is not easy to have full clarity based on
independently verified facts. While the parties blame
each other, we highlight the importance of avoiding any
actions that feed into mistrust, including military buildup or other provocations along the border. A blame
game and retaliatory measures will only bring about
more clashes and could lead to renewed fighting and an
open conflict with serious consequences. Those serious
and worrisome developments are a stark reminder of

22-592007/16

S/PV.9132

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

15/09/2022

the volatility and fragility of the situation on the ground
in the absence of a peace treaty.

activity and for armed forces to withdraw to their
original positions before the escalation.

The latest acts of violence erupted beyond the
Nagorno-Karabakh region. It is important and urgent
to do the utmost so that the conflict lines do not spread
further. As everybody knows, European security is
already under serious threat from the ongoing war in
Ukraine. A further escalation of the situation in the
region leading to the outbreak of a conflict would have
far-reaching consequences that would transcend the
region’s borders.

It is only through diplomacy, in line with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, that
lasting peace can be achieved. That was demonstrated
by encouraging developments in recent weeks,
including the return of prisoners of war by Azerbaijan
and the trilateral meetings held in Brussels. We
urge the leaders of both Armenia and Azerbaijan
to re-engage in good faith in that dialogue, with the
support of the international community, and to return
to substantive negotiations to settle all outstanding
matters between them.

As in every conflict, civilians are the first to suffer,
but let us not forget also that the wider South Caucasus
is a crucial artery for energy commodities to Europe
and the world markets. At a time when the world
markets have been deeply affected by the ongoing war
in Ukraine, with severe impacts on energy markets,
any further disruption elsewhere would only increase
volatility and make the global situation worse. Needless
to say, the humanitarian situation would also worsen
even further, which we certainly do not need.
We support international efforts within existing
formats, including the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the active role played by the
European Union, to stop the hostilities. We welcome the
ceasefire that entered into force yesterday evening and
which, according to reports, is being respected so far.
We call on all sides to continue its implementation. We
welcome the strong involvement of the European Union
in the normalization process between Armenian and
Azerbaijan, including at the highest levels through the
President of the European Council, Mr. Charles Michel.
We reiterate that there is no alternative to reaching
a peacefully negotiated solution to the conflict via the
path of diplomacy.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): We thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for his very helpful
update. We welcome the Ambassadors of Azerbaijan
and Armenia to the Chamber.
The United Kingdom welcomes the news of a
ceasefire brokered on the evening of 14 September,
but remains deeply concerned over numerous reports
of civilian casualties caused by the military action
that was launched earlier this week. The long-standing
position of the United Kingdom is that there is no
military solution to the conflict. We have been urging
an immediate and sustained cessation of all military
8/16

The United Kingdom will continue to support the
diplomatic efforts of international partners in Vienna
and Brussels as they seek to secure much-needed
stability and security for the people of the region.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): We thank
Assistant Secretary-General Jenča for his useful
briefing this morning.
Let me begin by noting that we are deeply troubled
by the outbreak of violence along the ArmenianAzerbaijani border, including reports of the shelling
of civilian infrastructure in Armenia. We offer our
condolences to the families of those killed and injured
in the renewed violence.
The United States has engaged with Armenian
and Azerbaijani officials and conveyed our deep
concern over military actions along the border. We
are particularly disturbed by reports of civilians being
harmed inside Armenia. All sides must fully observe
their obligations under international humanitarian law,
including those related to the protection of civilians.
Like others, the United States welcomes the
cessation of all hostilities and encourages both parties
to continue to exercise restraint. Military forces should
now disengage to allow both parties to resolve all
outstanding issues through peaceful negotiations. There
is an urgent need to return to talks aimed at a lasting
peaceful resolution to the conflict and the normalization
of relations between Armenia and Azerbaijan.
I want to be clear today: the United States is firm
in that there can be no military solution to the conflict.
We encourage both Governments to re-establish direct
lines of communication across diplomatic and military
channels and to recommit to the diplomatic process. A
negotiated comprehensive settlement of all remaining
22-59200

15/09/2022

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

issues between Armenia and Azerbaijan is needed.
The international community must continue to engage
diplomatically to help broker a lasting peace.
The United States is dedicated to a sustainable
ceasefire and peaceful resolution. Secretary Blinken
spoke with Armenian Prime Minister Pashinyan
and Azerbaijani President Aliyev to convey our
deep concern over military actions along the border.
Ambassador Philip Reeker, Senior Advisor for Caucasus
Negotiations, is also in the region meeting with senior
Azerbaijani and Armenian leaders.
The United States is committed to promoting
a peaceful, democratic and prosperous future for
the South Caucasus region. We urge the parties to
intensify their diplomatic engagement and to make
use of existing mechanisms for direct communication
to find comprehensive solutions to all outstanding
issues related to, and resulting from, the conflict. We
stand ready to facilitate dialogue between Armenia
and Azerbaijan bilaterally, through the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and in
coordination with partners in order to achieve a longterm political settlement to the conflict in accordance
with international law, including the Charter of the
United Nations as well as the Helsinki Final Act.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Miroslav Jenča for his briefing.
The Russian Federation is extremely concerned
about the sharp escalation of the situation in certain
areas on the Armenia-Azerbaijan border that took place
on the night of 12 and 13 September and the subsequent
exchanges of fire. As a result, a large number of
servicemen were killed and there were civilian
casualties. We express our deepest condolences to their
families and wish the injured a speedy recovery.
We consider the use of force as unacceptable. We
hope to see the implementation of all the ceasefire
agreements brokered by Russia. We call on Azerbaijan
and Armenia to show restraint and refrain from steps
that could increase the tensions, as well as to strictly
comply with the agreements within the framework
of the trilateral statements of the leaders of Russia,
Azerbaijan and Armenia made on 9 November 2020 and
11 January and 26 November 2021.
In order to stabilize the situation, the leadership of
the Russian Federation is in close contact with Baku
and Yerevan. The reduction of tensions was discussed

S/PV.9132

during telephone conversations between President Putin
of Russia and Prime Minister Pashinyan of Armenia, the
Foreign Ministers of Russia, Armenia and Azerbaijan
and the Defence Ministers of Russia and Armenia. We
expect the topic to be the main focus of attention at
the meeting between Mr. Putin and President Aliyev of
Azerbaijan on the margins of the Summit of Heads of
State of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization to be
held in Samarkand on 15 and 16 September. Significant
efforts in that regard are being made through Russia’s
Ministry of Defence and Federal Security Service
Border Service. Our military is in close contact
with both countries in order to achieve a sustainable
ceasefire and the return of Azerbaijani and Armenian
soldiers to their previous positions.
The situation was discussed at the extraordinary
session of the Collective Security Council of the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO)
on 13 September. It resulted in an agreement by the
CSTO secretariat and joint staff to send a mission to
the Republic of Armenia in order to study the situation
in various areas on the border between Armenia and
Azerbaijan and make appropriate recommendations
and proposals to be reviewed by the CSTO Heads of
State. It was decided that the mission should be led
by the CSTO’s Secretary-General Stanislav Zas and
Chief of Joint Staff General Anatoliy Sidorov. Today
the mission is beginning carry out its tasks. We hope
that its impartial work on the ground will be a factor in
helping to de-escalate the situation.
We continue to believe that all contentious issues
between Armenia and Azerbaijan should be resolved
exclusively through political and diplomatic means,
and, with regard to the border issues, through the
work of the bilateral Armenian-Azerbaijani Border
Delimitation Commission, with the advisory assistance
of Russia. Incidentally, the first meeting of the national
delegations was held on 24 May at the border itself.
The second took place in Moscow on 30 August. The
main work will be done by Baku and Yerevan, but
we stand ready to share our experience on border
delimitation and demarcation in the post-Soviet era,
provide cartographic and other materials and other
necessary advisory and technical assistance. In order to
ensure the effectiveness of such efforts, it is important
to promote stability and security in the border area
without outside interference and to avoid politicization.
Unfortunately, as the events of 12 and 13 September
have shown, delimitation and demarcation issues are
very sensitive and do not come without disruptions and

22-592009/16

S/PV.9132

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

escalation. What is needed is swift stabilization and a
return to dialogue.
The Russian side is making every effort to
normalize relations between the countries based on
the three trilateral statements made by the leaders of
Russia, Azerbaijan and Armenia. The first of them,
most importantly, ended the hostilities and defined
the parameters for the deployment of a Russian
peacekeeping contingent along the Lachin corridor and
the line of contact in the Nagorno Karabakh conflict
area. Our peacekeepers are continuing to ensure the
ceasefire in their area of responsibility and assist in
resolving acute humanitarian issues. Building on the
provisions of the first statement, a second, dedicated
to unblocking all economic and transportation links in
the region, was adopted in January 2021. A trilateral
working group, co-chaired by the Deputy Prime
Ministers of Azerbaijan, Armenia and Russia, has
been established and activated. Substantial work has
been done, and a package of major projects is being
coordinated with an emphasis on launching rail and
road communication between Azerbaijan and Armenia,
with possible access to neighbouring countries. The
projects include the construction of a railroad and a
highway between the western regions of Azerbaijan
and the Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic through
Armenia’s Syunik oblast.
One of the key points of the third statement made
on 26 November 2021 was precisely that of establishing
mechanisms for border demarcation and delimitation.
Besides that, one of the central points in our efforts
to normalize Armenian-Azerbaijani relations is
the preparation of a peace treaty. Both sides have
confirmed to us their desire for the relevant Russian
assistance, and we treat that issue with the greatest
possible responsibility. Despite the current escalation
in tensions, the work has continued. Igor Khovaev, the
special representative of Russia’s Foreign Ministry
for issues relating to the normalization of relations
between Azerbaijan and Armenia, visited Baku on
8 and 9 September and Yerevan on 13 and 14 September.
Relevant consultations and the search for points of
convergence will continue.
Obviously, we are only at the beginning of the
difficult path to reconciliation between the two
countries. We believe that the basis for the normalization
of relations between Baku and Yerevan continues to be
the full implementation of the provisions of the trilateral
statements by the leaders of Russia, Azerbaijan and
10/16

15/09/2022

Armenia. All three documents are comprehensive
and inextricably linked, as their provisions are
interdependent. Their implementation will ensure
the conditions for achieving sustainable peace in the
Southern Caucasus, which is in the interests not only
of the States of the region but of all their neighbours.
Russia is determined to continue to provide Baku
and Yerevan with all necessary assistance for the
implementation of the agreements in formats and a
scope acceptable to both sides. Achieving sustainable
results will require time and considerable efforts from
both Baku and Yerevan, as well as the unity of the
international community. Geopolitical competition and
zero-sum games can only damage the process. But the
most important thing for us today is to stop the fighting
and implement the ceasefire agreements.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I thank Mr. Jenča for his briefing. France is very
concerned about the military actions on the border
between Armenia and Azerbaijan, which have led
to dozens of casualties. Several areas on Armenian
territory have been fired on and there are reports of
strikes on civilian infrastructure. We are dealing with
the most serious fighting since the 2020 war. In the face
of the escalation, France, together with its partners, is
working to restore respect for the ceasefire. President
Macron has met with the Prime Minister of Armenia
and the President of Azerbaijan. The Minister for
Europe and Foreign Affairs also met successively with
her Armenian and Azerbaijani counterparts. Three
main messages were conveyed to the parties.
First, priority must be given to strict compliance
with the 8 November 2020 ceasefire. We are all,
without exception, bound by the Charter of the United
Nations to settle our disputes peacefully. We also call
on Azerbaijan to maintain its forces in their original
positions. The delimitation of the border must be
decided exclusively through negotiations. In the present
case and in view of the advance of Azerbaijani forces
beyond certain segments of the border, the territorial
integrity of Armenia must be respected. Finally, the
parties must resume a dialogue to resolve all outstanding
issues through negotiations. We call on the parties to
make progress on the delimitation and demarcation
of the border and on ways to prevent further incidents
through measures to distance forces.
22-59200

15/09/2022

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

France recalls that the parties are bound to uphold
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and urges them to facilitate the unhindered delivery
of humanitarian aid. We welcome the work of the
International Committee of the Red Cross.
We call for the release of prisoners. France
welcomes the release by Azerbaijan of five Armenian
prisoners on 8 September. France stands ready to
continue its efforts, alongside all partners and the
Secretary-General. In its capacity as co-Chair of the
Minsk Group of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and as a member State of the
European Union, France will continue supporting all
efforts to achieve lasting peace in the region.
France welcomes the efforts of the President of
the European Council, who has met with President
Aliyev and Prime Minister Pashinyan four times since
November 2021 with a view to normalizing relations
between Armenia and Azerbaijan. The European Union
is also working to ensure respect for the ceasefire.
It is important that the Security Council remain
seized of the matter and that the efforts of its members
be focused on ending the hostilities, ensuring lasting
respect for the ceasefire and contributing to the
implementation of the commitments made by the parties
under the trilateral statement and during the mediation
by the President of the European Council.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): I would like to express
appreciation to the French presidency for convening
today’s emergency meeting upon the request contained
in the letter from the Foreign Minister of Armenia (see
S/2022/688, annex).
This meeting takes place at a grave time for my
country, as acts of criminal aggression have been
perpetrated against the territorial integrity of the
Republic of Armenia, in flagrant violation of the
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
The perpetrator, indeed, has a name — Azerbaijan,
Armenia’s neighbour to the east, which is several
times larger in territory, population and resources, and
whose pervasive record of hostile conduct, rhetoric and
unchecked, disproportionate violence demonstrates
a most dangerous pattern of utter disregard for every
tenet and norm of international law and reveals a clear

S/PV.9132

intention to instigate wars, destruction and instability
in the region.
In the early hours of 13 September, Azerbaijan
initiated a major military offensive, targeting the
eastern and south-eastern regions of Armenia with the
use of a wide range of weaponry, including artillery
and combat unmanned aerial vehicles. The offensive
took the lives of 105 people, left dozens wounded
and dozens missing and inflicted various forms of
material damage, including upon civilian settlements
and infrastructure. The scale of destruction and the
intensity of shelling is so high that, at the moment, we
have only initial statistics.
Approximately 200 civilian homes suffered
serious damage, with more than 60 of them completely
destroyed. For a few consecutive days, several densely
populated towns in Armenia, including Goris, Jermuk,
Vardenis, Kapan and Sotk, came under heavy fire.
The most recent reports indicate that the offensive has
displaced at least 2,750 people in the Gegharkunik,
Vayots Dzor and Syunik provinces, which include 370
children and 55 persons with disabilities among those
displaced. The shelling of the resort town of Jermuk,
which has absolutely no military targets, is nothing
short of a war crime, as are the strikes against the
Kechut reservoir, with a potentially catastrophic human
toll and environmental impact.
In flagrant violation of the Geneva Conventions
and international humanitarian law, at least seven
identified prisoners of war have been captured, with
video evidence suggesting that there could be more
captives held by Azerbaijan. The offensive targeted
journalists, both local and foreign, who were carrying
out their work covering the events.
We have often reflected at the United Nations and
here in the Chamber on the challenges for justice and
accountability. In doing so, we are constantly reminded
that impunity for past crimes can lead to the most serious
violations in the future — the ultimate manifestations
of which are genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity. Advancing the early-warning and accurate
reporting capacities of the United Nations to monitor
and respond includes identifying the systematic
policies of promulgating hate speech, incitement and
the glorification of violence on the basis of ethnicity or
religion, in particular when such policies are State-led.
Over the past year, we have repeatedly brought to
the attention of the Council the fact that Azerbaijan has

22-5920011/16

S/PV.9132

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

been engaging in the illegal practice of acquisition of
territories by force and have duly reported such acts of
aggression under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter.
Through the letters dated 14 May 2021 (S/2021/467),
29 July 2021 (S/2021/693) and 16 November 2021 (see
S/2021/956, annex), Armenia alerted the members of
the Council about Azerbaijan’s persistent violations of
the norms and principles of international law, as well as
the provisions of the trilateral statement of 9 November
2020 on the establishment of ceasefire and cessation of
hostilities, following the 44-day war in 2020.
The most recent attacks demonstrate that, in the
absence of proper accountability measures, policies of
aggression are likely to continue, and even increase in
scope and scale. It also follows that, emboldened by the
results of the use of force in the past, Azerbaijan now
seeks to normalize violence and aggression to capture
territories by force. Over the past two days, Azerbaijan
has intruded and occupied more than 10 square
kilometres of the sovereign territory of Armenia. That
attack follows the offensives in May and November
2021, when Azerbaijan occupied approximately 45
square kilometres of Armenian land.
The actions of Azerbaijan are in blatant violation of
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular Article 2, paragraph 4, of the
Charter, the Helsinki Final Act of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and international
humanitarian law. Moreover, the military aggression
of Azerbaijan goes against the letter and spirit of
the trilateral statements of 9 November 2020 and
26 November 2021. The latter in particular stipulates
that the sides agreed to “take steps to increase the
level of stability and security on the AzerbaijaniArmenian border”.
I should underline in particular that that act of
aggression occurred in the context of peace negotiations
conducted in different forums and facilitated by various
actors. Armenia has engaged in all those processes in
good faith, with the aim of stabilizing the situation in
the South Caucasus. Armenia has publicly undertaken
to work to bring about peace in the region and has
declared its readiness to launch negotiations for a peace
agreement. This aggression is Azerbaijan’s answer to
the mediation efforts of the international community.
As we speak, we are receiving reports that the
fragile ceasefire is under threat. There are credible
reports that Azerbaijan is planning yet another military
offensive by widening the geography of the aggression,
12/16

15/09/2022

including from the direction of Nakhijevan, to realize
the unlawful ambitions to establish an extraterritorial
corridor through the sovereign territory of Armenia.
The representative of Azerbaijan is here to offer
justifications for his country’s predatory conduct.
Make no mistake — there is none, at least not under
international law. For all the talk about manufactured
pretexts such as “Armenia’s provocations”, “occupation”
or “Azerbaijan’s right to self-defence” and “counterattacks”, the truth is that no such actual armed attack
has been initiated by Armenia.
We understand that, for many years, the blame game
and speculation have been Azerbaijan’s best friends
and that it is precisely for that reason that Azerbaijan
has been so vehemently opposed to any idea leading
to the creation of internationally monitored verification
mechanisms to identify ceasefire violations. If
established, such measures would be instrumental
to ending the blame game. They would be critical to
helping to sustain the ceasefire so that peace and
diplomacy have a chance.
In reality, today’s acts of aggression are nothing
short of the product of an intentional decision to walk
away from the Nagorno-Karabakh negotiations and opt
for a military solution to the conflict. The very fact
that a large-scale military aggression was unleashed
amid an unprecedented pandemic in 2020 is a crime of
global proportions in itself and should be evaluated and
addressed on its own merit, or rather the lack thereof.
It follows that the use of force and threats have
become Azerbaijan’s distinct pattern of behaviour in all
conflict situations. The claims that Azerbaijan resolved
the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict by force, abolished all
collective rights of the people of Nagorno-Karabakh
and even eliminated the very name of that Armenian
populated land are illustrative in that regard.
Armenia is well aware of the challenges and
complexities in international politics today. We are
equally cognizant of the growing energy demand in the
world. Having said that, we appeal to the Council to
live up to its responsibility under the United Nations
Charter for the maintenance of international peace and
security. Azerbaijan is yet to abide by its humanitarian
obligations vis-à-vis Armenian prisoners of war, to
commit in good faith to the preservation of Armenia’s
cultural and religious heritage and to address the
anti-Armenian rhetoric, including at the level of
public officials and institutions, as indicated in the
22-59200

15/09/2022

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

provisional measures issued by the International Court
of Justice against Azerbaijan in December 2021 under
the International Convention on the Elimination of all
Forms of Racial Discrimination.
We strongly urge the members of the Security
Council to come up with tangible outcomes following
the discussions in today’s emergency meeting. Those
should include a strong condemnation of Azerbaijan’s
unprovoked aggression against the sovereign territory
of the Republic of Armenia; a demand for the immediate
and unconditional withdrawal of Azerbaijan’s forces
from the sovereign territory of Armenia; and a demand
for Azerbaijan to refrain from any future acts of
aggression against the territorial integrity of Armenia
and fully comply with its international obligations and
commitments at the highest level, including the United
Nations Charter, the Helsinki Final Act and trilateral
statements. We call on the Council to urge Azerbaijan
to engage peacefully in the negotiation process,
including on issues resulting from and related to the
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, including that of its status,
and to release and repatriate all Armenian prisoners of
war — we stress that acting contrary to that constitutes
a violation of international humanitarian law.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): This meeting of the
Security Council takes place in the aftermath of a serious
military escalation along the undelimited State border
between Armenia and Azerbaijan recklessly provoked
by Armenia with the aim of torpedoing the fragile
post-conflict normalization process being pursued with
the active engagement of relevant international actors,
including the members of the Council. As such, it is
our expectation that today’s deliberations will send an
appropriate message confirming the support of the
international community for the search for negotiated
diplomatic solutions to all issues pertaining to the
normalization of inter-State relations between Armenia
and Azerbaijan.
Unfortunately, the statement we just heard from
the representative of Armenia demonstrates the quite
opposite intention of that Member State to abuse
the Security Council to cover up its continuous and
systematic efforts, both in rhetoric and actions, with the
aim to evade the implementation of its commitments.
We categorically reject the allegations made by the
representative of Armenia. Those allegations, full of a
standard set of fabrications, distortions and deceptions,

S/PV.9132

demonstrate that Armenia is far from complying with
its international obligations and promoting peace,
stability and cooperation in our region.
It is ironic that Armenia, the country that unleashed
aggression against Azerbaijan, held the sovereign
territories of my country under occupation for almost
30 years, carried out ethnic cleansing on a massive
scale and committed other heinous crimes during the
war, talks enthusiastically now about the very norms
and principles it has consistently violated and makes
appeals to the Security Council, whose resolutions it has
refused to implement in its desire for endless impunity.
In fact, the lack of adequate attention and targeted
measures to implement the demands of the Security
Council has encouraged Armenia to consolidate the
results of its unlawful use of force against Azerbaijan.
The consequences of the aggression therefore remain
unaddressed and are being further aggravated. It is the
occupation of part of the State border for nearly 30 years
that made delimitation and demarcation impossible.
Had that happened in a timely manner, it would have
prevented the latest escalation. Therefore, attempts
by Armenia to portray itself as an ardent defender of
the commonly agreed principles, norms and values are
incapable of whitewashing the well-known, real image
of that country as a persistent violator of international
law and human rights.
That Armenia is yet to comply with its international
obligations and commit itself genuinely to peace and
stability in the region is evidenced by its continued
use of obsolete or fake names for the localities in
Azerbaijan. The references in the statement of the
representative of Armenia to such names, which
have no historical or legal grounds whatsoever, are a
testament to his Government’s continued territorial
claims against Azerbaijan and apparent disregard for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of my country.
I have to emphasize that Armenia has no legal, political
or moral grounds to make any statements concerning
the internationally recognized territory of Azerbaijan,
or on the matters falling within my country’s exclusive
sovereign rights, competence and responsibilities.
On the night of 12 to 13 September, Armenia’s
armed forces committed a large-scale act of military
provocation in the direction of the Dashkasan, Kalbajar
and Lachin districts of the Azerbaijan-Armenia State
border, attempting to plant mines on the roads between
the military positions of the Azerbaijani army, while
taking advantage of the night-time and difficult terrain.

22-5920013/16

S/PV.9132

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

Furthermore, the positions of the armed forces of
Azerbaijan were subjected to intense fire from different
types of weapons, including mortars and artillery. As
a result, that night, 42 servicemen of the Azerbaijani
army and eight border guards were killed and significant
damage was inflicted on military infrastructure.
Azerbaijan took adequate and proportionate measures
to neutralize the threat against its sovereignty and
territorial integrity and ensure the safety of its military
personnel and civilians who were involved in the
ongoing rehabilitation and reconstruction works in
close vicinity to the State border.
The countermeasures taken in response to
Armenia’s provocations were limited and targeted at
legitimate military objects. Contrary to the allegations
we just heard from the representative of Armenia, the
Ministry of Health of his country reported no casualties
or injuries among civilians. It is also worth mentioning
that Armenian social media are full of photographs
depicting the so-called destruction of civilian objects
allegedly on the territory of Armenia. In fact, those
were photographs taken after missile strikes by
Armenia’s armed forces on the cities in Azerbaijan
during the war in the fall of 2020, particularly in the
city centre of Barda, which came under massive rocket
fire on 28 October, causing the deaths of 21 civilians
and injuring more than 70.
Taking into account the appeals of our international
partners, a ceasefire agreement was reached, effective
as of 9 a.m. on 13 September, Baku time. However,
in a reckless attempt to further escalate the crisis
and manipulate politics in front of the international
community, the armed forces of Armenia continued
attacks and provocations in the border areas using
artillery and other heavy weapons. As a result of
Armenia’s violations of the established ceasefire,
Azerbaijan suffered further losses and casualties
among its military personnel. In addition, two civilians
were seriously wounded. In total, 71 servicemen of the
armed forces of Azerbaijan perished.
Of particular concern is that Armenia resorted to yet
another gross violation of international humanitarian
law by stationing its armed forces and heavy equipment
within the residential areas in the vicinity of the border
line. Needless to say, that was aimed at substantiating
groundless accusations against Azerbaijan of shelling
civilian infrastructure, which Armenia had been trying
to spread through its propaganda channels since the
early minutes of the escalation. Yet the armed forces
14/16

15/09/2022

of Azerbaijan demonstrated the utmost restraint and
professionalism and limited themselves to targeting,
with high-precision weapons, exclusively the locations
from which Armenia was firing its weapons, in order
to suppress its attacks on the positions of Azerbaijan.
In view of Armenia’s overt attempt at further
escalation, Azerbaijan took several steps, including
through contacts with relevant international partners,
and demonstrated good faith and genuine will to restore
the ceasefire that had already been agreed upon a
day before. Among other things, the Azerbaijani side
declared its willingness to return to Armenia the remains
of its deceased military personnel on a unilateral basis
and informed the International Committee of the Red
Cross accordingly.
Eventually, the ceasefire was restored, effective
8 p.m. local time, which is noon Eastern Standard
Time in the United States, on 14 September, through
direct communication channels between Armenia and
Azerbaijan, and since then it has been maintained, as
confirmed by both sides. But now we have heard an
absolutely provocative statement on the part of the
Armenian representative.
Both Armenia and Azerbaijan are now engaged
in dealing with humanitarian consequences, including
the retrieval of dead bodies. Azerbaijan reiterated to
Armenia and the relevant humanitarian actors present
on the ground its readiness to return the deceased
Armenian soldiers unilaterally.
Moreover, as a result of the escalation, several
Armenian soldiers fell under the control of Azerbaijan.
They are being treated fully in line with the norms
and principles of international humanitarian law, and
necessary medical first aid was provided to those
injured. Both sides are in contact with a view to
facilitating their repatriation as soon as possible.
Therefore, there is ground for cautious optimism
that common sense will finally prevail and yet another
military adventure irresponsibly resorted to by Armenia
will be overcome without further undermining the
shaky normalization process between the two countries
after an almost 30-year-long bloody conflict. In that
context, it is more important than ever for the entire
international community to contribute to this process
and refrain from one-sided actions and statements that
would complicate the already delicate situation.
The escalation at the State border was not an isolated
incident, but another link in the chain of destabilizing
22-59200

15/09/2022

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

S/PV.9132

actions by Armenia over the past months. Suffice it to
mention just a few.

true scale and gravity of the humanitarian threat facing
Azerbaijani civilians.

On 3 August, Armenia resorted to military
provocations in the direction of the Lachin district
of Azerbaijan, which we reported to the SecretaryGeneral and the Security Council in our letter issued
under the symbol S/2022/638. From 2 September
onwards, after the fourth trilateral meeting between
the leaders of Azerbaijan and Armenia mediated by the
President of the European Council, Mr. Charles Michel,
which was held on 31 August in Brussels, the armed
forces of Armenia intensified fire against the positions
of the armed forces of Azerbaijan along the border in
the direction of the Kalbajar and Lachin districts.

Furthermore, in violation of article 4 of the
trilateral statement, Armenia has not completely
withdrawn the remnants of its armed forces and illegal
armed formations from the territory of Azerbaijan
where the peacekeepers of the Russian Federation are
temporarily deployed.

Following the Brussels meeting, the Prime
Minister and the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Armenia made provocative statements in connection
with the anniversary of the so-called “independence”
of the unlawful regime that Armenia established and
maintained on the territories of Azerbaijan in the
years of their occupation, while the Secretary of the
Security Council of Armenia illegally visited the city
of Khankendi in Azerbaijan.

Even after the end of the conflict, Armenia
continues to allow racist hate groups formed for the
specific purpose of inciting and committing violence
against Azerbaijanis to operate openly and notoriously
on its territory, in violation of international law
and apparent disregard for the order on provisional
measures handed down by the International Court
of Justice on 7 December 2021 in the case on the
Application of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
(Azerbaijan v. Armenia).

Furthermore, in breach of the provisions of the
trilateral statement regarding the cessation of all
military activities, as well as of its other international
obligations, Armenia continued to plant mines on
a massive scale on the territory of Azerbaijan. Since
15 August, more than 1,300 anti-personnel mines
have been found in the Lachin district alone. It was
established that those mines were manufactured in
Armenia in 2021 and, accordingly, laid on the territory
of Azerbaijan after the signing of the trilateral statement
on 10 November 2020.
Massive mine planting by Armenia on the
territory of Azerbaijan continues along with Armenia’s
consistent failure to share accurate and comprehensive
information about the hundreds of thousands of
landmines it indiscriminately laid on Azerbaijan’s
territory during the conflict. As a result, after the
signing of the trilateral statement, more than 240
citizens of Azerbaijan were killed or injured by mine
explosions. Of those mine explosions, 134 — in other
words, more than 50 per cent — took place in areas not
covered by the minefield records shared by Armenia.
That is indicative of the indiscriminate nature of
mine planting by Armenia, in gross violation of the
relevant international norms, and demonstrates the

There are also almost 4,000 citizens of Azerbaijan,
both civilians and members of the military, who remain
missing in connection with the conflict. Armenia has
failed to clarify the whereabouts of those persons who
fell into its hands but have not been seen since.

That is the overall context in the run-up to the
recent large-scale military provocations on the border
by Armenia.
Domestically, my Government prioritized the
rehabilitation and reconstruction of the liberated
territories and their reintegration into the country’s
economy to ensure the safe return of the displaced
population and high standards of living. Impressive
large-scale post-conflict investment, rehabilitation
and reconstruction projects are under way in close
proximity to the areas where the armed hostilities
recently erupted.
After almost three decades of occupation and
denial of their basic human rights, the first group of
Azerbaijani internally displaced persons (IDPs) recently
returned to the newly constructed Aghali village in the
liberated Zangilan district. Furthermore, Azerbaijan is
about to complete the construction of a new airport in
Zangilan close to the State border with Armenia.
The Government of Azerbaijan has also made
consistent and successful efforts to promote interaction
with local Armenian residents, including most recently

22-5920015/16

S/PV.9132

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

in addressing important water and energy supply issues
in the region.
Consequently, Azerbaijan cannot be interested in
any military activity in those areas that endanger such
large-scale and costly rehabilitation and reconstruction
projects that are being implemented with foreign
investors. On the contrary, the escalation in the vicinity
of newly liberated territories aims at preventing the
restoration of the demographic situation in the conflictaffected territories by enabling the safe return of several
hundreds of thousands Azerbaijani IDPs to their places
of origin. In that regard, it is no coincidence that Armenia
fully continues its militarization of the borderline areas
in preparation for military provocations.
Furthermore, a few days ago, as a goodwill gesture,
Azerbaijan released and handed over to Armenia five
Armenian servicemen who were previously charged
and imprisoned for criminal offences. That step was
taken with a view to strengthening trust and improving
the atmosphere for peace talks.
It is evident that, by resorting to political and
military provocations, Armenia tried to backtrack
from the implementation of the agreements reached
between the two countries, undermine the process of
the normalization of inter-State relations, involve third
parties in bilateral issues and expand the geography
of tensions for the purpose of sustaining its territorial
claims and revanchist objectives.
Against that background, it is important that
the international community resolutely condemn
Armenia’s policy and actions, which run counter to
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, demand that Armenia strictly comply with its
international obligations, focus on their implementation
and engage in good faith in the results-oriented process
of normalizing inter-State relations.
Ensuring lasting peace, development, progress and
good-neighbourliness is the basis of Azerbaijan’s vision
for the future. Azerbaijan is firm in its determination to
continue efforts towards advancing the rehabilitation,

16/16

15/09/2022

reconstruction and reintegration of its conflict-affected
territories, as well as ensuring justice and preventing
and eliminating — by all legitimate means —any threat
to the safety and well-being of its people and the State’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Azerbaijan is committed to regional peace,
stability and development. The establishment of goodneighbourly relations between Armenia and Azerbaijan
is key for building a secure, stable and prosperous
South Caucasus through full-fledged regional
normalization. Border delimitation and demarcation
through bilateral commissions and the opening of
transport communications are the two tracks of
inter-State normalization complementing negotiations
on a bilateral peace treaty.
Azerbaijan’s position in that regard is clear,
principled and consistent and is based on international
law and established international practice. It is
Azerbaijan that, right after the end of the conflict,
initiated the process of normalizing inter-State relations
with Armenia, based on mutual recognition and respect
for each other’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
within their internationally recognized borders,
including through the signing of a peace treaty based
on those principles.
Azerbaijan counts on the support of the international
community for its efforts, both domestically and in
terms of mitigating the consequences of the occupation
of its territories for nearly 30 years, and on the
inter-State track aimed at building good-neighbourly
relations with Armenia.
We take this opportunity to reiterate our call for
the international community to persuade Armenia
to reciprocate Azerbaijan’s offer, cease its political
and military provocations, abandon its aggressive
rhetoric and actions and engage in good faith in direct
negotiations to find peaceful diplomatic solutions to
all issues pertaining to inter-State relations between
Azerbaijan and Armenia.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

22-59200
