A /76/PV.93

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

93rd plenary meeting

Monday, 11 July 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Ndong Mba
(Equatorial Guinea) took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs
(b) Election of members of the Economic and
Social Council
The Acting President: Since no candidate obtained
the required two-thirds majority in the previous ballot,
there remains one seat to be filled from among the
Eastern European States. We shall therefore proceed to
the fifth unrestricted ballot. In accordance with rule 94
of the rules of procedure, this twelfth round of balloting
shall be unrestricted.
May I remind the Assembly that any Member
State from among the Eastern European States may be
a candidate except those that will remain members of
the Economic and Social Council as of 1 January 2023,
as well as those that were already elected for a term
beginning on 1 January 2023. The following members
can therefore not be voted for in the present balloting:
Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Slovakia
and Slovenia.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind members that pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order on
the actual conduct of the voting.

We shall now begin the voting process. Ballot
papers will now be distributed.
Members are requested to put an “X” in the box
next to the name printed on the ballot paper or to write
the name of another eligible State on the blank line. If
the box next to the name of a State is checked, the name
of that State does not have to be repeated on the blank
line. There should not be more than one checked box
or handwritten name for the vacant seat to be filled.
Accordingly, members can check only one box or write
one name of an eligible State from among the Eastern
European States in the space provided.
If the ballot paper contains a vote for a Member
State that will remain a member of the Economic
and Social Council as of 1 January 2023 or that was
already elected for a term beginning on 1 January 2023,
the ballot paper will be declared invalid. Finally, if a
ballot paper contains any notation other than a vote in
favour of an eligible Member State, those notations will
be disregarded.
At the invitation of the Acting President, the
representatives of Ecuador, Hungary, Japan,
Mozambique, New Zealand and Timor-Leste acted
as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The Acting President: In the interest of time, the
General Assembly will now proceed to consider the
other items announced in The Journal of the United
Nations while the ballots are being counted.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-41797 (E)

*2241797*

A/76/PV.93

The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 115.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly concluded its consideration
of sub-item (b) of agenda item 74 at its 54th plenary
meeting, on 24 December 2021. To enable the General
Assembly to take action on the draft resolution, it will
be necessary to reopen consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 74. May I take that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item
(b) of agenda item 74?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 17 September 2021, the
General Assembly decided to allocate sub-item (b)
of agenda item 74 to the Third Committee. To enable
the Assembly to take action expeditiously on the draft
decision, may I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to consider sub-item (b) of the agenda item 74
directly in plenary meeting and proceed immediately to
its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 74 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
(b) Human rights questions, including
alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms
Draft decision (A/76/L.69)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft decision A/76/L.69, entitled “The
safety of journalists and the issue of impunity”. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft decision
A/76/L.69?
Draft decision A/76/L.69 was adopted (decision
76/571).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 74?
2/10

11/07/2022

It was so decided.
Agenda item 20 (continued)
Sustainable development
Draft resolution A/76/L.68
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
Special Representative of the President of Uzbekistan on
Foreign Policy to introduce draft resolution A/76/L.68.
Mr. Kamilov (Uzbekistan): I have the honour
to introduce draft resolution A/76/L.68, entitled
“Strengthening connectivity between Central and South
Asia”. At the outset, I would like to thank all Member
States for their active and constructive engagement in
the negotiation process, as well as for their valuable
input and proposals for the text of the draft resolution.
Central and South Asia are two regions that are
closely connected historically, given the similarities
in their economic, social and cultural dimensions.
Located at the crossroads of the Great Silk Road, they
have contributed to active dialogue between peoples
and civilizations for many centuries.
In recognition of the fact that connectivity plays
a key role in trade, economic growth and sustainable
development and also contributes to strengthening
regional cooperation and developing friendly relations
among nations, at the initiative of President Shavkat
Mirziyoyev of Uzbekistan, on 15 and 16 July our country
hosted a high-level international conference, entitled
“Central and South Asia: Regional Connectivity.
Challenges and Opportunities”. The conference, which
was attended by many high-level delegations from all
over the world, provided a unique opportunity and
platform for discussing a wide range of important
topics related to development and the strengthening
of regional connectivity in Central and South Asia.
Secretary-General António Guterres, who sent a video
message to the conference participants, highlighted the
crucial role of connectivity in trade, economic growth
and sustainable development, and expressed the full
commitment of the United Nations to supporting efforts
to strengthen connectivity in the region.
In recent years, the concept of connectivity has
become an essential item on the agenda of the United
Nations and plays a key role in a human-focused
approach that leaves no one behind. The Charter of
the United Nations encourages measures to establish
regional cooperation in advancing the purposes
22-41797

11/07/2022

and principles of the United Nations. In practice,
the implementation of infrastructure projects such
as the Mazar-e-Sharif-Kabul-Peshawar railway,
the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India gas
pipeline, as well as the Central Asia-South Asia-1000
power transmission and trade project and the SurkhanPuli-Khumri power transmission line, will promote the
consolidation of connectivity between the two regions.
In that regard, the draft resolution before the Assembly
recognizes the importance of regional connectivity
in promoting the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and emphasizes the key role of transport
and transit corridors in accelerating economic growth
and increasing the efficiency of trade and economic
ties between the countries of Central and South Asia,
as well as cooperation in the field of energy.
In Uzbekistan, we consider Afghanistan to be
an integral part of Central Asia. The proposed draft
resolution therefore recognizes the importance of
Afghanistan’s potential role in connecting Central Asia
and South Asia, as well as the importance for lasting
peace and stability of its economic development and
integration into interregional economic processes.
I would like to take this opportunity to inform the
Assembly that the Government of Uzbekistan is
planning to hold a high-level international conference
on Afghanistan in Tashkent on 25 and 26 July, to
discuss ways to find a consolidated approach to the
peace process in that country.
From Uzbekistan’s perspective, the adoption
of draft resolution A/76/L.68 will be an important
milestone in promoting inclusive growth and
sustainable development in Central and South Asia
and strengthening relationships between the regions
and its peoples in the areas of education, science
and technology, innovation, tourism, culture, art and
sports, as well as accelerating trade and economic ties.
We firmly believe that connectivity between Central
Asia and South Asia will be key in ensuring stability
and sustainable development, as well as improving the
living standards and well-being of the peoples of the
two regions.
In conclusion, I would once again like to thank all
delegations for their support throughout the negotiation
process, and to take this opportunity to express my
gratitude to those countries that have already sponsored
our resolution and encourage other Member States to
do so.

A/76/PV.93

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/76/L.68, entitled
“Strengthening connectivity between Central and
South Asia”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to the delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of draft resolution A/76/L.68: Angola,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Burundi, the Central
African Republic, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Djibouti,
the Dominican Republic, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Ethiopia, Ghana, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Lesotho,
Malaysia, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, Nicaragua,
the Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, the Philippines, Qatar,
the Russian Federation, Senegal, Sri Lanka, Türkiye,
Uganda, Vanuatu, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.68?
Draft resolution A/76/L.68 was adopted (resolution
76/295).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to delegations in explanation of position, I would like
to remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Czech Republic.
Mr. Kulhánek (Czech Republic): I am delivering
this statement on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its member States. The candidate countries North
Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia, as well as Ukraine
and the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with
this statement.
We welcome the adoption by consensus of
resolution 76/295, entitled “Strengthening connectivity
between Central and South Asia”. We thank Uzbekistan,
especially our colleagues Mr. Laziz Karaev and
Mr. Gulyamjon Pirimkulov, for their skilled facilitation
of the negotiation process.
I would like to make a few comments relevant to
the EU in the context of the resolution. With regard

22-417973/10

A/76/PV.93

to Afghanistan, and paragraph 5 of the resolution
in particular, the EU is very concerned about the
humanitarian, economic, security and political situation
in Afghanistan, which has deteriorated significantly
since the Taliban took over in Kabul on 15 August
2021. The EU would like to emphasize that the longterm stabilization and economic reconstruction of
Afghanistan will take place only if various political and
security requirements are fulfilled.
The EU’s assistance in Afghanistan has
significantly increased to cover the country’s huge
humanitarian needs, as well as to address fundamental
needs of the Afghan population such as basic services,
livelihoods, displacement and human rights, with a
particular focus on the rights of women and minorities.
The EU’s engagement with the de facto authorities
continues to take place based on five criteria defined by
the EU and its member States in the European Council’s
conclusions of 21 September 2021. Security Council
resolution 2593 (2021) reaffirmed the importance of
those five areas and called for action to be taken in
that regard. The criteria, which are meant to fulfil the
expectations of the people of Afghanistan with regard
to peace, security, justice and development, are an
essential prerequisite for the successful completion of
paragraph 5 of resolution 76/295, and as such should
have been included in the text.
On another note, we appreciate the fact that the
resolution emphasizes the importance of effective
border management in promoting connectivity. That is
key to ensuring security and stability, facilitating trade
and cross-border cooperation among countries, thereby
promoting sustainable development in Central and
South Asia. In that regard, the EU has contributed and
shared its best practices in Central Asia for 20 years
through the flagship Border Management Programme
in Central Asia. We would have welcomed a reference
to that in the resolution.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position. We will now hear
statements after the adoption of the resolution.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan is grateful to the
Government of Uzbekistan for proposing this important
resolution (resolution 76/295) on strengthening
connectivity between Central and South Asia. We
welcome its introduction today by Mr. Abdulaziz
Kamilov, the former Foreign Minister of Uzbekistan and
currently the Special Representative of the President of
4/10

11/07/2022

Uzbekistan on Foreign Policy. Pakistan is honoured to
have been a sponsor of this timely resolution.
Regional connectivity in road, rail, energy,
trade, ports and shipping is a vital accelerator of
economic production, growth and prosperity. Regional
connectivity and cooperation can also contribute to
building and sustaining peace, stability and security. The
ancient silk route that connected the East and the West
across the Eurasian heartland was a prime historical
example of the benefits of regional connectivity. It
unleashed an era of prosperity in the West, the East and
in Central Asia. China’s Belt and Road Initiative and the
China-Pakistan Economic Corridor are contemporary
initiatives aimed at reviving the prospects of prosperity
through regional connectivity and cooperation.
The regions of Central and South Asia, both adjacent
to Pakistan, are among the world’s least economically
integrated areas. Unlocking the potential of their
integration can therefore provide a significant impetus
to economic growth, productivity and prosperity
in both regions and beyond. Relations between the
peoples of Central and South Asia are rooted in a shared
historical and cultural heritage, a foundation on which
the two regions can build connectivity and cooperation
in trade, investment, transport, energy, tourism and
other sectors. For the landlocked Central Asian States,
Pakistan can serve as a gateway not only to South Asia
but to global markets. We have traditionally engaged
in close cooperation with the countries of Central
Asia, and that has deepened in recent years. Pakistan
and the Central Asian States have concluded several
multilateral and bilateral trade agreements, including
the Quadrilateral Traffic in Transit Agreement.
As Mr. Kamilov mentioned, we are working
on several specific connectivity projects. The first
seeks to enhance energy connectivity through the
Central Asia-South Asia-1000 project, which would
supply surplus electricity from Tajikistan and
Kyrgyzstan to Afghanistan and Pakistan. The second
enhances transport connectivity through the TermezMazar-e-Sharif-Kabul-Peshawar railway project, which
will provide Central Asian States with access to deepsea ports in Gwadar and Karachi. The third provides gas
connectivity through the Turkmenistan-AfghanistanPakistan-India gas pipeline. There is also an emerging
consensus on extending the China-Pakistan Economic
Corridor to Afghanistan.
For the success of connectivity and integration
between Central and South Asia, it will be vital to ensure
22-41797

11/07/2022

durable peace and security in Afghanistan. Today, after
40 years of conflict, there is an opportunity to bring
peace and development to Afghanistan. To that end, it
is essential to establish sustained engagement with the
de facto Afghan Government, especially for the forum
of its six neighbours plus Russia.
The greatest challenge to full connectivity with
and within South Asia arises from the tensions between
Pakistan and India over Jammu and Kashmir. That
festering dispute must be resolved in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions and the wishes
of the people of Jammu and Kashmir.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, let me express my appreciation to Mr. Bakhtiyor
Ibragimov, Ambassador and Permanent Representative
of Uzbekistan, and his colleagues for their tireless
efforts in preparing the text of this important and
timely resolution. I would also like to express my
gratitude to His Excellency Mr. Abdulaziz Kamilov,
Special Representative of the President of Uzbekistan
on Foreign Policy and former Foreign Minister of
Uzbekistan, for his presence here today and for
introducing resolution 76/295.
My delegation attaches great importance to the issue
of connectivity between Central and South Asia, as well
as to the comprehensive and consistent development
of ties in all areas between the States of Central and
South Asia, based on the spirit of traditional friendship
between the peoples of the two regions, with the purpose
of strengthening historical and cultural bonds. On the
other hand, we want to stress the need to increase
cooperation in all the relevant arenas, especially in
the fields of economic production, investment, energy,
transport and technological innovation.
My delegation also underlines the importance of
strengthening regional and interregional connectivity
and joint action on infrastructure-development
policies, energy and unimpeded trade and financial
cooperation. We are of the view that connectivity plays
a key role in trade, economic growth and sustainable
development, enhances regional cooperation and
fosters friendly relations between neighbouring
States. In this regard, we highlight the important
role of such regional organizations as the Economic
Cooperation Organization in enhancing interregional
and intraregional connectivity.
My delegation also encourages the continuation and
advancement of Central and South Asian cooperation by

A/76/PV.93

expanding transport and communication infrastructure
and international transport corridors that open such
convenient, commercially and safe routes to seaports as
those linking Termez, Mazar-e-Sharif, Herat, Zahedan
and Chabahar as well as the Uzbekistan-TurkmenistanIran-Pakistan railway system. We also highlight the
importance of multimodal transport for connectivity of
the Central and South Asian regions, and in this context
underline the crucial role of such ports as Chabahar.
With its unique capacities, potentials and capabilities
and as an important connecting bridge between Central
Asia and South Asia, Iran is ready to help promote the
connectivity between these two important regions.
In conclusion, I would like to add that the negative
impacts of unlawful and unilateral coercive measures,
illegal unilateral sanctions and the politicization of the
vital issue of connectivity in this area should be taken
into account.
Mrs. Kasymalieva (Kyrgyzstan): At the outset,
let me thank and congratulate our colleagues from
Uzbekistan for the initiative and the successful
adoption of resolution 76/295, entitled “Strengthening
connectivity between Central and South Asia”.
We warmly welcome the presence of Mr. Abdulaziz
Kamilov, Deputy Secretary of the Security Council
under the President of Uzbekistan in charge of Foreign
Policy and Security Affairs.
From the very beginning, Kyrgyzstan supported
the idea and promotion of resolution 76/295 and
became one of its main sponsors. The resolution
reaffirms that regional cooperation is an effective
form of multilateralism and international cooperation,
contributing to the promotion of the purposes and
principles of the United Nations. It emphasizes the
importance of the comprehensive and consistent
development of relations among the States of Central
Asia and South Asia in all areas.
My country is interested in continuing to work on
the development of regional connectivity to advance
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and is
focused on the need to consolidate efforts in the fight
against common challenges and threats to stability
and security in Central and South Asia. In this regard,
Kyrgyzstan welcomes the adoption of this important
and timely resolution.
Mr. Ren Hongyan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Connectivity is a very important driver for development
and revitalization of various countries. China

22-417975/10

A/76/PV.93

commends and supports Uzbekistan’s initiative in
presenting the draft resolution entitled “Strengthening
connectivity between Central and South Asia” in
the General Assembly, just adopted as resolution
76/295. This resolution emphasizes the importance of
intraregional and interregional connectivity and will
contribute to the international community’s support
for regional connectivity to maintain the stability of
global industrial and supply chains. It will also lend
impetus to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
In 2013, President Xi Jinping put forward the Belt
and Road Initiative. Since then, China has developed
closer ties and better cooperation with countries
of the Central Asia and South Asia regions. Many
pragmatic projects have been making steady progress,
and economic ties and trade have been deepened. In
June this year, the meeting of the Foreign Ministers
of China and five Central Asian countries adopted a
new “China+5” connectivity initiative. In September
2021, President Xi Jinping solemnly put forward the
Global Development Initiative at the General Assembly
general debate (see A/76/PV.3, annex VI), committing
to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and making
connectivity in the digital era an important area
of cooperation.
China is ready to work with countries in the two
regions as well as all parties to strengthen the Belt and
Road Initiative and cooperation under the framework
of Global Development Initiative and to help countries
in the two regions transform landlocked countries
into land-connected countries, so that we can have a
partnership with closer connectivity and build a global
community of shared development.
Mr. Annaberdiyev (Turkmenistan): At the outset,
we would like to thank His Excellency Mr. Bakhtiyor
Ibragimov, Permanent Representative of Uzbekistan
to the United Nations, and his team for the tireless
work on resolution 76/295 and congratulate them on
its successful adoption by the General Assembly. We
also would like to thank His Excellency Mr. Abdulaziz
Kamilov, for introducing the resolution.
We are convinced of the importance and relevance of
strengthening connectivity between Central and South
Asia in the light of the present circumstances and trends.
We thank the Government of Uzbekistan for holding a
high-level international conference entitled “Central
and South Asia: regional connectivity — challenges
and opportunities” in Tashkent on 15 and 16 July
6/10

11/07/2022

2021. Turkmenistan participated at a high-level in
this conference. As the representative of Uzbekistan
expressed in his introductory statement today, the
conference served as the basis for today’s resolution.
Turkmenistan views Central and South Asia
as a geostrategic space, given the importance of
both regions’ economic potential for the sustainable
development of the countries in Central and South
Asia, particularly in terms of strengthening the regional
connectivity with a view to enhancing the effectiveness
of trade and economic relations, a cultural humanitarian
collaboration among the States of the two regions and
their unique transport, transit and investment potential.
Turkmenistan advocates the consistent development
of transport and trade links, including cooperation
mechanisms, as well as the implementation of the
principles of modernization, harmonization and
digitalization in the fields of transport, logistics and
management of trade-supply chains at both the regional
and international levels. In this regard, in November
2016, Ashgabat hosted the first United Nations Global
Conference on Sustainable Transport, which is reflected
in the sixth preambular paragraph of resolution 76/295.
In conclusion, we appreciate the initiative taken
by the delegation of Uzbekistan in presenting this
resolution. From our perspective, strengthening
connectivity between the countries of Central and
South Asia will contribute to the fulfilment of 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, deepen relations
among the countries in both regions and enhance the
contribution of the countries of Central and South Asia
to the knowledge and understanding within the United
Nations system of the vast areas they comprise.
Mr. Hikmat (Tajikistan): At the outset, let me join
my colleagues in commending the Permanent Mission of
Uzbekistan, in particular His Excellency Mr. Bakhtiyor
Ibragimov, for introducing and advancing this very
important initiative, in particular, resolution 76/295,
entitled “Strengthening connectivity between Central
and South Asia”. We also commend Mr. Ibragimov’s
able team for facilitating the informal consultation on
this important text leading to its successful adoption by
the General Assembly.
We recognize and welcome the presence of His
Excellency Abdulaziz Kamilov, Special Representative
of the President of Uzbekistan for Foreign Policy.
The Republic of Tajikistan is honoured to be
among the main co-sponsors of the resolution. We
22-41797

11/07/2022

A/76/PV.93

acknowledge the importance of transport and transit
corridors for accelerating economic growth, increasing
the efficiency of trade and economic ties among the
countries of Central and South Asia, and we recognize
the importance of cooperation between Central and
South Asia in finding ways to enhance and strengthen
collaboration between those two important regions. We
also realize the importance of exchanges of experience
between those two regions in promoting sustainable
development, including through access to clean energy
technology and disaster risk reduction strategies and
enhancing cooperation, including through initiatives
that address environmental challenges and contribute
to the protection of the environment and ecosystems.

the call contained in the resolution for the economic
development of Afghanistan. A peaceful, developed
Afghanistan that is free from terrorism and drugs is in
the interest of all States in the region as well as all its
neighbours. That is the key to stability in the region as
a whole.

Tajikistan therefore welcomes the adoption of this
relevant resolution and looks forward to joining hands
with Uzbekistan and other relevant partners in the
implementation of this important resolution.

Russia is working to fully implement interregional
transit and logistical initiatives such as the
International North-South Transport Corridor, which
goes from Europe to the Indian Ocean, as well as the
Europe-Western China transcontinental transport
corridor. We are also updating the Russian port
infrastructure on the Caspian Sea. We are continuing
to contribute to enhancing mutually beneficial
connectivity between Central and South Asia and
neighbouring countries in order to develop historic
business ties with the use of modern technology in the
interests of all of Eurasia, founded on equality, mutual
respect and seeking a balance of interests.

Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we would like to thank our
colleagues from Uzbekistan for having taken the
initiative to propose and agree upon resolution 76/295,
adopted today, as well as for holding an international
conference in 2021 entitled “Central and South Asia:
regional connectivity — challenges and opportunities”.
Russia supports the very useful document that we
adopted today, of which we are a co-sponsor.
We view the issue of connectivity between Central
and South Asia first and foremost from the standpoint of
integrational processes, which have become very active
throughout Eurasia. We have consistently supported
the creation of the Greater Eurasian Partnership, a
unifying integrative framework that should be as free
as possible for the movement of goods, capital, labour
and services. That format would be open to all countries
and integrational bodies on the continent, including the
Eurasian Economic Union.
In that connection, we welcome the provisions
contained in the resolution about the importance
of developing regional and interregional economic
integration. We also have a positive view of the documents
targeting the practical development of connectivity
between the two regions in terms of transport, energy,
digitization, culture and humanitarian cooperation.
In that broad context of increasing connectivity
between Central and South Asia, we can see new
opportunities for developing trade and economic
and investment processes in Eurasia. We support

Collective efforts to achieve a comprehensive
resolution and national reconciliation in the country
as well as its social and economic recovery would
facilitate increasing cooperation as much as possible
between Central and South Asia. That is the only
way to successfully implement economic projects and
initiatives with the participation of Kabul.

Ms. Dubey (India): We thank the delegation of
Uzbekistan, the facilitator of resolution 76/295, for all
its efforts.
We joined the consensus today on the resolution but
would like to make an explanation of position.
Robust connectivity within and between Central
and South Asia is rooted in history. Connectivity
with the Central Asian countries remains a key
priority for India, and our focus in the last few years
has been to rebuild links that were diminished by the
colonial period.
India is a member of both the International
North-South Transport Corridor and the Ashgabat
Agreement. Since 2016, India has taken practical
steps to operationalize the Chabahar port in Iran. That
provides secure, viable and unhindered access to the
sea for Central Asian countries.
The working group on the joint use of Chabahar
port is a welcome development. Economic growth
is universally driven by three “C’s”: connectivity,
commerce and contacts. All three need to come

22-417977/10

A/76/PV.93

together to ensure regional cooperation and prosperity.
Connectivity projects deserve priority attention and
could be a force multiplier for trade and economic
cooperation and contacts between countries and people.
While expanding connectivity between Central
Asia and South Asia, we need to address not just
physical infrastructure but all its accompanying facets.
Tourism and societal contacts can create a fostering,
enabling environment. Connectivity has acquired
particular salience in the context of post-coronavirus
disease recovery, as there is a widespread realization of
the need for more resilient and reliable supply chains.
Development and prosperity go hand in hand with
peace and security. Peace and security in Afghanistan
are critical imperatives that all of us need to collectively
strive for. India will continue to play its role towards the
pursuit of that objective. The interests of the Afghan
people will continue to be at the heart of our efforts
in Afghanistan.
Connectivity initiatives should be based on certain
principles. Building connectivity is an act of trust
and must, at a minimum, conform to international
law. Connectivity initiatives that straddle national
boundaries must be pursued in a manner that respects
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of nations.
They should promote trade, not tension. No country
can accept a project that ignores its core concerns on
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Connectivity efforts must be based on economic
viability and financial responsibility. They should
promote economic activity and not create debt burdens.
Connectivity must be consultative, transparent and
participatory, focusing on local priorities. Ecological
and environmental standards, as also skill and
technology transfers, are imperative.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker on this item.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 20.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs
(b) Election of members of the Economic and
Social Council
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
8/10

11/07/2022

Eastern European States (1 seat)
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members present and voting:
Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Russian Federation
North Macedonia

170
0
170
4
166
111
94
72

Since no candidate obtained the required two-thirds
majority in the previous ballot, there remains one seat
to be filled from among the Eastern European States.
We shall therefore proceed to a sixth unrestricted
ballot. In accordance with rule 94 of the Assembly’s
rules of procedure, this thirteenth round of balloting
shall be unrestricted.
I would like to remind the General Assembly that
any Member State from among the Eastern European
States may be a candidate except those that will remain
members of the Economic and Social Council as of
3 January 2023, as well as those that have already
been elected for a term beginning 3 January 2023.
The following members can therefore not be voted for
in the present balloting: Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech
Republic, Slovakia and Slovenia.
Before we begin the voting process, I would like to
remind members that in accordance with rule 88 of the
rules of procedure, no representative shall interrupt the
voting except on a point of order on the actual conduct
of voting.
We shall now begin the voting process. Ballot
papers will now be distributed.
Members are requested to put an X in the box next
to the name printed on the ballot paper or to write the
name of another eligible State on the blank line. If the
box next to the name of the State is checked, the name
of that State does not have to be repeated on the blank
line. There should not be more than one checked box
or handwritten name for the vacant seat to be filled.
Accordingly, members can check only one box or write
one name of an eligible State from among the Eastern
European States in the space provided.
If the ballot paper contains a vote for a member
State that will remain a member of the Economic and
Social Council as of 3 January 2023 or that has already
22-41797

11/07/2022

A/76/PV.93

been elected for a term beginning 3 January 2023, the
ballot paper will be declared invalid.
Finally, if a ballot paper contains any notation other
than a vote in favour of an eligible member State, the
notations will be disregarded.
At the invitation of the Acting President, the
representatives of Ecuador, Hungary, Japan,
Mozambique, New Zealand and Timor-Leste acted
as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 4.10 p.m. and
resumed at 4.25 p.m.
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Eastern European States (1 seat)
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members present and voting:
Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Russian Federation
North Macedonia

176
0
176
3
173
116
99
74

Since no candidate obtained the required two-thirds
majority in the previous ballot, one seat remains to be
filled from among the Eastern European States. We
shall therefore proceed to the seventh restricted ballot.
In accordance with rule 94 of the rules of procedure,
this fourteenth round of balloting shall be restricted to
the two States from among the Eastern European States
that were not elected but obtained the largest number
of votes in the previous unrestricted ballot, namely, the
Russian Federation and North Macedonia.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind members that, pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order on
the actual conduct of voting.
We shall now begin the voting process. Ballot
papers will now be distributed.
Members are requested to put an “X” in the box
next to the name printed on the ballot paper. There

should be no more than one checked box for the vacant
seat to be filled. A ballot will be declared invalid if both
boxes are checked. Any notation other than a vote in
favour of an eligible Member State will be disregarded.
At the invitation of the Acting President, the
representatives of Ecuador, Hungary, Japan,
Mozambique, New Zealand and Timor-Leste acted
as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 4.35 p.m. and
resumed at 4.50 p.m.
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Eastern European States (1 seat)
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members present and voting:
Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Russian Federation
North Macedonia

175
0
175
3
172
115
99
73

Since no candidate obtained the required two-thirds
majority in the previous ballot, one seat remains to be
filled from among the Eastern European States. We
shall therefore proceed to the eighth restricted ballot.
In accordance with rule 94 of the rules of procedure,
this fifteenth round of balloting shall be restricted to
the two States from among the Eastern European States
that were not elected but obtained the largest number
of votes in the previous unrestricted ballot, namely, the
Russian Federation and North Macedonia.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind members that, pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order on
the actual conduct of voting.
We shall now begin the voting process. Ballot
papers will now be distributed.
Members are requested to put an “X” in the box
next to the name printed on the ballot paper. There
should be no more than one checked box for the vacant
seat to be filled. A ballot will be declared invalid if both

22-417979/10

A/76/PV.93

11/07/2022

boxes are checked. Any notation other than a vote in
favour of an eligible Member State will be disregarded.
At the invitation of the Acting President, the
representatives of Ecuador, Hungary, Japan,
Mozambique, New Zealand and Timor-Leste acted
as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 4.55 p.m. and
resumed at 5.15 p.m.
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Eastern European States (1 seat)
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members present and voting:
Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Russian Federation
North Macedonia

177
0
177
4
173
116
99
74

Since no candidate obtained the required twothirds majority in the previous ballot, one seat remains
to be filled from among the Eastern European States.
We shall therefore proceed to the ninth restricted ballot.
In accordance with rule 94 of the rules of procedure,
this sixteenth round of balloting shall be restricted to
the two States from among the Eastern European States
that were not elected but obtained the largest number
of votes in the previous unrestricted ballot, namely, the
Russian Federation and North Macedonia.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind members that, pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order on
the actual conduct of voting.
We shall now begin the voting process. Ballot
papers will now be distributed.

10/10

Members are requested to put an “X” in the box
next to the name printed on the ballot paper. There
should be no more than one checked box for the vacant
seat to be filled. A ballot will be declared invalid if both
boxes are checked. Any notation other than a vote in
favour of an eligible Member State will be disregarded.
At the invitation of the Acting President, the
representatives of Ecuador, Hungary, Japan,
Mozambique, New Zealand and Timor-Leste acted
as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 5.25 p.m. and
resumed at 5.45 p.m.
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Eastern European States (1 seat)
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members present and voting:
Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Russian Federation
North Macedonia

177
0
177
3
174
116
101
73

The restricted ballot has again been inconclusive.
One seat remains to be filled from among the
Eastern European States. In accordance with rule 94
of the rules of procedure, we shall continue with this
series of balloting.
In view of the lateness of the hour, further balloting
will take place on a day to be determined.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 115.
The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

22-41797
