S/2020/622

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 June 2020
English
Original: French

Letter dated 29 June 2020 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
In paragraph 13 of its resolution 2507 (2020), the Security Council requested
that I provide a further update on progress achieved by the authorities of the Central
African Republic on the key benchmarks established in its presidential statement of
9 April 2019 (S/PRST/2019/3). The benchmarks had been established to serve as a
basis for the Council to assess the contribution and relevance of the arms e mbargo in
supporting the relevant aspects of the security sector reform process, the
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation process, and the
management of weapons and ammunition.
Over the past year, in response to appeals from the Go vernment of the Central
African Republic and in the light of the progress achieved against the benchmarks,
the Council has progressively adjusted the embargo measures. Following my letter
dated 26 July 2019 (S/2019/609), the Council, in its resolution 2488 (2019), decided
that:
(a) The arms embargo approval process would no longer apply to supplies of
weapons with a calibre of 14.5 mm or less, as well a s ammunition and components
specially designed for such weapons, to the country’s security forces. Instead, such
deliveries needed only to be notified in advance to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African
Republic;
(b) Member States or international, regional or subregional organizations
supplying arms and related materiel would be primarily responsible for notifying the
Committee and that such notification must be at least 20 days in advance of the
deliveries. The Council further stressed the importance of the notifications including
detailed explanations for how the requested equipment would support security sector
reform in the country;
(c) The authorities of the Central African Republic would still be able to
obtain weapons and ammunition with a calibre of more than 14.5 mm, subject to
approval by the Committee under the relevant provisions of the arms embargo;
(d) Supplies of non-lethal military and police equipment intended solely for
humanitarian or protective use, and related technical assistance or training, would no
longer require advance approval by the Committee, only advance notification.
Following my letter dated 31 December 2019 (S/2019/1008), in resolution its
2507 (2020), the Council further adjusted the arms embargo measures by deciding
that the arms embargo approval process shall no longer apply to supplies of unarmed

20-08665 (E)

060720

*2008665*

080720

S/2020/622

ground military vehicles and ground military vehicles mounted with weapons with a
calibre of 14.5 mm or less, to the security forces of the Central African Republic.
Instead, such deliveries would only need to be notified in advance to the Committee.
The Committee plays an important role in the management of the above mentioned adjustments and other exemptions applicable to the arms embargo. Since
the imposition of the embargo, the Government of the Central African Republic has
submitted a total of 19 exemption requests and 14 notifications. The Committee has
received a total of 70 exemption requests and 84 notifications from Member States
and international organizations, including the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), the
United Nations Development Programme and the European Union. This brings the
total number of weapons and ammunition approved by the Committee since 2015 to
approximately 14,703 weapons and 17,432,000 rounds of ammunition. 1 The armed
forces remain the primary recipient of the weapons and ammunition, followed by the
internal security forces (police and gendarmerie).
In the following section, I provide an update on progress made against each of
the five key benchmarks since my letter dated 31 December 2019. The progress made
by the authorities of the Central African Republic on these benchmarks should be
assessed in the light of other political and security developments in the country, in
particular the status of implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic of 6 February 2019 and preparations
for the upcoming general elections to be held in 2020/21 (see S/2019/145 and my
most recent report on the Central African Republic, S/2020/545). It is also important
to take into consideration the impact of the global pandemic caused by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19), which was officially declared in the country on 14 March. This
global pandemic has limited the capacities of both the Government and its
international partners, which in certain cases have had to focus their attention and
resources on the pandemic.
Update on progress achieved on benchmark A
The national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatri ation
programme aims to disarm and demobilize 5,000 ex-combatants from the armed
groups and 1,500 children associated with the armed groups and fighting forces and
to repatriate an estimated 500 ex-combatants. The programme was estimated to cost
approximately $45 million. In terms of socioeconomic reintegration, the Government
has signed agreements worth approximately $12 million with the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) and the Agency for Technical Cooperation and
Development (an international non-governmental organization) to provide reinsertion
for 1,000 ex-combatants and to undertake community support projects (see
S/2019/609).
Since the official launch of the programme on 17 December 2018, a total of
1,321 combatants, including 81 women, have been disarmed and demobilized, and
802 weapons of war, 1,239 unexploded ordnances and 67,537 rounds of ammunition
have been collected, as reflected in my letter dated 31 December 2019. Since my last
update in December 2019, there have been no disarmament and demobilization
operations. However, since May 2020, the unit responsible for the implementation of
the national disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and reintegration programme
and the Ministry for Disarmament, Demobilization, Repatriation and Reintegration
have been planning the launch of disarmament and demobilization operations in
Ndélé, in the central region of the Central African Republic, following the agreement
__________________
1

2/8

This represents an increase of 4,703 weapons and 1,432,600 additional rounds of ammunition
since July 2019 (see S/2019/609).
20-08665

S/2020/622

by the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique to move forward with
the process. The planned operations would also facilitate the establishment of the
joint security units in Ndélé. There are also plans to continue the disarmament and
demobilization operations in the west, as well as in other locations in the centre -east.
Some further progress has been made in relation to reinsertion and reintegration
activities for demobilized ex-combatants, while community support projects have
continued in areas where the reintegration of ex-combatants is ongoing or planned, 2
as part of the project for the reintegration of ex-combatants carried out by the unit
responsible for the implementation of the national disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation programme, through its implementing partners (IOM
and the Agency for Technical Cooperation and Development), and with the financial
support of the World Bank. To date, 839 ex-combatants have participated in
reinsertion activities and 295 in reintegration activities. 3
Since the last cycle of disarmament and demobilization operations, which took
place from 14 October to 14 November 2019, 413 ex-combatants, including 25
women, have been registered in reinsertion training programmes in Bouar and Koui.
In Bouar, 121 ex-combatants, including 2 women, who have completed their threemonth reinsertion training cycle, have begun their three-month vocational training
cycle for their socioeconomic reintegration. In Koui, the Agency for Technical
Cooperation and Development has begun reinsertion training sessions for 166
demobilized ex-combatants (all men), including 124 ex-combatants from the Retour,
réclamation et réhabilitation armed group who had not been admitted into the joint
security units. 4
In Paoua, IOM completed the vocational training of 176 ex -combatants in
January 2020 (see S/2019/1008); these ex-combatants, who had opted for
socioeconomic reintegration into civilian life, were part of a cohort of 227 disarmed
and demobilized combatants. The remaining 51 had chosen to join the joint security
units. 5 Following the last disarmament and demobilization operations of October and
November 2019, an additional 67 ex-combatants were admitted into socioeconomic
reintegration programmes implemented by IOM. The activities of this group will start
following the signing of the extension of the contract between IOM and the unit
responsible for the implementation of the national disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation programme.
In my letter dated 26 July 2019, I reported that the national disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation programme was almost fully funded
with support from the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS), the
World Bank, the United States of America, France, MINUSCA and the Government
of the Central African Republic. Unfortunately, the slower-than-anticipated pace of
progress has had a heavy impact on resources. With the support of MINUSCA, the
World Bank and the United States, the authorities of the Central African Republic are
currently taking measures to address a possible funding shortfall and to avoid deficits.
I call upon current donors to continue to support these operations and upon potential
__________________

In Paoua and Bouar (west), where disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation
operations have begun, and in areas where disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation operations have yet to begin, namely Ndélé (centre), Bria (east) and Birao (east).
3
Prior to the start of the reinsertion and reintegration activities, all demobilized ex-combatants
receive “reinsertion allowances” for three months, beginning on the day of the disarmament and
demobilization. To date, 1,321 demobilized combatants have received such allowances.
4
On the basis of the criteria for admission into the joint security units (age, physical condition and
health status).
5
On 5 June 2020, the members of the first batch of joint security units were deployed and settled
in their camp in Paoua, after completing their training at the Bouar training site.
2

20-08665

3/8

S/2020/622

donors to help the authorities of the Central African Republic in their efforts to raise
funds for their national programme.
Alongside the national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme, the Government has also established a community violence
reduction programme, which has become an important stabilization tool in localized
conflict situations.
International partners, namely MINUSCA, the United Nations Office for Project
Services and the Peacebuilding Fund, help the authorities of the Central African
Republic by implementing such programmes in Bangui, Bangassou, Bossangoa,
Bouar, Bria, Kaga Bandoro and Bambari.
Their aim was for these programmes to benefit 4,000 people during the period
2019–2020. To date, a total of 4,014 beneficiaries, including 1,57 0 women, have had
income-generating activities and participated in local projects under the community
violence reduction programme. In addition, 41 weapons of war, 1,640 artisanal
weapons, 913 rounds of ammunition and 3 unexploded ordnances have been
collected.
Since the pilot disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme
implemented in 2018, under which 232 ex-combatants, including 6 women, had been
integrated into the armed forces (see S/2019/609), no further progress has been made
on the integration of vetted former armed group members into uniformed services.
The Government has also not applied the 10 per cent quota for armed group members
in the internal defence and security forces in its recruitment activities, including in its
campaign to recruit 2,600 soldiers for the armed forces which began in February 2020.
Similarly, much work remains to be done with regard to the establishment of a
commission on the harmonization of ranks to facilitate th e reintegration of
ex-combatants and the reinsertion of former armed forces personnel who had joined
the armed groups. The decree establishing the joint commission for the harmonization
of ranks, as stipulated in the Political Agreement of February 2019, h as yet to be
adopted.
During the period under review, the guarantors of the Political Agreement (the
African Union and ECCAS) and other international partners made considerable
efforts to ensure that the armed groups that are signatories to the Political Agreement
continue to adhere to the Agreement, including by doing their utmost to be admitted
into the national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation
programme. The Consultative Follow-up Committee on Disarmament,
Demobilization, Reintegration and Repatriation held its most recent meeting with
representatives of the armed groups on 29 May 2020, with the participation of
MINUSCA and other international partners. I am encouraged by the launch, on
22 June, of disarmament and demobilization operations in Ndélé, BaminguiBangoran prefecture, and by the plans of the authorities of the Central African
Republic to learn lessons from the latest disarmament and demobilization operations,
including the need to address the low rate of surrender of weapons of war and to
enhance the coordination between the unit responsible for the implementation of the
national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation programme and
the parent ministry.
It is important that all parties continue to participate in good faith in the
implementation of the national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme, which is a core requirement of the Political Agreement.
It is also necessary to redouble efforts to ensure a common und erstanding among
the parties of the linkage between the national programme, the establishment of the

4/8

20-08665

S/2020/622

joint security units and the integration of ex-combatants into the security sector, as
well as the harmonization of ranks.
Update on progress achieved on benchmark B
One year ago, the authorities of the Central African Republic shared with my
assessment team visiting the country a planning document showing the projected
needs in terms of weapons and ammunition storage and management. According to
the document, the Government estimated that by 2023 it would need 295 facilities for
the storage of 28,826 different categories of weapons and at least 9,492,562 rounds
of ammunition, as well as 1,180 trained and vetted personnel responsible for the
storage and management of these weapons and ammunition.
Since 2014, with the support of international partners, the authorities of the
Central African Republic have been able to rehabilitate and build physical
infrastructure for the storage of weapons and ammunition. This was achieved owing
in part to the support provided by MINUSCA, through the Mine Action Service, to
help strengthen the Government’s capacity in weapons and ammunition management
through the construction and rehabilitation of storage faciliti es and the provision of
specialized training in weapons and ammunition management, in accordance with the
armed forces and internal security forces deployment plans. To date, the Mine Action
Service/MINUSCA have built 20 armouries and rehabilitated 41 othe rs, in addition
to the three rehabilitated by the national authorities. The Mine Action
Service/MINUSCA have provided capacity to the armed forces for their deployment
in Bouar, including the regional armoury used to store ammunition for two battalions,
one armoury with a 600-weapon capacity, two armouries with a 220-weapon capacity
and a training centre armoury with a 600-weapon capacity. However, the delivery of
the regional armoury to the national authorities has been delayed owing to
COVID-19.
The Government has also requested the Mine Action Service/MINUSCA to
support the deployment of the joint security units by providing four temporary storage
facilities for weapons and ammunition and organizing training on weapons and
ammunition management.
In terms of training, more than 300 members of the defence and security forces
of the Central African Republic have received capacity-building support and training
from the Mine Action Service/MINUSCA, China, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, the
European Union, France, Morocco, the Russian Federation, Rwanda and the United
States, including on weapons and ammunition management.
During the period under review, the Mine Action Service/MINUSCA provided
training for new defence and internal security forces in weapon s and ammunition
management, including a training session on explosive ordnance disposal. With
financial support from the United States, the Mine Action Service/MINUSCA
launched a project in February 2020 to support the development of national capacity
for the destruction of obsolete ammunition within the armed forces.
As part of that project, two specialized explosive ordnance disposal teams will
be created. They will be composed of trained members of the armed forces who will
receive specialized refresher training and mentoring so that the Central African
Republic has explosive ordnance disposal capacity, in particular in support of
disarmament activities undertaken by the country. It is important that these trained
personnel be productively utilized in these specializ ed functions. However, the
project is presently suspended owing to COVID-19.
In my letter dated 26 July 2019, I indicated that the Central African Republic
authorities had decided to adopt a standardized procedure across all defence and
20-08665

5/8

S/2020/622

security forces for the authorization of personnel dedicated to the management of
weapons and ammunition, which involves a vetting process. Recruitment into the
armed forces and the internal security forces now regularly includes a vetting process
for roles in weapons and ammunition management, and a national seminar on vetting
was held on 27 February 2020. The Government is currently planning to establish a
national mechanism and to develop a national policy on the issue.
Update on progress achieved on benchmark C
This benchmark relates to the finalization by the Government of an arms
registration and management protocol for weapons delivered to its armed forces and
internal security forces, and the establishment of a system of individual receipt of
weapons and of a system for applying individual accountability.
The Government continues to apply interim protocols and technical guidelines
for the receipt and management of weapons and ammunition for each shipment of
weapons notified to or approved by the Committee. A national protocol outlining the
process for the delivery and verification of weapon and ammunition shipments in the
country has yet to be developed. Likewise, each entity of the armed forces and internal
security forces maintains its own internal documentation and procedures for weapons
registration.
Update on progress achieved on benchmark D
This benchmark relates to the operationalization of the Commission nationale
de lutte contre la prolifération des armes légères et de petit calibre (national
commission to combat the proliferation of small arms and light weapons), which
continues to implement its national action plan on small arms and light weapons,
including by holding the fourth session of its plenary assembly on 6 January 2020.
In addition, a law on the general regime for conventional weapons and their
parts, components and ammunition, drafted in 2019 with the support of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), was approved on 12 March 2020 by
the Cabinet and sent to the National Assembly.
An initiative to develop weapons marking and tracing capacity has been
included in the national action plan to combat the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. The Government has not yet decided on a national marking format or on a
national plan and standards for the marking and tracing of State -owned weapons. It
is important that weapons be marked and registered properly in order to be able to
monitor the weapons transferred to the security forces and the joint security units of
the Central African Republic. I note that the Central African Republic is a signatory
to the Central African Convention for the Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons,
Their Ammunition and all Parts and Components That Can Be Used for their
Manufacture, Repair and Assembly (Kinshasa Convention) and the Nairobi Protocol
for the Prevention, Control and Reduction of Small Arms and Light Weapons in the
Great Lakes Region and the Horn of Africa, and is a member of the Regional Centre
on Small Arms and Light Weapons in the Great Lakes Region, the Horn of Africa and
Bordering States, which has approved a regional weapons tracing format. In line with
the Government’s treaty obligations, 6 no weapons and ammunition with partial or

__________________
6

6/8

According to article 14, paragraph 2, of the Kinshasa Convention, “all small arms and light
weapons and all ammunition which is not marked in accordance with this Convention shall be
considered illicit. Unless marked for use under the conditions defined by national laws and
regulations and this Convention, such weapons and ammunition must be duly recorded and
destroyed”.
20-08665

S/2020/622

illegible serial numbers can be transferred from the national disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation programme to the joint security units.
UNODC has launched the procurement process to provide weapon marking
machines and record-keeping kits, as well as appropriate training, to the Commission
and to the armed forces and the internal security forces. The delivery of the two
marking machines is expected by the end of 2020. With financial support from
Member States, this positive step may be complemented by a marking training
programme and the purchase of additional marking machines by the Government,
which would help in the establishment a national marking programme.
Such a programme would help to ensure the proper marking of weapons
provided to the armed forces and the internal security forces and, with proper record keeping, to facilitate the tracing of weapons in the event that they fall into the hands
of armed groups.
The Commission is financed through an allocation from the national budget,
which for 2020 stands at 75 million CFA francs, an amount that covers the operational
costs of the office and the payment of salaries, but is insufficient to finance the
operational activities set out in the national action plan.
The amount allocated to the implementation of the operational activities of the
plan is approximately $1.7 million per year over the next five years, but the
Commission is not receiving the full amount needed. MINUSCA, including the Mine
Action Service, and UNODC continue to support the implementation of the plan.
Update on progress achieved on benchmark E
The protocol on the collection, destruction or transfer to the Central African
Republic armed forces and internal security forces of surplus, unreg istered or illicitly
held weapons and ammunition seized by the authorities of the Central African
Republic is being developed. I would like to draw the attention of the Security
Council to information provided to my assessment team one year ago to the effe ct
that administrative practices were in place, including in the context of judicial
proceedings, to manage the seizure, collection, destruction or transfer of weapons. In
the case of seizures by the armed forces, administrative procedure includes the
transmission of a report to the Chief of Defence Staff, followed by the registration of
the weapons at the central armoury before they are returned to the unit that seized
them and placed under the responsibility of the armourer.
The Central African Republic also has legal frameworks relating to the
obligations of this benchmark. The Commission has continued to work with UNODC
to strengthen the legislative framework for combating illicit trafficking in weapons in
the country, including preventive and security measures, criminal justice provisions
and mechanisms for international cooperation and information -sharing. The
Government has submitted the bill on the general framework governing conventional
weapons and their parts, components and ammunition to the National Assembly for
review and adoption. UNODC is currently completing the drafting of general
instructions for the management of weapons and ammunition, in particular weapons
seized in Africa. Once completed, these instructions will be shared with and
operationalized by various countries, including the Central African Republic.
At the regional level, efforts to reactivate the bilateral commissions between the
Central African Republic and its neighbours have continued to yield results. On 20
and 21 December 2019, the Central African Republic and Chad held the fourteenth
meeting of their joint bilateral commission.

20-08665

7/8

S/2020/622

The discussions centred on security along their common border and cooperation
in justice and economic matters. The Ministry of Defence has also participated in
several bilateral meetings with Chad, the Congo and the Sudan.
Conclusion
With the support of international partners, the Government has remained
committed to achieving the benchmarks in order for the arms embargo to be further
eased or lifted. Continued support from the Security Council and international and
regional partners is necessary for further progress to be made.
I continue to believe that it is important to also pay careful attention to the arms
embargo imposed on the armed groups, which remains in full effect, and to ensure
that it yields the necessary and desired outcomes, with a view to improving the
security and political situation in the country. In this connection, the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central
African Republic and its Panel of Experts can help the Central African Republic and
the States in the region to adopt the necessary measures against arms traffickers, some
of whom have been named in the reports of the Panel of Experts since 2017. The
regional bilateral commissions (and the implementation of their recommendations),
as well as the revitalization of the interministerial committee on border ma nagement,
can also make a difference on this issue.
A well calibrated and efficiently implemented arms embargo, along with other
sanctions measures, can reinforce the positive political progress being made in the
country. It can also support my call for a global ceasefire. The armed groups in the
Central African Republic that hear my call must urgently translate it into action by
putting an end to the violence, and all the parties must agree to adhere to the global
ceasefire, especially at a time when the country and the region are grappling with the
COVID-19 pandemic.
(Signed) António Guterres

8/8

20-08665
