United Nations

A/RES/70/139

General Assembly

Distr.: General
3 February 2016

Seventieth session
Agenda item 70 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 17 December 2015
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/70/487)]

70/139. Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other
practices that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 1 the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 2 the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 3 and other relevant
human rights instruments,
Recalling the provisions of Commission on Human Rights resolutions 2004/16 of
16 April 2004 4 and 2005/5 of 14 April 2005 5 and relevant Human Rights Council
resolutions, in particular resolutions 7/34 of 28 March 2008,6 18/15 of 29 September 20117
and 21/33 of 28 September 2012,8 as well as its resolutions 60/143 of 16 December 2005,
61/147 of 19 December 2006, 62/142 of 18 December 2007, 63/162 of 18 December 2008,
64/147 of 18 December 2009, 65/199 of 21 December 2010, 66/143 of 19 December 2011,
67/154 of 20 December 2012, 68/150 of 18 December 2013 and 69/160 of 18 December
2014 on this issue, resolutions 61/149 of 19 December 2006, 62/220 of 22 December 2007,
63/242 of 24 December 2008, 64/148 of 18 December 2009, 65/240 of 24 December 2010,
66/144 of 19 December 2011, 67/155 of 20 December 2012 and 68/151 of 18 December
2013, and its resolution 69/162 of 18 December 2014, entitled “A global call for concrete
action for the total elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action”,

_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
4
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
5
Ibid., 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
6
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. II.
7
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and Corr.1), chap. II.
8
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. II.
2

15-16893 (E)

*1516893*

Please recycle

Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices that contribute to fuelling
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

A/RES/70/139

Acknowledging other important initiatives of the General Assembly aimed at raising
awareness about the suffering of victims of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance, including in the historical perspective, in particular regarding
commemoration of the victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade,
Mindful of the seventieth anniversary of the establishment of the Nuremberg
Tribunal, and recalling in this regard the Charter of the Tribunal and the Judgement of the
Tribunal, which recognized as criminal, inter alia, the SS organization and all its integral
parts, including the Waffen SS, through its officially accepted members implicated in or
with knowledge of the commission of war crimes and crimes against humanity connected
with the Second World War, as well as other relevant provisions of the Charter and the
Judgement,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action adopted by the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance on 8 September 2001,9 in particular paragraph 2 of
the Declaration and paragraph 86 of the Programme of Action, as well as the relevant
provisions of the outcome document of the Durban Review Conference of 24 April 2009,10
in particular paragraphs 11 and 54,
Alarmed, in this regard, at the spread in many parts of the world of various extremist
political parties, movements and groups, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, as well
as racist extremist movements and ideologies,
Deeply concerned by all recent manifestations of violence and terrorism incited by
violent nationalism, racism, xenophobia and related intolerance,
Recognizing with deep concern the alarming increase in instances of discrimination,
intolerance and extremist violence motivated by anti-Semitism, Islamophobia and
Christianophobia and prejudices against persons of other religions and beliefs,
Recalling that in 2015 the international community celebrated the seventieth
anniversary of victory over Nazism in the Second World War, and welcoming in this
regard the special solemn meeting held on 5 May 2015 during the sixty-ninth session of the
General Assembly,
Stressing that this historic event contributed to establishing the conditions for the
creation of the United Nations, designed to prevent future wars and save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war,
1.
Reaffirms the relevant provisions of the Durban Declaration9 and of the
outcome document of the Durban Review Conference, 10 in which States condemned the
persistence and resurgence of neo-Nazism, neo-Fascism and violent nationalist ideologies
based on racial and national prejudice and stated that those phenomena could never be
justified in any instance or under any circumstances;
2.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the
Human Rights Council on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, prepared in accordance with the request contained in
its resolution 69/160;11
3.
Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and his Office for their efforts to fight racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, including the maintenance by the Office of the United
_______________
9

See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.
See A/CONF.211/8, chap. I.
11
A/70/321.
10

2/7

Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices that contribute to fuelling
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

A/RES/70/139

Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights of a database on practical means to combat
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
4.
Expresses deep concern about the glorification, in any form, of the Nazi
movement, neo-Nazism and former members of the Waffen SS organization, including by
erecting monuments and memorials and holding public demonstrations in the name of the
glorification of the Nazi past, the Nazi movement and neo-Nazism, as well as by declaring
or attempting to declare such members and those who fought against the anti-Hitler
coalition and collaborated with the Nazi movement participants in national liberation
movements;
5.
Calls for the universal ratification and effective implementation of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 3 and
encourages those States parties that have not yet done so to consider making the
declaration under its article 14, thus providing the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination with the competence to receive and consider communications from
individuals or groups of individuals within their jurisdiction claiming to be victims of a
violation by a State party of any of the rights set forth in the Convention;
6.
Emphasizes the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur that “any
commemorative celebration of the Nazi regime, its allies and related organizations,
whether official or unofficial, should be prohibited by States”, 12 also emphasizes that such
manifestations do injustice to the memory of the countless victims of the Second World
War and negatively influence children and young people, and stresses in this regard that it
is important that States take measures, in accordance with international human rights law,
to counteract any celebration of the Nazi SS organization and all its integral parts,
including the Waffen SS;
7.
Expresses concern about recurring attempts to desecrate or demolish
monuments erected in remembrance of those who fought against Nazism during the
Second World War, as well as to unlawfully exhume or remove the remains of such
persons, and in this regard urges States to fully comply with their relevant obligations,
inter alia, under article 34 of Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions of 1949;13
8.
Notes with concern the increase in the number of racist incidents worldwide,
including the rise of skinhead groups, which have been responsible for many of these
incidents, as well as the resurgence of racist and xenophobic violence targeting, inter alia,
persons belonging to national, ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities, including arson
attacks on houses and vandalization of schools and places of worship;
9.
Reaffirms that such acts may be qualified as falling within the scope of the
Convention, that they may not be justified when they fall outside the scope of the rights to
freedom of peaceful assembly and of association as well as the rights to freedom of
expression and that they may fall within the scope of article 20 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights2 and may be subject to certain restrictions, as set
out in articles 19, 21 and 22 of the Covenant;
10.

Condemns without reservation any denial of or attempt to deny the Holocaust;

11. Welcomes the call of the Special Rapporteur for the active preservation of
those Holocaust sites that served as Nazi death camps, concentration and forced labour
camps and prisons, as well as his encouragement to States to take measures, including

_______________
12
13

Ibid., para. 73.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1125, No. 17512.

3/7

Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices that contribute to fuelling
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

A/RES/70/139

legislative, law enforcement and educational measures, to put an end to all forms of
Holocaust denial;14
12. Calls upon States to continue to take adequate steps, including through
national legislation, in accordance with international human rights law, aimed at the
prevention of hate speech and incitement to violence against persons belonging to
vulnerable groups;
13. Expresses deep concern about attempts at commercial advertising aimed at
exploiting the sufferings of the victims of war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed during the Second World War by the Nazi regime;
14. Stresses that the practices described above do injustice to the memory of the
countless victims of crimes against humanity committed in the Second World War, in
particular those committed by the SS organization and by those who fought against the
anti-Hitler coalition and collaborated with the Nazi movement, and may negatively
influence children and young people, and that failure by States to effectively address such
practices is incompatible with the obligations of States Members of the United Nations
under its Charter, including those related to the purposes and principles of the
Organization;
15. Also stresses that such practices fuel contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and contribute to the spread and
multiplication of various extremist political parties, movements and groups, including neoNazis and skinhead groups, and in this regard calls for increased vigilance;
16. Expresses concern that the human rights and democratic challenges posed by
extremist political parties, movements and groups are universal and no country is immune
to them;
17. Emphasizes the need to take the measures necessary to put an end to the
practices described above, and calls upon States to take more effective measures in
accordance with international human rights law to combat those phenomena and extremist
movements, which pose a real threat to democratic values;
18. Encourages States to adopt further measures to provide training for the police
and other law enforcement bodies on the ideologies of extremist political parties,
movements and groups whose advocacy constitutes incitement to racist and xenophobic
violence, to strengthen their capacity to address racist and xenophobic crimes, to fulfil their
responsibility for bringing to justice the perpetrators of such crimes and to combat
impunity;
19. Expresses deep concern about the increased number of seats occupied by
representatives of extremist parties of a racist or xenophobic character in a number of
national and local parliaments, and emphasizes in this regard the need for all democratic
political parties to base their programmes and activities on respect for human rights and
freedoms, democracy, the rule of law and good governance and to condemn all messages
disseminating ideas that are based on racial superiority or hatred and that have the
objective of fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance;
20. Expresses concern that ethnic profiling and police violence against vulnerable
groups discourage victims from seeking redress owing to their distrust of the legal system,
and in this regard encourages States to improve diversity within law enforcement agencies
and to impose appropriate sanctions against those within the public service found guilty of
racially motivated violence or of using hate speech;
_______________
14

4/7

A/69/334, para. 76.

Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices that contribute to fuelling
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

A/RES/70/139

21. Expresses deep concern about the increase in reported cases of racist
manifestations during sports events, including those committed by extremist groups,
including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and calls upon States, sports federations and
other relevant stakeholders to strengthen measures to prevent such incidents, while also
welcoming the steps that many States, sports federations and clubs have taken to eliminate
racism at sporting events;
22. Recalls the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur to introduce into
national criminal law a provision according to which committing an offence with racist or
xenophobic motivations or aims constitutes an aggravating circumstance, allowing for
enhanced penalties,15 and encourages those States whose legislation does not contain such
provisions to consider that recommendation;
23. Underlines that the roots of extremism are multifaceted and must be addressed
through adequate measures such as education, awareness-raising and the promotion of
dialogue, and in this regard recommends the increase of measures to raise awareness
among young people of the dangers of the ideologies and activities of extremist political
parties, movements and groups;
24. Reaffirms, in this regard, the particular importance of all forms of education,
including human rights education, as a complement to legislative measures, and calls
upon States to continue to invest in education, in both conventional and non-conventional
curricula, inter alia, in order to transform attitudes and counteract ideas of racial
hierarchies and superiority, and counter their negative influence, and to promote the values
of non-discrimination, equality and respect for all, as outlined by the Special Rapporteur;
25. Emphasizes the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur presented at the
sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly, in which he emphasized the importance of
history classes in teaching the dramatic events and human suffering which arose out of the
adoption of ideologies such as Nazism and Fascism; 16
26. Stresses the importance of other positive measures and initiatives aimed at
bringing communities together and providing them with space for genuine dialogue, such
as round tables, working groups and seminars, including training seminars for State agents
and media professionals, as well as awareness-raising activities, especially those initiated
by civil society representatives, which require continued State support;
27. Underlines the positive role that relevant United Nations entities and
programmes, in particular the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, can play in the aforementioned areas;
28. Reaffirms article 4 of the Convention, according to which States parties
condemn all propaganda and all organizations which are based on ideas or theories of
superiority of one race or group of persons of one colour or ethnic origin, or which attempt
to justify or promote racial hatred and discrimination in any form, and undertake to adopt
immediate and positive measures designed to eradicate all incitement to, or acts of, such
discrimination and, to this end, with due regard to the principles embodied in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights1 and the rights expressly set forth in article 5 of the
Convention, inter alia:
(a) Shall declare an offence punishable by law all dissemination of ideas based on
racial superiority or hatred, and incitement to racial discrimination, as well as all acts of
violence or incitement to such acts against any race or group of persons of another colour

_______________
15
16

Ibid., para. 81.
A/64/295, para. 104.

5/7

A/RES/70/139

Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices that contribute to fuelling
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

or ethnic origin, and also the provision of any assistance to racist activities, including the
financing thereof;
(b) Shall declare illegal and prohibit organizations, and also organized and all
other propaganda activities, which promote and incite racial discrimination, and shall
recognize participation in such organizations or activities as an offence punishable by law;
(c) Shall not permit public authorities or public institutions, national or local, to
promote or incite racial discrimination;
29. Also reaffirms that, as underlined in paragraph 13 of the outcome document of
the Durban Review Conference, any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that
constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence should be prohibited by law,
that all dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or hatred, or incitement to racial
discrimination, as well as all acts of violence or incitement to such acts, shall be declared
offences punishable by law, in accordance with the international obligations of States, and
that these prohibitions are consistent with freedom of opinion and expression;
30. Recognizes the positive role that the exercise of the right to freedom of opinion
and expression, as well as full respect for the freedom to seek, receive and impart
information, including through the Internet, can play in combating racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
31. Expresses concern about the increased use of the Internet to promote and
disseminate racism, racial hatred, xenophobia, racial discrimination and related
intolerance, and in this regard calls upon States parties to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights to counter the dissemination of the above-mentioned ideas while
respecting their obligations under articles 19 and 20 of the Covenant, which guarantee the
right to freedom of expression and outline the grounds on which the exercise of this right
can be legitimately restricted;
32. Recognizes the need to promote the use of new information and
communications technologies, including the Internet, to contribute to the fight against
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
33. Also recognizes the positive role that the media can play in combating racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, promoting a culture of tolerance
and representing the diversity of a multicultural society;
34. Encourages States, civil society and other relevant stakeholders to use all
opportunities, including those provided by the Internet and social media, to counter, in
accordance with international human rights law, the dissemination of ideas based on racial
superiority or hatred and to promote the values of equality, non-discrimination, diversity
and democracy;
35. Encourages those States that have made reservations to article 4 of the
Convention to give serious consideration to withdrawing such reservations as a matter of
priority, as stressed by the Special Rapporteur;
36. Notes the importance of strengthening cooperation at the regional and
international levels with the aim of countering all manifestations of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, in particular regarding issues raised in
the present resolution;
37. Stresses the importance of cooperating closely with civil society and
international and regional human rights mechanisms in order to counter effectively all
manifestations of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, as well
as extremist political parties, movements and groups, including neo-Nazis and skinhead
groups, and other similar extremist ideological movements that incite racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;

6/7

Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices that contribute to fuelling
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

A/RES/70/139

38. Encourages States parties to the Convention to ensure that their legislation
incorporates the provisions of the Convention, including those of article 4;
39. Encourages States to adopt the legislation necessary to combat racism while
ensuring that the definition of racial discrimination set out therein complies with article 1
of the Convention;
40. Recalls that any legislative or constitutional measures adopted with a view to
countering extremist parties, movements and groups of a racist or xenophobic character,
including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups and similar extremist ideological movements,
should be in conformity with the relevant international human rights norms, in particular
articles 4 and 5 of the Convention and articles 19 to 22 of the Covenant;
41. Also recalls the request of the Commission on Human Rights, in its resolution
2005/5,5 that the Special Rapporteur continue to reflect on this issue, make relevant
recommendations in his future reports and seek and take into account in this regard the
views of Governments and non-governmental organizations;
42. Encourages States to consider including in their reports for the universal
periodic review and their reports to relevant treaty bodies information on the steps taken to
combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, including with
the aim of implementing the provisions of the present resolution;
43. Requests the Special Rapporteur to prepare, for submission to the General
Assembly at its seventy-first session and to the Human Rights Council at its thirty-second
session, reports on the implementation of the present resolution, in particular regarding
paragraphs 4, 6, 7, 9, 13, 14, 25 and 26 above, based on the views collected in accordance
with the request of the Commission, as recalled in paragraph 41 above;
44. Expresses its appreciation to those Governments and non-governmental
organizations that have provided information to the Special Rapporteur in the course of the
preparation of his reports to the General Assembly;
45. Stresses that such information is important for the sharing of experiences and
best practices in the fight against extremist political parties, movements and groups,
including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and other extremist ideological movements that
incite racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
46. Encourages Governments and non-governmental organizations to cooperate
fully with the Special Rapporteur in the exercise of the tasks outlined in paragraph 43
above;
47. Encourages Governments, non-governmental organizations and relevant actors
to disseminate, as widely as possible, information regarding the contents of and the
principles outlined in the present resolution, including through the media, but not limited to
it;
48.

Decides to remain seized of the issue.
80th plenary meeting
17 December 2015

7/7
