UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1998/5
26 February 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3857th meeting of the Security Council, held on 26 February 1998, in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Sierra Leone", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council recalls its resolution 1132 (1997) of
8 October 1997, and the statements of its President of 27 May 1997
(S/PRST/1997/29), 11 July 1997 (S/PRST/1997/36) and 6 August 1997
(S/PRST/1997/42), following the military coup d'état in Sierra Leone on
25 May 1997. It expresses its deep regret at the violence, loss of life
and property and immense suffering undergone by the people of Sierra Leone
since the coup. It remains gravely concerned at the continued violence in
the country and calls for an urgent end to the fighting.
"The Security Council welcomes the fact that the rule of the military
junta has been brought to an end, and stresses the imperative need for the
immediate restoration of the democratically elected Government of
President Tejan Kabbah and a return to constitutional order, in accordance
with paragraph 1 of its resolution 1132 (1997).
"The Security Council encourages the earliest possible return to
Freetown by President Kabbah and looks forward to his re-establishing a
functioning and autonomous government in the country.
"The Security Council expresses its readiness to terminate the
measures imposed by paragraphs 5 and 6 of its resolution 1132 (1997) as
soon as the conditions referred to in paragraph 1 of that resolution have
been fulfilled.
"The Security Council commends the important role that the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) has continued to play towards the
peaceful resolution of this crisis. The Security Council encourages the
Military Observer Group of ECOWAS (ECOMOG) to proceed in its efforts to
foster peace and stability in Sierra Leone, in accordance with relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations. It underlines the need
for close cooperation between the legitimate Government of Sierra Leone,

98-04690 (E)

260298

/...

S/PRST/1998/5
English
Page 2

ECOWAS, and in particular its Committee of Five Foreign Ministers on Sierra
Leone, ECOMOG commanders, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and
his staff, United Nations agencies and relevant international organizations
in their work, and specifically on the development of a plan for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration into civilian life of all
combatants in Sierra Leone. In this context, it supports the intention of
the Secretary-General, subject to security conditions on the ground, to
take rapid steps towards the reopening of the United Nations Liaison Office
in Freetown in order to support the activities of his Special Envoy, and in
particular to assist national reconciliation and political dialogue.
"The Security Council expresses the view that the Conakry Agreement
(S/1997/824, Annexes I and II) and the Abidjan Agreement (S/1996/1034)
provide important elements for a framework for peace, stability and
national reconciliation in Sierra Leone. It calls upon all parties in
Sierra Leone to work towards these objectives through peaceful means and
political dialogue. In this regard, it condemns all reprisal killings and
related violence in Sierra Leone and calls for an immediate end to such
acts.
"The Security Council looks forward to detailed proposals by the
Secretary-General concerning the role of the United Nations and its future
presence in Sierra Leone. It requests the Secretary-General to establish a
Trust Fund to support such activities and calls on all Member States to
make early contributions to it.
"The Security Council welcomes the interim report of the Inter-Agency
Assessment Mission to Sierra Leone of 10 February 1998 (S/1998/155) and
commends those Member States and international organizations who have
provided urgent humanitarian assistance to Sierra Leone. It remains deeply
concerned about the serious and fragile humanitarian situation in the
country, and calls upon all States and international organizations to
provide further urgent assistance to Sierra Leone and neighbouring
countries affected by the crisis. It calls on ECOMOG and all those
concerned to ensure safe and unrestricted access to those in need.
"The Security Council expresses its concern about the safety of all
humanitarian personnel in Sierra Leone, and condemns the taking of hostages
by former members of the deposed junta. It calls for the immediate release
of all international personnel and others who have been detained or held
hostage. It commends ECOMOG for its efforts to liberate those individuals
being held against their will.
"The Security Council will remain seized of this matter."

-----
