UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2526). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Expression of thanks to the retiring President. ......................
Adoptionoftheagenda

..................................

..........

Page
1

......

1

.....

1

Letter dated 22 March 1984 from the ChargC d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/16431) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ; . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SIPV .2526

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2526th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,
President: Mr. Vladimir A. KRAVETS
(Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1.
2.

Adoption

agenda (SIAgendaD526)

of the agenda

Letter dated 22 March 1984 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/16431)
The meeting was called to order at Il.35 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring

President

1. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
As this is the first meeting of the Council for the month
of April, I should like on behalf of the Council to pay a
tribute to Mr. Javier Arias StelIa, the representative of
Peru, for the great diplomatic skill, tact and courtesy
with which he conducted the business of the Council
last month. I am sure that I am speaking for all the
members of the Council in expressing deep appreciation to Mr. Arias Stella for his service as President for
the month of March.
2. The Ukrainian SSR is taking up the duties of President of the Council with a sense of lofty responsibility.
We shall do our utmost to ensure that we perform our
duties in the best possible manner. At the same time,
I would most cordially urge all speakers during this
month to keep to the minimum any expressions of
greetings to the incoming President, for that will save us
much time. I assure members that, in so doing, they will
in no way detract from our deep respect for the representatives and the countries they represent.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 22 March 1984 from the Char& d’affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Gbyan Arab
Jamahiriya
to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/16431)
3. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
In accordance with the decisions taken at previous

2 April 1984, at 10.30 a.m.
meetings [2522nd and 2523rd meetings] I invite the
Secretary of the People’s Committee of the People’s
Bureau for Foreign Liaison of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to take a place at the Council table; I invite
the representatives of Afghanistan, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Ethiopia, the German
Democratic Republic, the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Mongolia, Poland,
the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic and Viet Nam to
take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Treiki (Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya)
took a place at the Council table;
Mr. Zarif (Afghanistan),
Mr. Garvalov (Bulgaria),
Mr. KovaW (Czechoslovakia),
Mr. Al-Ashtal (Democratic Yemen), Mr. Ibrahim (Ethiopia), Mr. Ott (German Democratic
Republic),
Mr. Rajaie-Khorassani
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Kittikhoun
(Lao People’s Democratic Republic), Mr. Erdenechuluun (Mongolia), Mr. Natorf (Poland), Mr. Birido (Sudan),
Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic) and Mr. Le Kim
Chung (Viet Nam) took the places reservedfor them at
the side of the Council chamber.
4. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
I wish to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Cuba and
Hungary in which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Roa Kouri
(Cuba) and Mr. R&z (Hungary) took the places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
5. Mr. CHAMORRO
MORA (Nicaragua) [interpretation from Spanish]: First, I should like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We are sure that you,
the representative of the Ukraine SSR, which has been
working for democracy in the world, will guide the
Council’s deliberations
in the customary excellent
manner characteristic of your experience and ability.
6. I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate the representative of Peru, Mr. Javier Arias Stella,
on the excellent manner in which he conducted the

Council’s work last month. Thanks to his contribution,
we were able to deal successfully with the subjects on
the Council’s agenda last month.

gua and others as a result of the interventionist
nature
of the United States which, through whatever means
available, attempts to impose its imperialist
will on
our peoples and Governments. We have also witnessed
the cynicism that has characterized the various United
States representatives who give the name of freedom
fighters to the mercenaries of the United States Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), who are trying to overthrow my Government from Honduran territory, and
the name of terrorists to the fighting patriots of the PLO
and SWAPO, who are just trying to win back their
territories occupied by Zionism and apartheid, regimes
which, as we all know, are strategic allies of United
States imperialism.

7. In his letter of 21 March [S/16425], the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya drew the international community’s attention to the dangerous situation in the Libyan eastern border area caused by the
increased interference by the United States there. The
representative of Libya reported to us the presence of
AWACS espionage aircraft with a group of fighters in
the region and that there were plans to send in more
such air&aft in the coming weeks. This information has
been broadly borroborated by the American press.
8. We recall that in February 1983, the United States
sent four AWACS aircraft and moved the aircraftcarrier Nimitz into the vicinity of Libya, under pretexts
similar to those now being used. On that occasion the
representative of the United States denied that reconnaissance aircraft and others with equipment for interference were flying along the Libyan borders, and in a
letter to the Council [S/Z56271 said that the flights of
aircraft from the Nimitz were routine and that the
Nimitz was passing through the region. Later, in
August 1983, the United States sent four more AWACS
aircraft to the region, on the pretext of Libya’s threats
against Chad. When the Council met on that occasion at
Libya’s request, my Government denounced United
States policies of intimidation:
the use or threat of force
and the “big stick” throughout the entire world. At the
time, the aircraft-carrier Eisenhower was located near
Libya and the “Bright Star-83” military manoeuvres
were being conducted.

11. I do not intend on this occasion to dwell on denunciations of United States policies in this region, nor will
I speak at length about the .parallel and similar nature
of the policies it is pursuing in Africa and the Middle
East. The representative
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya spoke at considerable length a few days ago
about the military interventions of the self-appointed
defenders of freedom and democracy throughout the
world since the last century. He cited, among other
examples and solely with reference to those in Latin
America, Grenada, Chile, the Dominican Republic,
Guatemala, Panama, as well as Nicaragua and El Salvador at the present time, which should be sufficient to
make the point:
12. I shall merely adduce some additional serious
examples in order to establish the similarity between
the actions carried out against Libya and those against
my country. At the time of Libya’s earlier complaint to
the Security Council in August 1983, as the United
States was bringing in the aircraft-carrier Eisenhower
and carrying out the “Bright Star-83” manoeuvres to
intimidate Libya, it was carrying out the “Big Pine-II”
manoeuvres in Central America, on Honduran territory. Now, at the time of this new complaint, as we
witness an increase in the presence of the AWACS
aircraft and the creation of alleged Libyan conflicts and
acts of aggression in order to stir up enmity between
Libya and its neighbours, in Central America and specifically with respect to Nicaragua, efforts to find a
negotiated political solution to the problems in our region are being exhausted, the United States military
presence’ is being intensified and acts of aggression
from neighbouring countries are being stepped up.

9. Today, a year later, the United States is continuing
to spy on Libya with its AWACS aircraft and to engage
in displays of force against that fraternal non-aligned
country. The United States does not understand-or
does not wish to understand-that
the Libyan revolution, its leaders and people, as well as the revolution in
Nicaragua, cannot be defeated by brute force, still less
by demonstrations of force. The United States does not,
understand that its warmongering policies will elicit in
response only the just wrath of our peoples, who will
rise up in arms and, after a popular revolutionary war,
turn their countries into more Viet Nams awaiting
United States invading forces. We hope that President
Reagan will think twice and that Central America,
North Africa, southern Africa and the Middle East will
not become places where our citizens will meet their
death; nor do we want those regions to become burialgrounds for hundreds of thousands of invading American soldiers-which
will surely occur if they challenge
the fighting spirit and determination
of our peoples.

13. All these acts of aggression make us wonder about
the validity of the principles of international law to this
permanent member of the Council. What respect for the
principles of non-interference in the internal affairs of
countries has a Government that publicly and brazenly
debates the appropriation of $2 1 million for the murder
of Nicaraguans? What respect for the principle of the
inviolability
of borders has a Government that believes
it has the right, based on its technological superiority,
to spy on any country by flying through its airspace?
According to this logic, any country whose rights are
thus violated and which can obtain the necessary tech-

10. My delegation is not at all surprised at the spirit of
adventurism
and interventionism
underlying United
States foreign policy. On many occasions the Council
has been the scene of complaints from Libya, Angola,
the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), the South
West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), Nicara2

nical means can bring down these planes, in full exercise of the well-known ensuing international right. In
my country an incident occurred recently where we
were forced to bring down a United States helicopter
which, like others before it, entered our airspace to
carry out espionage and supply the CIA-backed mercenaries. I wish to explain that we were the first to
express regret over the incident, in spite of there having
been a flagrant violation of our borders, because it
caused the death of a United States citizen, bringing
mourning to an honest family in that country, whose
only fault was to have served under one of the most
inflexible and militaristic Administrations
in the history
of the United States. However, I wish at the same time
to point out that such incidents, if they were to continue, could be used to spark a war between neighbours
or justify direct intervention,
alone or with the help of
friends, as has happened in the past in order to begin
wars elsewhere. Let us merely recall the sinking of the
Maine off Cuba, which was used as a pretext for beginning the war against Spain, and the Tonkin Gulf
incident in Viet Nam.

17. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Mongolia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
18. Mr. ERDENECHULUUN
(Mongolia)
[interpretation from Russian]: On behalf of the Mongolian
People’s Republic, I should like at the outset to express
deep condolences to the Government and people of
Guinea on the untimely death of the President of
the People’s Revolutionary
Republic of Guinea, Mr.
Ahmed SCkou Tour& an outstanding African statesman
and staunch champion of the cause of the freedom and
independence of peoples.
19. The Mongolian delegation takes great pleasure in
seeing you, Mr. President, presiding over the Security Council, a principal organ of the United Nations,
entrusted with the responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. We whole-heartedly
welcome you and the delegation of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and wish you the greatestsuccess in the performance of your responsible duties.

14. Just a few days ago. in this same forum
[252Zsr meeting], my delegation declared its surprise at
the irresponsibility
of the Reagan Administration
in
attempting to obtain $114 million from the Congress for
the sowing of death and destruction in Central America.
The funds would be taken from an aid programme for
hungry African children, thus sowing death in that continent also by allowing the death rate to increase. We
also expressed the conviction that sooner or later our
African brothers would realize who was the primary
cause of their problems and who, by supporting the
racist regime of Pretoria, was the main obstacle to their
development.

[The speaker continued

in English.]

20. My delegation pays a tribute to your predecessor,
Mr, Arias Stella, the representative of Peru, for the able
manner in which he conducted the Council’s work last
month.
21. I am grateful to you, Mr. President,. and other
members of the Council for having given me an opportunity to state the position of my country on the question at present under consideration.
22. The Council is seized of the complaint by the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, which requested an urgent
meeting of the Council to consider the deteriorating
situation resulting from hostile and provocative acts of
the United States directed against that country.

15. Before concluding my statement today, I wish to
reiterate our militant solidarity with the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and state our great concern at the political
and military actions being .conducted by the present
United States Administration,
whose sole intention is
to maintain its hegemonistic interests by keeping the
Arab nation divided. We are sure that our Arab brothers know the identity of the main obstacle confronting
them-who
it is that backs, and, indeed, has a strategic
alliance with, the Zionist regime. We are also sure that
sooner or later they will unite and free themselves from
oppression and aggression and recover their territories
that are occupied today and live in peace and tranquillity.

23. In a letter of 20 March 1984 [S/26425], as well as in
the statement of 28 March by the Secretary of the
People’s Committee of the People’s Bureau for Foreign
Liaison of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mr. Ali Treiki
[2522nd meeting], the attention of the Council was
drawn to the.causes of the situation currently prevailing
in that part of the world.
24. One should point out here that this is not the first
time that Libya has become an object of repeated acts
of intimidation
and direct threats. Last year the Council
had to deal on more than one occasion with the United
States provocations against the sovereignty of Libya.,
Today, that country is faced with yet another hostile
campaign of threats and intimidation.
This time, the
recent reported events concerning the incident with
an unidentified aircraft which, on 16 March, bombed
Omdurman have been exploited for such a campaign.

16. The fact that Mr. Reagan needs a foreign-policy
triumph today more than ever, especially since his
shameful defeat in Lebanon, and solely for electoral
ends, should be of fundamental concern to Council
members, the non-aligned and the whole international
community.
We sincerely hope that this does not lead
to a conflict of regrettable consequences for mankind,
but we believe that the fact just mentioned is where the
explanation must be sought for the threats and acts of
aggression against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

25. Once again-as if everything was prearrangedreconnaissance AWACS planes and other military
3

hardware have been dispatched to the region with enviable speed. One hardly needs to recall here the everincreasing military presence of the United States in the
world in general and in that region in particular. The
most ominous sign of this can be found in the stationing
of nuclear weapons-namely,
cruise missiles-aafew
hundred miles away from African, Mediterranean
and
other neighbouring countries. Thus a situation has been
brought about which seriously endangers international
peace and security.

responsibilities.
My words of appreciation go also to
your predecessor, Mr. Arias Stella, representative of
Peru, for the exemplary manner in which he conducted
the work of the Council during the busy month of
March.
33. It has now become a routine matter for the United
States to appear in the Council as a defendant. It has
become even more routine for the Council to consider
complaints against two of the closest partners of the
United States, namely the Zionist entity and the racist
minority apartheid regime in South Africa. In the case
of the United States, however, these complaints do not
emanate from one region only: they come from*Asia,
from Africa and from Latin America.

26. It is obvious that these developments can in no
way be divorced from the overall policy of United
States imperialism,
which arbitrarily declares whole
,regions of the world situated thousands of miles away
from the American coasts as zones of “vital interest”.
In these actions one cannot but see imperialist attempts
to impose neo-colonialist solutions on other countries,
to consolidate further its positions in that strategically
important area rich in mineral resources.
27. It should be noted here that shows of force and
muscle flexing have become a matter of routine in
imperialist conduct these days. Those policies of the
United States Administration
are in flagrant contravention of the Charter of the United Nations and the generally accepted norms and principles of international
law.

34. That fact is not just indicative of the hatred of
peoples ail over the world towards the aggressive,
interventionist
and warmongering policies of United
States imperialism; it is testimony to the determination
of Member States to continue their struggle for the
preservation of their independence,
national sovereignty and territorial integrity, even if it means standing
up against the most monstrous military might. It also
vividly shows the confidence and trust which Member
States place in the Security Council and their expectations of this supreme body responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

28. The Mongolian People’s Republic fully shares the
alarm and concern voiced by the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya at the further exacerbation of the situation in that
region and expresses its full support for and solidarity
with that country in defence of its sovereignty and
national independence.

35. What they have achieved so far has been either
futile debate with acrimonious polemics or, at best, a
deliberately vague and excessively watered-down resolution. Even such resolutions have remained unimplemented, thanks to the defiance of some of the very
members who voted in the affirmative.

29. We believe that the outstanding issues can and
must be resolved through political means in the interests of the peoples of the region without outside interference.

36. But they still keep coming to the Council, for the
obvious reason that there is no other place in the world
with more appropriate responsibility
and authority.
They come because they feel threatened by those for
whom they are no match. They come also because they
believe in the peaceful settlement of disputes among
nations.

30. The PRESIDENT
[inrerpretution from Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Afghanistan.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

37. This is not the first time that all those reasons have
come together to prompt a decision by the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to bring its legitimate case before the Council. Nor is it the first time that the United States has
been responsible for the creation of a situation warranting the convening of the Council.

31. Mr. ZARIF (Afghanistan): I should like, at the
outset, to express the sincere condolences of the delegation of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan to
the delegation of the Revolutionary
People’s Republic
of Guinea on the sad demise of President Ahmed Stkou
Tour-e. As a staunch tighter for the cause of his nation’s
independence from French colonialist rule, President
Sekou Tour-e earned the respect and admiration not
only of the people of Guinea but of the peoples all over
Africa and the world. He will be long remembered.

38. It should be recalled that, since the victory of the
people’s revolution in Libya and the emancipation of
the Libyan people from the bondage of United States
neo-colonialism,
a disproportionately
large campaign
of lies and defamation has accompanied an all-out
United States economic, political and military blockade
of and direct armed aggression and acts of provocation
against Libya. Through the years, the devilish animosity of the United States towards Libya has developed a
frightening, sadistic complexion that manifests itself
now in one form and now in another.

32. May I, Sir, extend to you our warmest felicitations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. In view’of your outstanding diplomatic and
human qualities,, we are certain that under your able
guidance the Council will satisfactorily discharge its
4

39. All-the admirers of the late, unlamented Herr
Goebbels have just cause for alarm: the reputation of
the Hitlerite propagandist is in real danger of being
eclipsed by the growing renown of the United States
Administration’s accursed lying apparatus. The Nazi
technique of continuing to repeat a lie in the hope of its
acquiring a semblance of truth and of continuing to sling
mud with the expectation of some of it sticking is being
practised by the inheritors of the mantle of the Third
Reich in this regard, who are seeking to perfect it. The
technique has been upgraded, with the warlords of
Washington seeking to convict others-including the
victims--of their own outrageous crimes.
40. Thus, a false and fundamentally distorted image is
drawn of Libya and its foreign policy. The initial intention was to force some countries of the region into the
American orbit by scaring them with an imaginary and
hypothetical threat from Libya. This lie has been so
often repeated that even the inventor of the lie, the
United States, seems to believe it.
41. The present scenario is all too familiar. It reads as
follows: “It is a bird. No, wait: it is a plane: It is a
Soviet-made plane. It is a Soviet-made, Libyan-owned
plane.” But the world observes, “Oh, no; it is an
AWACS plane.”
42. Little more than a year ago the United States was
trumpeting, with full force, charges that Libya was
massing its troops along the frontiers of a neighbouring
State and was preparing to launch an act of aggression
against that State. But long before the smoke-screen
dispersed and the propaganda dust settled, little doubt
remained in the mind of the international community
about the real cause of the escalating tension in that
region. The .Pentagon’s strategists had considered it
imperative to deploy more detachments of their armada
in the region, and, in order to justify that action, they
desperately needed a pretext. The CIA cooked up a
design which was carried out in large part by the imperialist disinformation and misinformation monopolies.
Libya was to be accused of preparing to attack a neighbouring State. Provocative and slanderous statements
were made against Libya, its people, its revolution and
its leadership. The aircraft-carriers Nimitz and Eisenbower were dispatched to roar along the shores of
Libya in a deliberate show of force. The “Bright Star”
manoeuvres were conducted in the close proximity of
Libyan territory with full participation by United States
ground, naval and air forces. .In a stark act of aggression, United States fighter-planes belonging to the
Sixth Fleet attacked Libyan planes which were on a
reconnaissance flight over the territorial waters of
Libya and shot down two of the Libyan aircraft. The
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, after examining
the situation at the request of Libya, condemned the
United States act of aggression. The Security Council,
however, was paralysed in its meetings on the subject in
February and August 1983, owing to the veto cast by
the United States. Since then, many covert and overt

attempts have been made to destabilize Libya and to
bring about a deterioration of the situation in the region.
43. The Council is expected by all small and militarily
weak Member States to call to order those States-particularly those which are permanent members of the
Council-which tend to pose a threat to international
peace and security.
44. As Babrak Karma& General Secretary of the Central Committee of the People’s Democratic Party of
Afghanistan and President of the Revolutionary Council of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, said on
the occasion of the Afghan new year, which begins on
20 March:
“We consider it our main duty to defend peace and
security in the international arena. Pursuing this policy, the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan strongly
condemns the strivings of the imperialists, headed by
United States imperialism, directed towards the
intensification of tension in the world and intervention in the internal affairs of independent countries,
and its militaristic and warmongering policy.”
45. Mr. President, I should like to conclude by
thanking you and, through you, the Council for
affording my delegation the opportunity to appear
before the Council and to make this statement.
46. The PRESIDENT [interpretationfrom
Russian]:
‘The next speaker is the representative of Czechoslovakia. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
47. Mr. KOVACIC (Czechoslovakia): It was with
great sorrow that the Government and the people of
Czechoslovakia received the news of the death of President Ahmed SCkou Tour6 of Guinea, a great son of
Africa, who throughout his life strove for the liberation
of the black continent in order to rid Africa of colonialism and neocolonialism and for the unity and solidarity
of the African nation. We shall remember his contribution to the forming of the Organization of African Unity
and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and to the
constant growth of their progressive role; and we shall
not forget his personal and political contribution to the
development of friendship and co-operation between
the Czechoslovak and Guinean peoples. On behalf of
the Czechoslovak delegation, I should like to convey
through you, Sir, our profound condolences to the people and the Government of Guinea and to President
SCkou Tourt’s family.
48. I wish at the outset to thank you, Mr..President,
and all the other members of the Council for the opportunity to address this forum, as the representative of
the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, on the issue on
the agenda today. Let me also extend to you, the representative of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, my sincerest congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the current

month and express my profound conviction that your
personal qualities and diplomatic skill and experience
guarantee the fulfilment of the mission and the mandate
of the Council to safeguard international
peace and
security. May I also express my appreciation of the
exemplary performance of your predecessor in the
presidency, Mr. Javier Arias Stella, the representative
of Peru.

sure and threats against Cuba, Syria and other nonaligned and progressive developing nations and the
strengthening of the United States presence in the
Indian Ocean, the Persian Gulf and the Mediterranean
-all this is fraught with great danger; It is precisely the
stepped-up armaments, the acts of pressure and aggression by the reactionary forces of imperialism,
headed
by the United States, such as the hostile acts against
Libya, which must be seen as being at the root of the
deteriorating international
situation.

49. After a lapse of not much more than seven
months, the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
has again been compelled to turn to the Council in a
situation where it is being subjected to hostile campaigns and provocations and its security increasingly
threatened. The Council must again deal with acts
directed against a sovereign Member State which are
incompatible
with the Charter and the principles of
international
conduct among States. And again the
same forces in the United States are connected with
these acts.

53. The Czechoslovak Government and people are .
gravely concerned at the escalating acts of pressure and
provocation against the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, a sovereign independent State actively participating in the anti-imperialist,
anti-colonialist
and
anti-racist struggle of the entire progressive mankind, a
State whose extensive relations with my own country
have been reflected in a treaty of friendship and cooperation and are being further developed on that basis
to the benefit of the peoples of both countries.

50. This time the pretext given for hostile anti-Libyan
statements by leading representatives of the United
States, for stepped-up provocative military measures
and for fanning hostility among neighbouring
Arab
States against Libya is the alleged participation
by
Libya in the bombing of a Sudanese town. Belligerent
measures by the United States followed with remarkable speed and purpose-very
much like the armed
aggression against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam,
on the pretext of the so-called Tonkin Gulf incident,
which, as has been amply proved, was staged by the
United States itself, and very much like the recent
armed aggression against Grenada, on the equally artificially construed pretext of an alleged threat to the
lives of United States citizens.

54. The Government and the people of the CzechoSlovak Socialist Republic
resolutely condemn the
hostile acts against Libya and its friendly people and
against ‘Libyan sovereignty and independence-acts
which, at the same time, constitute a threat to international peace and security. We are in complete solidarity with the Libyan people, which resolutely resists
these provocations and this pressure. It is our expectation that the consideration of Libya’s legitimate complaint in the Council will result in the halting of these
arbitrary acts.
55. The PRESIDENT
[interpretufionfiom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

51. Hostile acts by the United States against Libya
are neither new nor isolated. Almost immediately after
the victory of the anti-imperialist
and a&colonial
revolution in Libya, that country has been the target of
attacks and of military, political and economic pressure
by the United States and other imperialist
Powers.
These acts must, at the same time, be seen within the
context of the efforts by imperialist forces, headed by
the United States, to regain supremacy over the nations
of Africa, to limit those nations’ sovereignty and independence and to make them docile in keeping with neocolonialist behaviour.

56. Mr. ROA KOURI
(Cuba) [interpretation
from
Spanish]: Mr. President, I would like first of all to
convey to you our keen satisfaction at seeing you presiding over the meetings of the Council this month.
Your recognized talent and diplomatic skill, as well as
your commitment
to principles, guarantee beforehand
the success of our work.

52. The belligerent acts against Libya are not an isolated phenomenon
in the foreign-policy
strategy of
the United States. The Washington Administration
is
stepping up armaments, carrying out a policy of blackmail and diktat and arbitrarily proclaiming
so-called
United States spheres of vital interests. It has become
apparent that this Administration
does not at all hesitate to use armed force to suppress revolutionary
liberation movements, as attested to by the aggression against Grenada, the events in Lebanon and the
situation with regard to Nicaragua. The deployment of
new United States nuclear first-strike weapons on the
territories of three Western European countries, pres-

58. In the last few weeks we have witnessed a dangerous aggravation of the situation in the Middle East
and the eastern portion of North Africa.

57. As I thank the other members, through you, for
giving me the opportunity to take part in today’s debate, I would like to say how pleased my delegation was
over the impeccable way in which Mr. Javier Arias
Stella, representative of Peru, conducted the work of
the Council in March.

59. After the failure of reckless United States and
Israeli meddling in Lebanon, where the patriotic forces
prevented the consummation
of a new betrayal of the
Arab nation and the cause of the Palestinian people,
6

66. Therefore it is essential, in no uncertain terms,
to denounce imperialism,
whether in the case of its
stationing of new nuclear devices in Western Europe
in the vain attempt to alter in its favour the intemational balance of forces; when it blocks any path to
understanding or a solution of the grave economic and
financial problems facing the underdeveloped
countries; or when it seeks to drown in blood the aspirations
of the peoples, intervening in the internal affairs of
other countries, as in the case of El Salvador, or invade
them, as in the case of Grenada, or,destabilizing
their
Governments, as in the case of Nicaragua.

like the one hatched at Camp David in 1978, imperialism is trying to devise new excuses for maintaining and
broadening its military presence in the region while at
the same time channelling its policy against the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya in new directions.
60. Whereas in the past the United States violated
Libyan sovereignty and attacked aeroplanes of that
non-aligned country over the Gulf of Sidra, acts that
were condemned by the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, now it is devising the fable of a Libyan
bombing of Omdurman in the neighbouring Sudan in
order to increase its military aid to allies in the region
and to send new AWACS spy planes to strengthen its
activities against the revolutionary peoples and countries of Africa and the Middle East.

67. The threats now hovering over the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya are identical to those daily made against
Nicaragua or against my country, against the patriots
of the Poiisario Front, ,or the Salvadorian Farabundo
Marti National Liberation Front, against the People’s
Republic of Angola or the Syrian Arab Republic,
against the PLO, the African National Congress of
South Africa or SWAPO.

61. This is not a new technique. Twenty-three years
ago, in this same forum, ‘the then representative of the
United States stated with characteristic impudence that
Cuban Air Force aircraft flown by “rebel officers”
were to blame for the bombing of the airports of Havana
on 15 April 1961. However, everyone knows that those
planes, in fact, belonged to the United States Air Force
and had been dispatched by the CIA to guarantee control of the air for the mercenary forces which it sent a
few days later against Playa Gir&, where imperialism
suffered a historic defeat.

68. The revolutionary
Government of Cuba-which
holds as unswerving principles of its foreign policy
solidarity with the peoples struggling for their liberation; the defence of peace and security of all States,
large and small; the struggle to bring about intemational detente; the right of peoples to development and
to a genuinely independent life; the establishment of
a new international economic order; and the advent of
a world free of wars, nuclear weapons and military
blocs-firmly
supports its Libyan brothers and their
right to denounce the policy of aggression and pressure
unleashed against the Jamahiriya by the United States
Government.

62. Let us also recall the Gulf of Tonkin incident and
the mining of Vietnamese ports which were a prelude to
the dirty imperialist war against heroic Viet Nam. In the
last few days, the sinister hand of the CIA has become
evident yet again in Nicaragua with the mining of various ports of that fraternal country, an action that is
a breach of international
law and the Charter of the
United Nations and which cannot fail to acquire special
meaning in the light of these precedents.

69. It is essential to bring to an end the political and
military interference of imperialism in the-Middle East
and neighbouring regions, as well as all acts of provocation and threats to the sovereignty of Libya. If the
Council does not once and for all bridle the warhorse of
imperialism,
no one tomorrow will be able to halt the
emergence of a new world conflict which could put an
end to life on earth.

63. There can be no doubt at all that the community of
nations, and in particular the Council, whose prime
responsibility is the maintenance of international peace
and security, have very good reason to be disturbed in
the light of the dangerous turn taken by the intemational situation at the present time as a consequence of
the warmongering
adventurism that has been manifested by each of the acts of the current United States
Administration.

70. We trust that sooner rather than later the conviction that such a monstrous destiny is possible will
ensure that reason and justice prevail in international
relations.

64. Old conflicts remain unresolved while new focal
points of tension are in danger of assuming greater and
more dangerous proportions.

71. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation from Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Hungary.
I invite ,him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

65. Genuine peace initiatives,
such as the United
Nations plan for Namibia, the Fez plan, the resolutions
of the International
Conference on the Question of
Palestine and the peace-seeking efforts of the Contadora Group meet with undisguised hostility on the
part of imperialism
when they do not simply become
bogged down in the dead end of mere formal support
lacking a genuine and necessary political will to find just
and lasting solutions to the conflicts.

72. Mr. Rk2Z (Hungary): Mr. President; at the very
outset I should like sincerely to thank you and, through
you, the other members of the Council for inviting my
delegation to the deliberations
of this body and for
giving me the opportunity
to express our view with
regard to the item on the agenda.
7

73. But before I turn to the issue under discussion,
please allow me to convey our condolences to the delegation of Guinea on the untimely passing away of
President Ahmed SCkou Tour& a great son of Africa
and one of the founding fathers of the Organization of
African Unity. Mr. Stkou TourC’s resolute stand and
unceasing activities for the elimination
of the shameful colonial system and for independence, peace and
development, as well as his uncompromising
struggle
against all forms of exploitation,
earned him respect
and international
prestige. We are confident that his
devotion will always serve as a bright example to the
generations to come and will continue to inspire those
who are struggling for the same lofty goals.

standard is being applied, which means blind forgiveness vis-ci-vis some regimes and all kinds of pressure
against independent nations that are not to Washington’s liking. But international law and the Charter of the
United Nations do not differentiate in terms of friendly
or unfriendly States. Their principles and provisions
aimed at protecting the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of all States must be respected, with
no exception.

74. It is a great honour and privilege for me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of April. It is my
pleasure to see in the Chair a representative of the
neighbourly Ukrainian
people, with which we have
traditionally
good, fraternal relations, and to express
my confidence that your known diplomatic skill and
wisdom will contribute greatly to the success of the
Council’s work. I should also like to express our
appreciation of the exemplary manner in which your
predecessor, the representative of Peru, conducted the
work of the Council last month.

79. The aim of the ongoing campaign against Libya is
not only to try to intimidate that country, to discredit
it among the African nations,. to sow the seeds of discord and conflict among peoples with common tradi-.
tions and similar aspirations-a
policy well known from
colonial times-but
also deliberately
to poison the
international
atmosphere. This is a very dangerous
course, because no one can lose sight of the possibility
that provocations of this nature may lead to unpredictable consequences, jeopardize the stability of the region in question and threaten international peace and
security as a whole. This is why we feel concern about
any sign of an increase in the mood of confrontation and
any developments that add to the strains of the already
tense international
situation. It is our firm conviction
that in the long run only reason, self-restraint and
mutual respect for one another’s interests can bring
about the normalization
and development of relations
among all countries and peoples the world over.

78. Hungary is in full solidarity with Libya and, with
every nation struggling for the respect for, and full
realization of, the aforementioned
principles, for genuine independence and against external pressure.

75. The international
community
has become very
sensitive to every kind of international
tension-and
rightly so, because in many parts of the world the
dimensions of confrontation are growing to dangerous
proportions. Today the Council is discussing an issue
which has been in the forefront of attention for some
time. This is not the first time that Libya has had to
resort to requesting the calling of a meeting of the
Council because its security has been threatened by the
military presence of a Power alien to the region. The
details of the past developments and those of the overall
propaganda campaign to which Libya has for many
years been subjected are too well known to all present.

80. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
I now call on the Secretary of the People’s Committee
of the People’s Bureau for Foreign Liaison of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
81. Mr. TREK1
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)
[interpretation from Arabic]: I should like to extend to you,
Sir, the congratulations
of the delegation of the Jamahiriya on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. I congratulate you not only
because you represent a friendly country which is
bound to my country by links of friendship and cooperation, but also because of your well-known ability
and wisdom, which will ensure that the Council’s work
for this month is crowned with success.

76. The sending by the United States of two AWACS
aircraft to the region to carry out spy missions against
Libya is yet another manifestation of the anti-Libyan
manoeuvres that constitute an act of provocation and
amount to a military threat. More significant is that this
step and the hysteria that accompanied it clearly demonstrate that some of the influential circles in international politics will stop at nothing to use any pretext
for muscle-flexing.
Those circles keep on stubbornly
ignoring the genuine interests of mankind and the corresponding wish of all peoples to alleviate intemational tension and to promote the spirit of mutual understanding among nations.

82. I also extend the thanks .and appreciation of my
delegation for the constructive and outstanding manner
in which your predecessor, Mr. Arias Stella, the representative of Peru, conducted the Council’s business
last month.

77. As several speakers who have spoken before me
in this debate have pointed out, the real aim of the
United States Administration
in North Africa, as it is in
many other parts of the world, is to strengthen its
position and to increase its military presence--even
in faraway regions. In pursuing these goals a double

83. The Council is meeting on the same day to discuss
complaints from two small, peaceable, non-aligned
countries about intervention
and aggression by the
United States Administration.
I believe that it is rare in
the Council’s history for it to witness such a situation,
8

in which the delegations of two small countries lodge
complaints against a permanent member of the Council,
which is supposed to be responsible for the maintenance of peace and security and respect for the Charter
of the United Nations and for defence of its principles.
But those who drew up the Charter and agreed to give
the United States permanent membership of the Council never thought, I think, that the annals of the Organization, and of the Council in particular, would be replete with innumerable violations of the Charter by the
United States. Indeed, it has launched aggression at the
same time against Nicaragua, Libya, Angola, Palestine
and in various other parts of the world.

United Nations. It must tell the United States that
respect and friendship cannot be bought with dollars,
cannot be achieved by the aircraft-carriers
the New
Jersey or the Eisenhower. It must tell the United States
to stop interfering in the affairs of other States. Such an
appeal may be useful, though, unfortunately,
we all
know that the great Power in question, with its tremendous potential, which could have been harnessed in
the service of peace and the prosperity of peoples, has
been humiliated and manipulated by world Zionism into
using that potential for its own benefit and for the
oppression of peoples.
89. Those who have been following developments in
the United States election campaign can see the unfortunate extent of the penetration by this monstrous
octopus, the movement known as Zionism. The candidates compete with one another as though they were
candidates for an election in Israel, defending the Zionist entity. They argue over who would be the first to
move the embassy to Jerusalem, despite the numerous
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly.

84. As small, non-aligned countries we do not seek
hostility for the sake of hostility, and we do not seek
problems for the sake of problems. We want to live in
peace. We want to be free in our countries, free to
choose our socio-economic systems as we deem appropriate. Millions of human beings have been sacrificed in
defence of our freedom, and we do not want to turn that
freedom over to the United States.
85. We are willing to engage in dialogue, and to establish sound relations with all in accordance with principles and mutual respect. But we will not acquiesce, and
we will not sell our independence, even for billions of
dollars. We want problems among States to be solved
peacefully through bilateral or regional channels.

90. I would assure the Council that my delegation and
our small, peaceable people are proud of the great
support and all the backing and solidarity on the part of
peace- and freedom-loving
peoples. But even if the
Council remains unable to adopt an appropriate resolution, owing to circumstances which are well known to
its members, there will be an end to injustice. Even if
they are small, peoples are able to make sacrifices.

86. The picture is becoming clearer every day. President Nimeiri announced today his discovery of a coup
attempt in the Sudan. His declaration concerning that
attempt clarifies the fabrications and the scenario and
the real reason for what has happened. We do not want
to interfere in the internal affairs of the Sudan, but we
will not accept the exploitation of the fraternal Sudan
by the enemies. of the Arab nation and the allies of
Zionism to commit aggression against us and create
problems between us and our brothers.

91, The people of the Jamahiriya, which is committed
to all international laws and instruments, affirms its full
confidence in the Council and its full belief in the United
Nations and its survival, although some would like to
wave us a fond farewell; as has been said in the Council.
The United Nations, its principles and its objectives
will survive, and the aggressors will meet theirjust end.
The history of peoples-most
recently in Viet Namhas taught us that the forces of injustice will meet their
end.

87. As members are aware, in recent days the delegations of many States-European,
Latin American,
African and Asian-have
spoken before the Council.
All have been unanimous in condemning the aggression. Indeed, members have probably noted that not a
single one has defended the United States, in spite of its
billions, its armadas, its Rapid Deployment Forces and
manoeuvres. That fact holds the promise that the world
is still all right-that
neither force nor billions or dollars
can buy the conscience of peoples. Still less can the
aircraft-carrier policy force peoples to abandon their
convictions.

92. Mr. CLARK (United States ofAmerica): We, too,
wish to extend to you, Sir, congratulations
on your
assuming the presidency for this month, and we trust
you will discharge your heavy responsibilities
with
great distinction and impartiality.
93. I should just like to say that we cannot agree that
the dreary litany-to
which the Council has listened so
patiently-by
non-members of the Council, members
not known for their independent voting record, and by
the most aligned members of the non-aligned, means
much of anything at all.

88. The Council must shoulder its responsibilities and
tell the United States to desist from violating the Char:
ter and taking lightly. the Security Council and the

The meeting

9

rose at I p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans la librairies et les agences depositaims du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies. Section
des vents. New York ou Geneve.

EVI~HWR
Opranwsaurtu
C%-hennnenuats
Hawdi
ICJXHD
xynwrb
a KHHX~~IX
Haraamtax
H arenrcruax
ao acex paRottax
rdepa. Haeonwre
CnpaaKR
06 H3AaHHIIX
aautess rornx~(~o*r
ruaraanne
nrrn ~HIUHT~ no anpecy:
OpranHJaUHR
06%eAHHeHHblX
Hatann. Cexunn
no npoaawe
noaannil.
HbEO-MOpK
HIIH
)fCeHeBa.
COMO

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

B

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de Ins Naciones Unidas es&r en venta en librerlas y casas distribuidoras
en
todas panes de1 mundo. Cons&e a su librero o ditijase a: Naciones Unidas. Sxcidn de Yentas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations,

New York

00300

90-61313-Jamy

1993-2.050
