S/2020/944

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 September 2020
Original: English

United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2476
(2019), by which the Council established the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(BINUH) and requested me to report on the implementation of the resolution every
120 days. The document covers significant developments that have occurred since the
issuance of my previous report (S/2020/537) and provides an update on the
implementation of the BINUH mandate as the mission completes its first year of
existence.
2.
The direct health impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic in
Haiti has, so far, been moderate, with 8,600 confirmed cases and 221 deaths reported
as at 22 September 2020. While official statistics are likely to be underreported, the
Government’s response to the crisis, under the leadership of its COVID-19
multisectoral commission, has contributed to containing the transmission rate. The
pandemic has nonetheless compounded the dire socioeconomic and humanitarian
situation resulting from years of crisis and illustrated the need for continued stability
and an ambitious development and reform agenda.
3.
BINUH and the United Nations country team have further built on the
complementary nature of the mission’s political and advisory mandate and the
programmatic as well as technical support capacities of the United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes present in the country. The United Nations system has
provided advocacy and programmatic support to the Government response to
COVID-19. In parallel, it has advanced implementation of its “One United Nations”
plan through a joint integrated strategic framework and developed programmes with
a view to preparing for an eventual transition of mission responsibilities to national
authorities supported by the United Nations country team.

II. Political and good governance (benchmark 1)
4.
The United Nations system continued to strengthen its partnership with national
authorities to implement a reform agenda aimed at addressing institutional weaknesses
and the root causes of instability. Progress, however, was constrained by the institutional
vacuum resulting from the non-holding of elections to replace the fiftieth legislature,
which ended its term on 13 January 2020, and the persistent lack of consensus on a

20-12135 (E)

011020

*2012135*

S/2020/944

common political agenda. Polarization remains acute, as formal talks to overcome the
political impasse have not resumed since the last round of dialogue facilitated by the
United Nations, the Organization of American States (OAS) and the representation of
the Holy See, on 24 February 2020. The spirit of national cohesion briefly displayed at
the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic rapidly dissolved, while increased levels of gangrelated insecurity and several high-profile murders in late August portend of
inauspicious dynamics as Haiti prepares to enter a new electoral cycle.
5.
Political tensions were further aggravated in late June as the opposition renewed
calls for President Jovenel Moïse to leave office in February 2021 and for the installation
of a transitional government. On 21 August, 228 members of opposition parties and
grass-roots civil society movements issued a statement objecting to the holding of
elections under the current administration and committing to reach agreement on the
modalities for a transitional government. Amid that tense climate, the Executive sought
to pursue parts of its governance agenda. On 5 June, the Council of Ministers adopted
an overdue $1.8 billion national budget (approximately 198.7 billion Haitian gourdes)
for the 2019/20 fiscal year, which ends on 30 September. The President also promulgated
several pieces of legislation by decree, including one pertaining to the new biometric
national identity card – which also serves as a voter identification card – on 16 June, and
a new Penal Code on 24 June. The latter was the result of a decade-long national effort
to update the country’s obsolete 1835 legal framework and better align it with
international legal and human rights norms.
6.
The use of presidential decrees to enact reform, in the absence of a functioning
legislative branch, elicited strong criticism from opposition parties and civil society
groups over the lack of checks and balances in the process. Those concerns were
further heightened by the Executive’s appointment, through a decree published on
9 July, of municipal commissions for the 140 municipalities where the term of office
of elected municipal councils ended between 23 May and 30 July without the holding
of elections. Following two extraordinary meetings, on 17 and 24 July, the Haitian
National Bar Association published an opinion arguing that the Haitian Constitution
does not grant the President the right to issue such decrees and called for the
withdrawal of those issued since 13 January.
7.
Despite those dynamics, some progress was made in the preparations for the launch
of a new electoral cycle in 2021. The Provisional Electoral Council submitted a draft
electoral decree, dated 23 July, to President Moïse. The text strengthens electoral dispute
resolution mechanisms and mandates that, in all electoral races, except for the
presidential one, one-third of political party candidates must be women. The drafters of
the document, however, eschewed other stronger measures advocated by the President
and women’s rights activists to increase elected representation of women. Progress also
continued towards the completion of an updated voter registry. As of 26 August, the
National Identification Office, which was recently allocated $4.3 million to increase its
delivery capacity, had registered some 2.7 million citizens out of an estimated 6.8 million
Haitians of voting age, and distributed 1.6 million biometric identity cards.
8.
Notwithstanding, electoral uncertainty remains high in the absence of consensus
on key aspects of election preparations, including an electoral calendar and the
composition of a new Provisional Electoral Council, after the collective resignation
of the previous Council on 24 July, an act that followed a request from the presidency
on 23 July for the sectors represented in the Council to either confirm their existing
representative or appoint a new one within 48 hours. In the light of the prevailing
political dynamics, negotiations that led to the 18 September designation by President
Moïse of nine new counsellors were convoluted.
9.
Amid increased electrical power outages, allegedly caused by poor quality fuel
supplied by a contractor new to the country’s oil market and widely viewed as
2/29

20-12135

S/2020/944

affiliated with influential individuals, the Government’s pursuit of its anti-corruption
agenda in the energy sector was contested by the opposition for being politically
motivated and partisan. Critics pointed in particular to the proceedings initiated
against the private electricity provider SOGENER, which had its premises sealed and
saw arrest warrants issued against several of its board members in the last week of
July. Critics were also incensed by President Moïse’s 22 June request to three
government anti-corruption bodies to open an inquiry into State oil contracts from
2010 onwards, and again by the 14 August release of the findings of those inquiries,
which concluded that the Haitian State had lost $1.7 billion over 10 years and that oil
companies had accrued $94 million in profit at the expense of the State following the
liberalization of the oil sector in March 2019. The Haitian Association of Petrol
Professionals rejected those findings in a 20 August statement, noting that prices had
been fixed by the Haitian State.
10. Moreover, following the 13 August hearing of a former Senate President and
leading opposition figure by the Anti-Corruption Unit for a loan extended to his
family by the State Pension Fund, the opposition announced that it would submit three
complaints for corruption against perceived allies of the ruling coalition, including
the firm currently contracted by the State to import petroleum products. Against that
backdrop, calls for accountability on the use of the PetroCaribe funds regained
momentum with the 17 August submission of a third PetroCaribe audit report by the
High Court of Auditors and Administrative Disputes to the 10 remaining members of
the Senate. On 19 August, the Court was also requested by a human rights
non-governmental organization to audit 30 contracts signed by the Government
during the COVID-19 public health emergency.
11. Discontent with the Government’s policies and initiatives spilled over beyond
parts of the political and business elite and resulted in an increase in civil unrest
episodes, from a total of 55 in May and June to 174 for the months of July and August.
Notably, a countrywide protest organized by religious actors opposing provisions in
the new Penal Code advancing sexual, reproductive and women’s rights mobilized
over 6,000 people. In addition, several local demonstrations against electricity
blackouts, insecurity and recent changes in municipal administrations also took place.
Those episodes attest to worrisome levels of popular frustration.
12. In that fraught context, the mission continues to extend its good offices to
address the trust deficit that permeates the Haitian political landscape and promote a
more conducive political environment. Outreach to political actors, a cademics, the
private sector, civil society, women leaders and other stakeholders is ongoing to
identify points of convergence and potential confidence-building measures, and to
maintain momentum on debates over key reforms. Moving forward, that engagement
will continue to seek to spark action on concrete, legitimate Haitian-led initiatives
that will place the country on a path to greater political stability.
13. The mission and OAS also reached out to a wide range of national stakeholders
and contributed to the growing public debate on constitutional reform, an issue that
received broad support during the dialogue hosted at the nunciature last year. A BINUH
editorial published on 15 June advocating for a Haitian-owned constitutional reform
process initially sparked mixed reactions but nonetheless paved the way for a number of
Haitian-led public initiatives on the issue, including a two-day workshop organized on
12 and 13 August by the Office of the Ombudsperson (Office de la Protection du
Citoyen), the national human rights institution of Haiti. Prime Minister Jouthe, in a
statement on 17 August, expressed support for such civil society efforts, which continue
to gain traction. However, this much-needed public debate has yet to lead to a formal
constitutional revision process, and the window of opportunity to address the
shortcomings of the 1987 Constitution prior to future elections is fast closing.

20-12135

3/29

S/2020/944

14. The shocking assassination, on 28 August, of the president of the Port-au-Prince
Bar Association and lead SOGENER counsel, Montferrier Dorval, a respected scholar
and vocal advocate for constitutional reform, could have a chilling effect on the active
participation of civil society organizations in the shaping and implementation of the
reform agenda the country needs. Many political and social actors, including the
Office of the Ombudsperson, magistrates’ associations, the Haitian and International
Federations of Bar Associations, private sector, human rights and faith -based
associations publicly expressed their dismay at such an act and have demanded
concrete improvement of the security situation as well as an end to impunity.
Addressing the nation on 29 August, the President expressed his commitment to
taking strong measures against insecurity and to hold perpetrators accountable.

III. Community violence reduction (benchmark 2)
15. Linkages between gang violence and political developments continued to
influence the levels of insecurity observed in Haiti. This was evident in recent months
in the Port-au-Prince metropolitan area (West Department), where deadly inter-gang
clashes in Cité Soleil and Bel Air over control of populous areas that house major
public markets and large polling stations displaced at least 298 households and fuelled
a widespread sentiment of insecurity. These dynamics, which suggest that competition
among gangs is growing in anticipation of elections, led to changes in the
constellation of gangs in the metropolitan area, with the formation on 10 June of a
new alliance, the G9 an fanmi (G9), initially comprising nine gangs from Cité Soleil,
La Saline and lower Delmas, but which has since expanded to 15 gangs spanning
several neighbourhoods.
16. The G9, which was reportedly formed at the instigation of former police officer
Jimmy “Barbecue” Cherizier – who is suspected of being implicated in the
emblematic cases of Grand Ravine (2017), La Saline (2018) and Bel-Air (2019) – is
notorious because of the diversity of its membership, its influence over vast swaths
of territory in the Port-au-Prince metropolitan area and its narrative as a social
movement fighting for better services and opportunities in poor neighbourhoods. Its
creation raised concerns among political and civil society actors about the detrimental
impact partisan gangs can have on State institutions.
17. The signing on 22 August by several gang leaders within G9 of a truce with
rivals in Cité Soleil and reports in late August of tensions within the alliance gave rise
to questions about its ability to maintain cohesion. Nonetheless, the consolidation of
the G9 control of parts of the metropolitan zone appears to have affected major crime
trends during the reporting period. Intentional homicides reported to the police
decreased by 12 per cent between 1 June and 31 August, with 328 victims (including
24 women and 9 children) compared with 373 (including 9 women and 12 children)
in the preceding three months. Just as in previous periods, 74 per cent of those cases
were recorded in the West Department, where some 35 per cent of the population lives
and gang violence is more prevalent. A closer look at statistics, however, reveals a
sudden spike in June (171 reported intentional homicides, compared with 132 in May)
that coincided with the formation of the G9 alliance and corresponds wi th the
deadliest raids on the Port-au-Prince neighbourhood of Pont-Rouge and the commune
of Cité Soleil. This was followed by a steep decline after July (with 77 homicides
reported), once alliances were reconfigured. Conversely, abductions followed the
opposite trend. After steadily declining since March to a monthly average of 3.5,
abduction cases increased to 19 in July, as gangs reverted to lucrative activities
following weeks of intense negotiations and clashes. In total, 32 individuals
(including 9 women and 3 children) were abducted, compared with 25 victims
(including 7 women and 7 children) in the three preceding months, a 28 per cent
4/29

20-12135

S/2020/944

increase. This uptick in kidnappings appears, however, to have been contained by
police operations conducted in the latter part of the reporting period, which led to the
arrest of 53 abduction suspects and 51 additional gang members.
18. A noticeable increase in gang-related incidents was also observed in other parts
of the country, particularly in Cap-Haïtien (North Department) and Petite-Rivière-del’Artibonite (Artibonite Department), where insecurity limits movement on several
important thoroughfares. Just as in the capital, gang violence might increase once an
electoral calendar is announced. Curbing the expansion of gangs thus remains a
priority for the Haitian National Police, which launched another nationwide police
operation on 7 August, and increased its presence in sensitive areas with the
construction of new police stations in Anse-à-Veau (Nippes Department), Ganthier
and Malpasse (West Department).
19. The National Commission for Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
continued to consolidate its position as the leading national institution on community
violence reduction, despite persistent operational constraints. It gained visibility through
involvement in the Government’s response to the COVID-19 epidemic, supporting the
preparation of key messages for the Government’s nationwide sensitization campaign as
well as mediating tensions over the distribution of food and health items and the
installation of sanitary equipment in areas controlled by gangs. However, its draft
national strategy on community violence reduction is yet to be formally adopted by the
Government. In addition, despite having received in late August a partial budget
covering expenses incurred in the previous nine months, including the remunerations of
commissioners, the Commission continues to lack a budget.
20. The United Nations contributed to the community violence reduction agenda
through programmatic activities. A three-year inter-agency Peacebuilding Fund
project, implemented by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the
International Organization for Migration (IOM) and the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), to strengthen social
cohesion in Jérémie (Grand’Anse Department) concluded on 31 July. A total of 4,880
beneficiaries, 55 per cent of whom were women, took part in project activities on
community leadership, citizen decision-making, gender equality, women’s
empowerment, conflict resolution and social cohesion. In addition, 10 youth
organizations received financial assistance, enabling microcredit to young people at
risk. A new project focused on the Martissant and La Saline areas of Port-au-Prince
was approved by the Peacebuilding Fund on 6 July. Its implementation, led by UNDP,
IOM and the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) is currently being fine -tuned
with BINUH and the Commission.
21. BINUH also continued to support national authorities in addressing the
proliferation of illicit weapons and ammunition in Haiti within the framework of a
dedicated Peacebuilding Fund project implemented by UNDP and IOM, with support
from the Department of Peace Operations and the Office of Disarmament Affairs. The
United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin
America and the Caribbean is assisting in the review and development of arms control
legislation. The United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research is preparing an
assessment on weapons and ammunition management in Haiti. Through the
Peacebuilding Fund project, support is also being provided to the Haitian National
Police to improve control over its weapons and ammunition arsenal as well as tha t of
the Firearms Permit Service (Service de Permis d’Armes à Feu) regarding the
management of civilian permits to possess or carry weapons. Under that project, IOM
also provided training to law enforcement and customs officers at the border to
improve border management.
22. Sexual and gender-based violence remained prevalent and continued to be
underreported. The national health system reported 457 cases of rape (including that
20-12135

5/29

S/2020/944

of 164 women, 235 children and 58 men) between 1 June and 31 August, compared
with 541 between 1 March and 31 May. By comparison, 43 rapes were reported to the
Haitian National Police between 1 June and 31 August, compared with 35 during the
earlier period. While legal protections for women have improved in the updated Penal
Code, with anti-discrimination provisions and the decriminalization of abortion, a
comprehensive law on violence against women has yet to be adopted, and redress for
victims remains inadequate. The United Nations also continues to assist the Ministry
of Women’s Affairs with the implementation of the national plan to counter violence
against women, despite no provisions for the plan in the national budget, and is
reviewing a list of service providers for survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence. Support was also provided to the Ministry of Women’s Affairs with the
implementation of its national COVID-19 emergency strategy and communications
campaign, with a focus on gender-based violence and continuity of access to basic
health services, especially for maternal health.

IV. Justice and the rule of law (benchmark 3)
23. Despite several important developments, including the appointment of a new
Minister of Justice and Public Security, the adoption of a new Penal Code and the
effective management of the COVID-19 response in prisons, major challenges
persisted in the police, justice and corrections sectors.
24. On 9 July, Rockefeller Vincent, until then the Director of the Anti -Corruption
Unit, replaced Lucmanne Délille as Minister of Justice and Public Security. During
his short tenure, Délille had faced controversy over his management of prisoner
releases ahead of the COVID-19 pandemic and several inflammatory declarations
related to gangs. Among the new Minister’s foremost priorities will be to assuage
judicial actors striking to publicize grievances over better work conditions, the
payment of salary arrears and the resumption of the currently stalled process to renew
judges’ mandates. The strikes have had an impact on the conduct of regular judicial
activities since my previous report. While commitments made by the Government in
early July halted the national movement, several magistrates’ associations pledged to
resume work stoppages should the executive branch fail to act on its promises. In
addition, slow progress in the establishment of the board of the National Council on
Legal Aid delayed the opening of 11 decentralized legal aid offices, despite
continuous engagement by BINUH, the United Nations country team and other
technical and financial partners active in the sector.
25. The promulgation, to mixed reactions, of a new Penal Code by presidential
decree on 24 July, represents a landmark achievement for Haiti, as it articulates a more
progressive and humane approach to enforcing the law and provides an opportunity to
advance justice sector reform. Imprisonment, currently the default option even for
minor crimes, will become an exception, and the use of alternatives to incarceration
may potentially help reduce prison overcrowding. Moreover, the recognition of new
forms of criminal offenses, such as electronic and transnational crimes and grave
human rights violations, including torture, crimes against humanity and war crimes,
will harmonize Haitian domestic legislation with international criminal justice an d
human rights norms and standards, including the country’s international treaty
obligations. Some religious leaders expressed concern over a number of provisions,
notably the lowering of the age of sexual consent to 15 and the criminalization of acts
of discrimination against members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex community, which they perceive as contrary to Haitian cultural and religious
values. The current two-year transition period before the Code enters into force could,
with the continued engagement of the expert panel that drafted its content under the
leadership of former Minister of Justice and Public Security Jean Joseph Exumé, pave
6/29

20-12135

S/2020/944

the way for strengthened buy-in among national stakeholders and afford judiciary as
well as other penal chain actors time to familiarize themselves with its contents in
order to gradually prepare for its application.
26. The limited amount of resources provided to the Haitian National Police over
the past several years is beginning to erode not only the organization’s operational
capacity, but more importantly public confidence in the country’s sole functioning
nationwide public safety institution. The share of the national budget allocated to the
police decreased from 6.60 to 5.53 per cent and remains below the target of 7 per cent
set for the third benchmark (see annex). The impact of the depreciation of the Haitian
gourde on purchasing power, in tandem with increases in episodes of civil unrest and
gang violence, has led the national police operating budget to be increasingly
stretched. While Haitian authorities should be striving to build a force of 25,000
police officers to meet the internationally accepted ratio of 2.2 police officers for
every 1,000 inhabitants, the national police workforce was reduced by 150 officers
since my previous report. The police now count 15,022 officers within its ranks,
which corresponds to a ratio of 1.28 police officers per 1,000 inhabitants.
27. Nevertheless, the Haitian National Police continued efforts to strengthen its
performance. While female representation within its ranks currently stands at just
over 10.5 per cent, women made up 21.3 per cent of the most recent class of recruits.
Supported by BINUH and international partners, the national police stepped up efforts
to boost women’s participation in future recruitment processes. However, the
Government needs to redouble its efforts to support the effective implementation of
the strategic development plan for the national police, 2017–2021, and notably focus
on better training and equipping police officers to ensure compliance with human
rights standards and improve police response to public complaints.
28. In collaboration with international partners, the Haiti prison administration
managed to mitigate the potentially dramatic effects of the pandemic in prisons and
allay fears of high death tolls and insecurity in the country’s penitentiary system.
Between March and July, 234 individuals out of a total inmate population of 10,908
were tested for COVID-19, with 140 positive cases. Moreover, no significant increase
in the carceral mortality rate has been observed compared with the same period last
year. Finally, in July, BINUH advocacy for, and advice on, improving the
management of Haitian National Police financial resources resulted in the provision
of two meals per day to detainees. However, the countrywide recurrent fuel and
electricity shortages continued to worsen the already poor detention conditions. In
addition, efforts to reduce the inmate population as part of the exceptional judicial
measures taken in the COVID-19 context had limited success. Despite the release of
1,042 detainees since 25 March (including 80 women and 25 children), the prison
occupancy rate was at 338 per cent, a 1.8 per cent increase compared with the rate
cited in my previous report. This increase was mainly due to rising numbers of pretrial
detainees stemming from bottlenecks in the judicial sector. The United Nations
Peacebuilding Fund allocated $2 million to support a reduction in prison and
detention centre inmates in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic as part of the
penitentiary administration contingency plan. The Peacebuilding Fund support would
help carry out virtual hearings to facilitate legal arbitration to release detai nees.
29. On a positive note, in the fight against impunity, the General Inspectorate of the
Haitian National Police expanded its operational capacity to fight misconduct and
human rights violations, reaching a key milestone with the construction of a full y
equipped and staffed office in Cap-Haïtien (North Department). The office is the
Inspectorate’s first regional presence and will help to address more proactively
citizens’ concerns over police wrongdoing.

20-12135

7/29

S/2020/944

V. Human rights (benchmark 4)
30. Gang-related violence and the difficulties encountered by State authorities to
protect citizens’ rights to life, security and physical integrity, in addition to the lack
of accountability of alleged perpetrators for past human rights abuses, continued to
have a negative effect on the human rights situation in the country. At the same time,
the Government bolstered its ownership of human rights issues by appointing Jessy
Ménos as Minister-delegate for Human Rights and the Fight against Extreme Poverty
on 8 July. That position had been vacant since the appointment of Joseph Jouthe as
Prime Minister on 4 March. As part of her duties, the Minister-delegate assumed
leadership of the Inter-Ministerial Committee on Human Rights, which is tasked with
the coordination of human rights-related policies.
31. The mission documented the continuing occurrence of human rights violations
and abuses in Haiti, primarily in the context of inter-gang clashes, the majority of
which were recorded in the metropolitan area of Port-au-Prince (West Department).
Since my previous report, BINUH observed an increase in attacks by gangs targeting
the population, a development that can be explained by the establishment of the G9
an fanmi alliance and a lack of accountability for past abuses, including in emblematic
cases like Grand Ravine (2017), La Saline (2018) and Bel Air (2019). Between 1 June
and 31 August, BINUH attributed 172 alleged human rights abuses to gang members
and unidentified armed men, including 27 killings, 28 injuries and 8 rapes.
32. Moreover, the seeming involvement in recent gang attacks in the Port-au-Prince
neighbourhoods of Pont-Rouge and Bel Air, as well as in the commune of Cité Soleil,
by known individuals, such as Jimmy “Barbecue” Cherizier, who are the subjects of
national police arrest warrants for their alleged implication in emblematic armed
attacks, including in Grand Ravine, La Saline and Bel Air, further underscores how
impunity and a manifest lack of accountability fuel recurrent cycles of violence. In
the face of such violence, the Office of the Ombudsperson, the national human rights
institution, emphasized the State’s obligation to protect the right to life, while civil
society organizations published multiple reports documenting gang violence,
questioning the effectiveness of the Government’s response and reiterating
allegations of collusion between gangs and State agents. BINUH also reiterated its
serious concerns in a 12 August statement, in which it strongly condemned gang
violence and reiterated its call for accountability of perpetrators.
33. The situation surrounding Emmanuel “Toto” Constant, a former paramilitary
leader sentenced in absentia to life imprisonment on 16 November 2000 for his
involvement in the 1994 Raboteau massacre, who was deported from the United States
of America on 26 June, also raises concerns. While Constant was arrested upon his
arrival in Port-au-Prince, the Prosecutor’s office has not been able to locate his judicial
file to confirm that his detention is in compliance with his prior conviction. Concerns
that Constant could escape justice remain despite the rejection by the Gonaïves Court of
First Instance, at the end of July, of an application for habeas corpus filed by Constant ’s
attorneys. BINUH and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) are advocating for the regularization of Constant’s legal situation and
are providing support to human rights organizations to strengthen awareness, access to
justice and protection, including for the families of the Raboteau victims.
34. The lack of accountability for human rights violations committed by State
agents (91 violations during the period under review, resulting in 29 people killed and
35 injured) remains concerning, because of the chronic absence of progress on
judicial proceedings against alleged perpetrators, including those within the national
police. Between October 2019 and August 2020, the General Inspectorate of the
National Police opened investigations into 172 allegations of human rights violations.

8/29

20-12135

S/2020/944

Among the 13 investigations concluded to date, recommendations have been endorsed
in seven cases while the others are pending final review by the Director-General ad
interim of the Haitian National Police or the Minister of Justice and Public Security.
In addition, 14 cases were transferred to the judiciary for prosecution during the same
period. The General Inspectorate also investigated an additional 134 possible
violations related to cases pertaining to incidents that occurred between 20 05 and
2019. It recommended sanctions in 45 cases, out of which only 8 were implemented
and 7 transferred for judicial proceedings.
35. In addition to the appointment of a new Minister-delegate for Human Rights and
the Fight against Extreme Poverty, the Government submitted its additive report to
the Human Rights Committee, ahead of a review of its implementation of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, planned for October.
Notwithstanding those developments, the national action plan on human rights,
validated in December 2019 by the Inter-Ministerial Committee, is still pending
endorsement by the Council of Ministers. The plan seeks to address lasting human
rights problems by implementing recommendations formulated in the context of the
Human Rights Council universal periodic review of Haiti in 2016.
36. Advocacy efforts are still ongoing to ensure the draft national human rights
action plan is adopted by the Council of Ministers. The ratification by Haiti of the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment and the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance is included in that draft.
37. The Office of the Ombudsperson also continued advocacy on key human rights
issues. It coordinated the implementation of the national human rights protection
framework and issued recommendations on various human rights concerns, including
prolonged pretrial detention, the right to health, the impact of the magistrates ’ strike
on access to justice and insecurity and gang violence. BINUH supported the Office
in the elaboration of an operational plan for the implementation of its new protection
strategy, which seeks to effectively manage human rights complaints countrywide, a s
well as develop and carry out key advocacy initiatives, in particular on economic and
social rights.
38. Furthermore, efforts to strengthen the ability of national human rights
organizations to undertake their critical role advocating for citizen ’s fundamental
rights continued. With support from BINUH and OHCHR, national organizations and
the Office of the Ombudsperson advocated for preventive COVID-19 measures and
anti-stigmatization practices in prisons, based on visits to several detention centres
and police stations, including the women’s prison in Cabaret and the juvenile
detention facility in Port-au-Prince. In addition, BINUH supported several national
human rights organizations in submitting alternative reports to the Human Rights
Committee ahead of its meeting on the implementation by Haiti of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, planned for October.
39. Finally, BINUH continued discussions with the Haitian authorities about opening
a standalone OHCHR office in Haiti. If approved, the office would continue to work
with the Haitian authorities following the eventual departure of the mission to ensure
the sustainability of progress made in recent years in the field of human rights.

VI. Unemployment, youth and other vulnerable groups
(benchmark 5)
40. The economic forecast for Haiti for 2020 remains gloomy. Recently revised
projections from the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
20-12135

9/29

S/2020/944

(ECLAC) suggest a contraction in gross domestic product by 5 per cent for the year,
due largely to the fallout of the COVID-19 health crisis compounding the economic
impact of sociopolitical unrest in 2019. In recent months, it has become harder for the
poorest households to gain access to food, owing to the continuing increases in the price
of staple foods and other goods. At the same time, household incomes and purchasing
power dropped as a result of, among other factors, reduced economic activity due to
disinvestment in the textile and agricultural sectors linked to the pandemic. On a
macroeconomic level, the weakened economic activity led to an estimated 16 per cent
decline in fiscal revenues by the end of July, while expenditures rose by 25 per cent in
real terms. The resulting large government deficit prompted a central bank intervention
equivalent to about 6 per cent of gross domestic product at the end of July. Meanwhile,
the value of the gourde against the United States dollar has exhibited increased
volatility, and inflation is projected to remain above 20 per cent in 2020. In addition,
efforts to address the country’s fundamental economic challenges still languish, as
discussions between the Government and the International Monetary Fund on a staff monitored programme recently stalled over the Fund’s request for greater transparency
regarding a public procurement contract in the oil sector.
41. To better understand the exact toll of the pandemic on the Haitian economy and
households, the resident coordinator has been leading the efforts of the country team
to assess and identify solutions to overcome the effects of the pandemic. Working
under the overall coordination of the Ministry of Planning and International
Cooperation and with UNDP providing technical leadership, the country team has
engaged, through a global tripartite agreement for post-crisis assessments with the
World Bank and the European Union, on the conduct of a joint, comprehensive
COVID-19 socioeconomic impact assessment. That process draws on the expertise of
various members of the country team, including non-residents such as ECLAC, and
the ongoing analysis by UN-Women of the gender-differentiated impacts of the
pandemic in Haiti. It will include recommendations for public policy reform and
guide the Government’s formulation of a cogent and comprehensive recovery plan.
In addition, the World Food Programme (WFP) and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs are delivering assistance through cash transfers in order to
empower beneficiaries to meet their essential needs through local markets.
42. Over the past several months, the United Nations country team has adapted its
implementation of short-term stabilization interventions to help achieve a long-term
impact despite the challenging context. To help support vulnerable rural household
incomes and to prevent further deterioration of food security, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) is assisting with agricultural
inputs, animal health and diversification of food and income sources, among other
actions. To help preserve employment and improve livelihoods, UNDP, in
collaboration with the Government, provided training in financial management,
marketing and customer service skills, as well as a one-time cash subsidy of $153 to
458 microenterprises. In addition, the United Nations Office for Project Services
(UNOPS) restarted its labour-intensive roadwork projects in the Artibonite and Centre
departments, while UN-Women trained low-income women in the production of
masks and soap, providing them with income opportunities during the pandemic.

VII. Basic social service delivery and resilience (benchmark 6)
43. While the impact of the pandemic in Haiti has not been as severe as initially
projected, the COVID-19 virus nevertheless continues to spread throughout the country
at a steady albeit low level, mandating continued caution. A small uptick in cases was
registered following the President’s suspension of the state of health emergency on
28 July, which permitted the reopening of schools and places of worship, but a larger
10/29

20-12135

S/2020/944

surge has not been observed to date. The Government continues to implement the
national COVID-19 preparedness and response plan, in which the United Nations system
– under the leadership of the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) and the World
Health Organization (WHO) and through the work of IOM, UNDP, UNFPA, UNOPS,
WFP and the United Nations Children’s Fund – played an important supporting role. As
part of the plan, the Government established call centres and data analysis teams in all
10 of the country’s departments and activated contact tracing and investigation teams
across the country to enhance surveillance. The Ministry of Public Health and Population
set up triage spaces for suspected cases in 147 non-COVID-19 health centres to ensure
safe treatment of patients. Moreover, in collaboration with partners, the United Nations
distributed masks and other material to vulnerable groups, including people living with
HIV. Measures to detect and follow-up on potential migrants with COVID-19 were put
in place at several border crossing points. Finally, awareness-raising efforts, a crucial
element of the COVID-19 response, helped reduce the spread of the virus by sensitizing
communities to effective prevention measures, including through the activities of
thousands of community health workers trained by PAHO/WHO with the Ministry of
Public Health and Population.
44. Development and humanitarian indicators in Haiti took a downward turn in
recent months. The pandemic heightened protection issues, including for women and
girls who face increased risks of sexual and gender-based violence. The United
Nations-European Union Spotlight Initiative on gender, working with 22 partners, has
sensitized more than 2,500 young people on the availability of the green line/hotline
of the Children’s Protection Brigade of the Haitian National Police and to provide
psychological assistance and group support to about 500 adolescents and girls. In
addition, the reallocation of health workers and resources to the COVID-19 response
and fear of contagion has interrupted the continuity of health services, including
routine immunization and life-saving maternal and neonatal health interventions.
45. After being closed for months, schools reopened on 10 August for more than
4 million children, but the lack of access to or limitations of distance learning
exacerbated existing educational inequalities for the poorest and most vulnerable
households. An ongoing drought, border closures and other COVID-19-related factors
also resulted in a deterioration of food security and nutrition, to the extent that 53 per
cent of households experienced hunger between May and June, according to a United
Nations-supported study by the National Coordination for Food Security. Without
access to sufficiently nutritious food, the number of children suffering from
malnutrition is expected to increase by 25 per cent by the end of the year. In that
context of growing vulnerabilities, the National Social Protection and Promotion
Policy – adopted in June – and the decree governing its implementation represent
positive developments. The United Nations stands ready to support the drafting of the
national action plan for the policy as a next step. It is also, in partnership with the
World Bank, contributing to the development of a knowledge base for policymaking
through the implementation of several studies on the impact of COVID-19 on
households, food security, the environment and gender, among others. Moreover, to
help respond to the worsening humanitarian situation, a revised 2020 Humanitarian
Response Plan was launched in June. It aims to reach 2.3 million (as part of the
non-COVID-19 response) of the 5.1 million Haitians deemed the most vulnerable.
Including the COVID-19 response, the revised plan requests $472 million. As of
10 September, it was 16 per cent funded.
46. One bright spot in the health sector, despite interruptions to services over the
past several months, remains the fight against cholera, which the United Nations
continues to prioritize, while supporting the Government in capitalizing on cholera
surveillance and alert-response systems to advance efforts against COVID-19 and
other infectious diseases. In 2020, only 79 suspected cases of cholera have been
20-12135

11/29

S/2020/944

identified, all of which have tested negative. Because so few cases of suspected
cholera have been found, testing has been expanded to include additional forms of
acute watery diarrhoea to increase confidence in results. Nineteen consecutive months
have passed since the most recent confirmed case of cholera was recorded in Haiti.
47. The current hurricane season, which has been more active than normal for Haiti and
the Caribbean region, could further exacerbate humanitarian needs. Already, the country
has seen 31 people killed, 2,320 houses damaged and 243 destroyed by tropical storms.
The United Nations is engaged with the General Directorate of Civil Protection to support
preparedness, including the prepositioning of food and non-food items, the enhancement
of rapid assessment and information management capacities, the review of contingency
plans in the light of the pandemic and the construction as well as renovation of emergency
shelters. To reinforce COVID-19 prevention efforts, masks have been given to the
General Directorate of Civil Protection for distribution, and prevention measures are
employed at food and cash distribution sites, as well as in emergency shelters.

VIII. Operational posture and integration
48. Efforts continued aimed at implementing the integrated strategic framework,
which is intended to guide the collective efforts of the Organization in 2020 and 2021,
following the projected renewal of the BINUH mandate. In particular, the United
Nations system in Haiti is currently devising integrated solutions to address the
structural blockages preventing progress on the country’s many challenges. In
addition, a number of entities have realigned or reprioritized some funding, while
some have brought on board additional human resources focused on objectives of the
integrated strategic framework.
49. BINUH successfully relocated its headquarters on 1 September to the
Pétionville commune of Port-au-Prince metropolitan area, in closer proximity to
United Nations agencies, partners and counterparts. The move enabled the mission to
close the logistics base inherited from previous peacekeeping missions, a site that had
become too costly to maintain and did not meet BINUH operational requirements.
The logistics base facilities are scheduled to be rehabilitated and returned to the
Government of Haiti on 30 September 2020, in full compliance with United Nations
policy and established environmental standards. They are set to house the National
Emergency Operations Centre of the General Directorate of Civil Protection. As part
of the move, surplus equipment and inventory was disposed of through sales and, in
some cases, gifting to governmental partners to strengthen institutional capacities and
help respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. BINUH police and corrections co-location
sites also finished rehabilitation and became fully operational.

IX. Sexual exploitation and abuse
50. Since my previous report, BINUH has received one new allegation of sexual
exploitation and abuse relating to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
period. The Mission also received allegations against a new perpetrator in a case
reported in 2009. Efforts continued to support those and other victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse, as well as any children born as a result of such misconduct.
The Office of the Ombudsperson stands ready to play a role in reporting cases,
including by contacting the national human rights institution of the country of origin
of alleged perpetrators. At the same time, efforts to prevent sexual exploitation and
abuse continued, including through the recruitment of a system-wide coordinator of
the task force on sexual exploitation and abuse, as well as through online training -oftrainers sessions for implementing partners on prevention.
12/29

20-12135

S/2020/944

X. Observations
51. As Haiti prepares to enter a new electoral cycle, the rapid dwindling of the
national cohesion witnessed at the onset of the COVID-19 outbreak is cause for
serious concern. Despite the prevailing consensus on the need for a constitutional
review prior to elections and comprehensive institutional reforms, national
stakeholders have not come to an agreement over a political and broader reform
agenda to address root causes of instability in Haiti. Furthermore, the ins titutional
vacuum created by delayed parliamentary and local elections has further added to the
polarization of the public debate.
52. A minimal political consensus, as well as a realistic plan for elections, to include
an electoral framework, calendar, voter registry and budget, and a fully functional
Provisional Electoral Council, are needed to ensure free, fair and transparent elections
that will lend legitimacy to the political system and strengthen State institutions and
good governance. Should this not be the case, the Haitian population could once more
be the victim of the type of political violence that has plagued previous processes. I
therefore reiterate my call, with renewed urgency, to government, political and civil
society stakeholders to set aside their differences and leverage this historical
opportunity to deliver on popular expectations by coming to agreement on necessary
governance reforms. My Special Representative, BINUH and the entire United
Nations system stand ready to assist national stakeholders in engaging in a
constructive dialogue aimed at forging a consensual reform agenda and devising a
credible and inclusive electoral process.
53. Women remain at risk of violence and continue to be marginalized in the
political life of the country. As we approach the twentieth anniversary of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), in which the Council reaffirmed the role of women
in peacebuilding, among other peace and security actions, I urge the Government to
take more decisive measures to improve the legal framework and finance the national
action plan on gender-based violence and to ensure increased women’s participation,
as voters, candidates and administrators, in the forthcoming elections.
54. I condemn in the strongest terms the assassination of Montferrier Dorval and
urge Haitian authorities to spare no effort to bring the perpetrators of this crime to
justice and to address the root causes of political and criminal violence, for all
Haitians to enjoy their fundamental civic, political and socioeconomic rights.
55. Gang violence increasingly challenges State authority over parts of the national
territory. Infighting between gang alliances in Port-of-Prince and the unacceptable
deliberate targeting of local communities during clashes have led to a stark increase
in civilian casualties in populous neighbourhoods. This rising insecurity is of
particular concern in the light of forthcoming elections. It is thus important and urgent
that the Government continue to support the National Disarmament, Demobilization,
and Reintegration Commission, including through the approval of its holistic national
strategy and the allocation of a viable budget. Likewise, I encourage the Government
and the donor community to marshal their support to the Haitian National Police,
which strives to fight insecurity within its limited means while operating in a constant
crisis-management mode, and to ensure the effective implementation of the strategic
development plan for the period 2017–2021, the advancement of security sector
reforms, as well as an improved security environment before the next elections.
56. Haiti continues to face challenges to its efforts to protect its citizens from
violence through effective law enforcement and judicial action, including by arresting
and prosecuting perpetrators, ensuring accountability and pre-empting violence. The
fact that those responsible for the killings of Grand Ravine, La Saline, or Bel Air have
yet to be brought to justice has perpetuated impunity and fed allegations of collusion
20-12135

13/29

S/2020/944

between gangs and political stakeholders. While the appointment of a new MinisterDelegate for Human Rights, the increased visibility of the Office of the
Ombudsperson and the Prime Minister’s outreach to human rights organizations are
encouraging signs of the Government’s intention to fulfill its human rights
obligations, those obligations also entail that all individuals who are subject to
national police arrest warrants, especially those with alleged implication in
emblematic armed attacks, are no longer allowed to remain at large and operate freely.
57. I encourage the Government to support the establishment of a standalone
OHCHR office in Haiti to safeguard continued collaboration with State authorities on
human rights issues.
58. The fight against corruption has to continue. I urge the Government and all
stakeholders to ensure that all those who are engaged in corrupt activities are brought
to justice, regardless of their political affiliation, and that adequate anti-corruption
safeguards and systemic transparency and integrity standards are put in place.
59. It is also essential to pursue efforts to tackle the systemic weakness of the justice
sector. The new Penal Code will contribute to aligning Haitian legislation with
international criminal justice and human rights norms and standards. Given the
Code’s controversial adoption by decree, it will be important to build support for it
and extensively prepare for its implementation during the two-year period before it
enters into force. While this updated legal framework provides an unprecedented
opportunity to modernize the Haitian justice system, adequate resourcing is required
to advance institutional reforms and strengthen the legal system.
60. The penitentiary system demonstrated a certain capacity to cope with the many
challenges that have arisen during the COVID-19 pandemic. Nevertheless, detention
conditions remain concerning, in terms of access to basic services and occupancy
rates, while the carceral system continues to hold an estimated 80 per cent of detainees
in pretrial detention. Government leadership, innovative solutions and increased
coordination among judicial actors, but also with international partners, are required
to resolve long-term issues pertaining to detention conditions and access to justice.
61. The thus-far muted impact of COVID-19 on Haiti, coupled with an effective
response by the Government and the multisectoral commission for the management
of the COVID-19 pandemic, have spared the country’s population from the most
serious effects of the pandemic. Nevertheless, the health emergency aggravated an
already dire socioeconomic and humanitarian crisis and exacerbated vulnerabilities
and inequalities regarding access to basic services and economic opportunities.
Robust recovery efforts will be required to reverse these negative trends and
reinvigorate the economy. The successful implementation of the United Nations supported socioeconomic impact assessment and recovery plan will require a
conducive political environment and a concerted effort from all of the country ’s
partners, both in terms of funding and programmatic support.
62. In doing so, we must keep our eyes on the longer-term, structural challenges of
Haiti, for which the 2030 Agenda offers a pathway forward. I count on BINUH and
the country team to continue working together to strengthen the United Nations
system’s cohesion to help the country recover better and accelerate progress towards
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Haiti and its people deserve no less.
63. In conclusion, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my Special
Representative for Haiti, Helen Meagher La Lime, to my Special Envoy, Josette
Sheeran, to Deputy Special Representative, Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian
Coordinator, Bruno Lemarquis, and to all United Nations personnel in the country for
their tireless work and dedication and to reiterate the commitment of the United
Nations to contributing to the stabilization and prosperity of Haiti.
14/29

20-12135

S/2020/944

Annex
Benchmark indicators, targets and baselines
Symbol

Equivalent

Symbol

On track to achieve target by the timeline
(5 targets, 14 per cent)

Challenges expected to achieve target by
the timeline but with a descending trend
(7 targets, 20 per cent)

Challenges expected to achieve target by
the timeline but with a positive trend
(11 targets, 31.5 per cent)

No progress/Not on track to achieve target
by timeline (5 targets, 14 per cent)

Challenges expected to achieve target by
the timeline but with a stagnating trend
(3 targets, 9 per cent)

No update on progress was expected during
the reporting period (4 targets, 11.5 per
cent)

Baseline as of December 2019
if not otherwise specified

Update as of 10 August
(or as otherwise specified)

December
2020

Political actors
currently converge
over the need for
structural reforms but
lack consensus on
transitional
arrangements; no
comprehensive
dialogue process is
taking place

Formal dialogue efforts have
not resumed since the United
Nations/Organization of
American States-facilitated
talks in late February 2020,
despite a number of informal
efforts and initiatives to
overcome the current political
impasse

N/A

The Government
remains in an acting
capacity; the mandate
of the Lower House
and part of the
Senate expired on
13 January, while
parliamentary
elections slated for
October 2019 have
been postponed

The Government remains in an
acting capacity in the absence
of clarity on an electoral
calendar for the delayed
parliamentary election or of a
political agreement on a
transitional roadmap. The
fiftieth legislature came to an
end in January 2020, leaving
the country without a
parliament

1.2.2 Adoption of N/A
a new Constitution
for Haiti

The 1987
Constitution remains
in effect. Political
conditions to start
constitutional reform
are absent

The 1987 Constitution remains
in effect. Despite stakeholders’
consensus on the need for
constitutional reform, the
current political conditions
have not yet permitted the
launching of the formal process

Benchmark

Target

Target timeline

1. National
political and
socioeconomic
actors,
including civil
society, are
engaged in
inclusive
cooperation
and consensusbuilding
resulting in
improved
functioning of
State
institutions and
good
governance

1.1 Political
dialogue leads to
consensus
regarding required
reforms and next
steps, including
adequate female
representation

1.2.1 Established
transitional
arrangements and
roadmap

20-12135

Equivalent

Trend

15/29

S/2020/944

Benchmark

16/29

Baseline as of December 2019
if not otherwise specified

Update as of 10 August
(or as otherwise specified)

1.3.1 Adoption of December
a new electoral
2020
legal framework
that preserves
existing provisions
relating to women
representation

The draft electoral
law of November
2018 is pending in
Parliament, amid
plans for a new draft
to be developed

The Provisional Electoral
Council submitted a draft
electoral law to the presidency
on 23 July, including a
provision for 30 per cent of the
candidates of all political
parties to be women for all but
presidential elections. The
President also began
consultations towards the
establishment of a new Council,
following its collective
resignation on 24 July

1.4.1 Government October 2020
investment as a
percentage of total
expenditure
increases by 5 per
cent, to 3.91 per
cent for 2019/20,
adjusted for
inflation

Government
investment was
3.72 per cent of total
expenses in 2018/19

As of July 2020, at the start of
the fourth quarter of the
2019/20 period, data from the
cash accounting stage showed
that government investment had
risen slightly from
2,298,000,000 gourdes during
the same period in 2018/19 to
2,568,000,000 gourdes (a
change of 11.7 per cent),
although inflation during the
same period was as high as
20 per cent, indicating a likely
decline in real investment. In
addition, data from the cash
accounting stage showed that
approved expenditure for public
investments fell to 3.16 per cent
of total expenditure for
2019/20, likely owing to
increased expenditure as a
result of the COVID-19
pandemic. Finally, the
Government’s budget execution
data from July 2020 showed an
increase of one percentage
point in intended expenditure
for public investments between
2018/19 and 2019/20. The
discrepancies could reflect
capacity challenges in updating
budgetary commitments, as
well as limitations in fiscal and
monetary management

Target

Target timeline

Trend

20-12135

S/2020/944

Benchmark

Target

Target timeline

2. State
institutions,
local
authorities,
communitybased civil
society, youth
and women’s
organizations
are engaged in
consultation,
cooperation
decisionmaking
processes and
programmes
that reduce
community
violence, in
particular
associated with
gangs and
sexual and
gender-based
crimes

2.1.1. Adoption
and
implementation of
the national
disarmament,
demobilization and
reintegration
strategy. (Levels:
(1) national
disarmament,
demobilization and
reintegration
strategy is drafted;
(2) national
strategy is
adopted;
(3) national
strategy is
implemented)

Strategy
drafted and
adopted by
December
2020, and
implementation
commences in
January 2021

20-12135

2.2.1. Number of
December
community
2020
violence reduction
and disarmament,
demobilization and
reintegration
community-based
projects and
interventions
coordinated
through the
National
Disarmament,
Demobilization and
Reintegration
Commission

Baseline as of December 2019
if not otherwise specified

Update as of 10 August
(or as otherwise specified)

A national strategy is
currently being
drafted by the
National
Disarmament,
Demobilization and
Reintegration
Commission with
support from the
United Nations
Integrated Office in
Haiti

Following consultations on the
development of the national
disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and
community violence reduction
strategy involving civil society
organizations, agencies of the
United Nations system, and the
National Disarmament,
Demobilization and
Reintegration Commission, the
final version of the strategy was
submitted by the Commission
to the Prime Minister on 5 May
2020. Adoption of the strategy
is pending

None

One inter-agency (United
Nations Development
Programme, International
Organization for Migration and
United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment
of Women (UN-Women))
community-based community
violence reduction project in
Jérémie was completed on
31 July, with support from the
Peacebuilding Fund. It focused
on promoting social cohesion in
at-risk neighbourhoods by
building leadership and
peacebuilding skills among
young people and promoting a
culture of peace, with a specific
focus on youth participation in
decision-making, addressing
gender-based violence and
gender equality, in addition to
carrying out an emergency
economic recovery programme
for women affected by gang
violence and the current
sociopolitical crisis. Additional
projects with greater
coordination by the Commission
are being prepared

Trend

17/29

S/2020/944

Benchmark

18/29

Baseline as of December 2019
if not otherwise specified

Update as of 10 August
(or as otherwise specified)

2.3.1. Adopt and
December
implement relevant 2021
laws and
implementing
frameworks on
weapons and
ammunition
management.
(Levels:
(1) redrafting of
law on ammunition
and weapons
management;
(2) establishment of
a national baseline
on small arms and
light weapons;
(3) adoption of law
on ammunition and
weapons
management)

A draft weapons and
ammunition
management law
passed the Senate but
requires further
revision before it can
be adopted

Following a number of
exchanges and discussions
between the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti
(BINUH) and various United
Nations partners, a two-phase
effort in support of national
weapons and ammunition
management efforts has been
agreed, involving the redrafting
by December 2020 of the
weapons and ammunition
management law, with the
establishment of a national
baseline by June 2021. The
contract for the first phase,
which will be implemented by
the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace, Disarmament
and Development in Latin
America and the Caribbean, is
in the process of being signed
with UNDP

2.4.1. A percentage December
of the State budget 2021
is allocated for
comprehensive
care and protection
of victims of
violence through
gender-responsive
budgeting

No specific budget
has been allocated to
the implementation
of the gender-based
violence national
action plan

No budget has yet been
dedicated to the implementation
of a gender-based violence
national action plan

2.4.2. Proposed new December
legal framework for 2021
gender-based
violence is adopted
and implemented,
including the
provision for
ensuring State
funding for
prevention and
response to genderbased violence

Senate adopted
several articles of the
proposed new legal
framework on
violence against
women and girls

A new Penal Code was adopted
by decree that includes
provisions on gender-based
violence. The proposed legal
framework law on gender-based
violence has not yet been
adopted, although a proposal is
being prepared by the Ministry
of Women’s Affairs for
presentation to the Council of
Ministers

2.4.3 Spotlight
programme is
launched and
implemented

Spotlight programme
was approved on
17 December 2019

Implementation of the Spotlight
programme has been launched,
and efforts are under way to
strengthen the capacity of State
institutions through the
programme. National
consultations are ongoing
regarding how to rapidly build

Target

Target timeline

June 2020

Trend

20-12135

S/2020/944

Benchmark

Target

Target timeline

Baseline as of December 2019
if not otherwise specified

Update as of 10 August
(or as otherwise specified)

Trend

capacity for and consensus
around combatting genderbased violence. In addition, the
development of tools and
directives to support the
implementation of the national
plan against gender-based
violence is ongoing
2.5.1. A 5 per cent December
reduction of area- 2020
based crime in
zones with
decreased presence
of State authorities
and identified
hotspots, including
Cité Soleil,
Martissant, La
Saline, Croix des
Bouquets and Bel
Air as pilot areas.

December 2019:

August 2020:

Cité Soleil
9 incidents

Cité Soleil: 3

Martissant
10 incidents
La Saline 3 incidents
Croix des Bouquets
24 incidents
Bel Air 4 incidents

Target:
Cité Soleil
8.55 incidents per
month
Martissant
9.5 incidents per
month
La Saline
2.85 incidents per
month

Martissant: 1
La Saline: 3
Croix-des-Bouquets: 9
Bel Air: 5
Trends in recent months
suggest a drop, beyond the
targets, in gang-related
incidents in Cité Soleil,
Martissant and Croix des
Bouquets. However, incident
averages remained stable in La
Saline and rose slightly in Bel
Air. The COVID-19 pandemic
may have contributed to
reduced numbers of incidents.
However, gang violence is
likely to increase in the lead-up
to proposed elections in 2021

Croix des
Bouquets
22.8 incidents per
month
Bel Air
3.8 incidents per
month
3. The
3.1.1. At least
national police, 7 per cent of the
corrections
national budget is
services, justice allocated to the
and
national police
anti-corruption each fiscal year
institutions
operate under
improved legal
and
20-12135

December
2020

6.6 per cent of the
national budget is
allocated to the
national police,
which has been the
same since 2017

The share of the national
budget allocated to the Haitian
National Police has seen a
downward trend. For the
2019/20 fiscal year budget,
adopted on 5 June 2020, the
Government allocated only
5.53 per cent of appropriations
to the Police, which is far
below expectations and does
19/29

S/2020/944

Benchmark

Target

Target timeline

management
frameworks, as
well as
3.2.1. A functional December
oversight
departmental
2020
mechanisms
office of the
General
Inspectorate of the
Haitian National
Police is
established in Cap
Haitien

20/29

Baseline as of December 2019
if not otherwise specified

Update as of 10 August
(or as otherwise specified)

Trend

not meet its minimum
operational requirements
The departmental
office of the General
Inspectorate of the
Haitian National
Police is not yet
functioning

The General Inspectorate of the
National Police has recruited
and trained 18 investigators,
including 3 women. Some of
the equipment for
operationalizing the office was
purchased by UNDP, and
preparations are under way to
open the regional office along
the projected timeline

3.2.2. Adoption of
a new national
anti-corruption
strategy

December
2021

2009–2019 national
anti-corruption
strategy came to an
end; no new national
anti-corruption
strategy has been
developed

The Government has yet to
develop and adopt a new
anti-corruption strategy

3.3.1 Increase the
ratio of the police
to the population
to 1.40 per 1,000
habitants

December
2021

1.33 per 1,000
habitants

No progress has been made
toward the target because of
delays in the recruitment of
new police cadets due to
budgetary constraints amid
COVID-19 challenges, as well
as the average annual attrition
of 400 officers for various
reasons, including resignation,
death and dismissal. As at
10 July 2020, the Haitian
National Police had an overall
workforce of 15,022 police
officers, equating to 1.28 per
1,000 inhabitants. The Police
would require approximately
2,000 new recruits by the end
of 2021 in order to meet the
1.40 target, a very challenging
goal in the current context.
However, a COVID-19 support
plan has been developed to
ensure that future classes of
recruits at the Police national
police school are protected

20-12135

S/2020/944

Benchmark

Target

Target timeline

3.3.2. Increase the
percentage of
women police
officers to 11 per
cent

December
2021

Baseline as of December 2019
if not otherwise specified

Update as of 10 August
(or as otherwise specified)

10.5 per cent of
Haitian National
Police officers are
women

A special class has been
organized to ensure that women
who are interested in joining
the Haitian National Police are
better informed and prepared
for the recruitment process. In
addition, an advocacy campaign
to encourage women to join the
Police is ongoing. Training also
continues for the Police on
gender equality issues

Trend

As of 10 July 2020, the Haitian
National Police had an overall
workforce of 15,045 police
officers, including 1,584
women, equating to 10.53 per
cent female representation, a
slight increase from the
baseline

20-12135

3.3.3. Legal aid
offices established
and functioning in
13 jurisdictions

December
2021

No legal aid offices
have yet been
established under the
new legal aid law

The opening of legal aid offices
has been delayed owing the
COVID-19 pandemic, although
staff recruitment is proceeding.
In addition, the ratification of
the director of the National
Council for Legal Aid
appointed by the Executive is
pending, since the Board for the
National Council has itself not
been established, because of
disagreements among judicial
actors

3.4.1. 6 prisons
certified in
accordance with
international
standards

December
2021

4 prisons were
certified as of July
2019

A training programme for key
staff of the Office of the
Ombudsperson on prisons
certification tools was
developed to support the
Prisons Administration
Directorate in the prison
certification process. However,
the convening of the training
programme has been put on
hold because of the pandemic.
In addition, support has been
provided for the
implementation of the gender
directive for corrections
institutions

21/29

S/2020/944

Benchmark

Target

Target timeline

3.5.1 By 2020,
70 per cent or less
of detainees in
pretrial detention
(disaggregated by
gender and age)

December
2020

Baseline as of December 2019
if not otherwise specified

Update as of 10 August
(or as otherwise specified)

1 January to
31 December 2019:
75 per cent of
detainees in pretrial
detention

Through the Global Focal Point
for the Rule of Law and the
Peacebuilding Fund’s access to
justice programme, which was
launched in July, the United
Nations system mobilized
funding to strengthen in-person
hearings and contribute to the
launch of remote hearings as an
innovative method for ensuring
the continuity of judicial
proceedings and accelerating
the release of pretrial detainees
during the COVID-19
pandemic. Consultations are
ongoing among judicial actors
to finalize the legal framework
for the remote hearings, which
is expected to be adopted by
presidential decree (arrêté
ministériel)

Trend

In addition, the adoption of the
new Penal Code by presidential
decree on 28 June and the
pending adoption of the new
criminal procedural code is
expected, once it enters into
force, to limit the use of
preventive detention
Despite the above-mentioned
COVID-19-related opportunities
to reduce prolonged pretrial
detention, efforts have not born
fruit in terms of reductions in
detainee numbers. Furthermore,
pretrial detention has increased
as the judicial system has been
unable to keep up with increased
Haitian National Police arrests in
response to the country’s
prevailing security situation
As at 2 September, 78 per cent
of the 10,884 detainees are in
pretrial detention. That
percentage includes 382 women
(3.5 per cent), 184 boys
(1.69 per cent) and 17 girls
(.15 per cent)

22/29

20-12135

S/2020/944
Baseline as of December 2019
if not otherwise specified

Update as of 10 August
(or as otherwise specified)

4.1.1. National plan December
of action for the
2021
implementation of
recommendations
accepted by the
Government, in
particular those of
the Human Rights
Council universal
periodic review,
adopted and 50 per
cent of
recommendations
progressively
implemented by
the Government,
including on
gender issues

The 2019–2021
action plan, which is
intended to
implement
recommendations
issued in the 2016
universal periodic
review of Haiti,
awaits endorsement
by the executive

The national human action plan
is still pending endorsement by
the Government. However, on
8 July, the Prime Minister
designated a new MinisterDelegate on Human Rights and
the Fight against Extreme
Poverty. The MinisterDelegate’s first advocacy
efforts have demonstrated her
interest in and commitment to
pursuing the Government’s
adoption of the plan

4.2.1. The national December
strategy 2019–
2021
2024 of the Office
of the National
Human Rights
Ombudsperson is
progressively
implemented,
including
integrating gendersensitive
perspectives

No action taken yet
to implement the
strategy

The Office of the Ombudsperson
has begun implementation of its
national strategy, as
demonstrated by its issuance of
several press statements in line
with the strategy. To support the
Office’s further efforts to
implement the strategy, BINUH
has recruited an international
consultant for a period of three
months to assist the Office in the
elaboration of a plan of action,
including resource mobilization,
and with training for the Office’s
staff regarding how to implement
the national strategy, taking into
consideration the Office’s
structural limitations while
maximizing the use of its
resources

4.3.1. Number of
cases of serious
human rights
violations or
abuses tried

Under the United
Nations Mission for
Justice Support in
Haiti
(MINUJUSTH), an
estimated 77 per cent
of cases were
investigated and
12 per cent were
prosecuted. Of the
12 per cent of cases
being prosecuted, all
cases are still at trial,
so no judicial

From October 2019 to August
2020, the Mission reported 197
human rights violations
committed during that period;
however, only 172 have been or
are being investigated by the
General Inspectorate of the
Haitian National Police, or
87 per cent, above the level
during MINUJUSTH. Of the 172
cases investigated, 159
investigations are still ongoing
by the Inspectorate. Of the 14
investigations that have been

Benchmark

Target

4. State
institutions, in
collaboration
with an
independent
national human
rights
institution
(Office of the
National
Human Rights
Ombudsman)
and civil
society
organizations,
protect,
promote, and
ensure respect
for human
rights and
fundamental
freedoms,
women and
gender
equality, and
uphold
accountability
for human
rights
violations

20-12135

Target timeline

December
2021

Trend

23/29

S/2020/944

Benchmark

Target

Target timeline

Baseline as of December 2019
if not otherwise specified

Update as of 10 August
(or as otherwise specified)

decision has been
taken yet

closed by the Inspectorate, 13
cases have been transferred to
prosecutor’s offices, but no trials
have yet been initiated. In
addition, during that period, the
Inspectorate closed the
investigations of 123 human
rights violations committed from
2005 and 2018

4.4.1. 10 reports
published by
Haitian civil
society
organizations
monitoring human
rights, including
on gender issues

December
2021

During the two-year
mandate of
MINUJUSTH, a total
of 47 reports were
published by civil
society organizations

Since the start of the BINUH
mandate, national
non-governmental
organizations focusing on
human rights have published at
least 19 public reports. In
addition, BINUH is currently
supporting a coalition of
national human rights nongovernmental organizations to
submit an alternative report to
the Human Rights Committee
ahead of the periodic session on
Haiti planned for October 2020

5. State
5.1.1. The textile
institutions,
industry employs
local
63,000 people
authorities and
the private
sector provide
access to youth,
women and
vulnerable
groups to
decent
employment
opportunities,
including jobs,
education and
training,
contributing to
reduce
socioeconomic
grievances and 5.2.1. At least two
address drivers measures are
adopted by
of instability
and inequality national and local
authorities to
encourage
integration of
women in high
value chains in

December
2021

The textile industry
currently employs
54,000 people

Textile exports have fallen
owing to lower demand from
importing countries and
reduced supply of inputs, as
well as the partial or complete
closure of factories during the
initial months of the COVID-19
pandemic. A United Nationssupported survey conducted by
the Bureau for Employers’
Activities in April and May
revealed that textile
manufacturers had been forced
to suspend or dismiss up to
40 per cent of the workforce.
As of August 2020, the textile
industry employed 45,322
people

December
2021

0 measures

No specific new policy
measures have been adopted;
however, three entrepreneurship
programmes implemented by
UN-Women, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations and the
International Labour
Organization, in cooperation

24/29

Trend

20-12135

S/2020/944

Benchmark

Target

Target timeline

Baseline as of December 2019
if not otherwise specified

sustainable
agriculture

5.3.1. Haitian
authorities
conceive and
implement a
programme of
economic and
fiscal reforms, in
collaboration with
relevant
international
financial
institutions

Update as of 10 August
(or as otherwise specified)

Trend

with national and local
authorities, are under way,
working to build the capacities
of 4,818 women rural
entrepreneurs in sustainable
agriculture and agricultural
product processing and
marketing, and helping to set
up 20 women’s
microenterprises
December
2021

The lack of a
Government ratified
by Parliament means
that Haiti is currently
unable to commit to
economic reforms

Haiti continues to lack a
Government ratified by
Parliament, thus hampering its
efforts to implement economic
reforms. Discussions between
the Government and the
International Monetary Fund on
a staff-monitored programme
recently stalled over the Fund’s
request for greater transparency
regarding a public procurement
contract in the oil sector
Beyond constraints related to the
absence of a Parliament, little
effort has still been made to
tackle the much-needed reforms
that would establish an enabling
environment for job creation in
the country. Efforts need to be
sped up to allow the country to
prepare to enact a much-needed
legal and regulatory framework
for the development of small and
medium-sized enterprises

6. State
institutions are
reinforced to
effectively
implement
policies and
programmes
that ensure the
delivery of
quality basic
services in the
most
underserved
communities
and increase
their resilience
20-12135

6.1.1. Conduct of
December
Haiti’s fifth
2021
Population and
Housing Census,
including a second
phase dedicated to
promoting the
culture of use of
statistical data and
strengthening of
the national
statistical system

All preparatory
activities prior to the
main census
enumeration,
including mapping, a
pilot census and
procurement of
equipment, have been
completed

Census activities have been
delayed because of the COVID
19 pandemic and the
deterioration of security in the
country. The census
enumeration was originally
planned for January/February
2021, with all preparations
aligning with that timeline.
However, recent political and
security developments,
principally linked to the yet-tobe-determined electoral
calendar, put that target under
stress. As a result, a second
window in March or April is
25/29

S/2020/944

Benchmark

to climaterelated threats,
including
through
disaster
management
and risk
mitigation

Target

Target timeline

Baseline as of December 2019
if not otherwise specified

Update as of 10 August
(or as otherwise specified)

Trend

under consideration. Depending
on final enumeration dates, the
preliminary results of the
census are expected in June
2021 or August 2021 and the
final results in November 2021
or January 2022
6.2.1. Increase the December
proportion of the
2021
population using
an improved water
source to 79 per
cent

73.4 per cent of the
population currently
uses an improved
water source

No change as at 10 August
2020. However, United
Nations-supported interventions
in response to the COVID-19
pandemic have led to the
installation of an additional
6,898 hand washing points
across the country. In addition,
handwashing behaviour change
efforts have reached almost
7.8 million people. The
household impacts portion of
the nationwide study of the
socioeconomic impacts of
COVID-19, which may provide
further information, is still
ongoing

6.2.2. 15 per cent July 2023 a
of population in
rural area and
2 per cent of
population in
urban area practise
free open
defecation

Rural: 36 per cent

No change as of 10 August
2020. The household impacts
portion of the nationwide study
of the socioeconomic impacts
of COVID-19, which may
provide further information, is
still ongoing

6.3.1. 30 per cent
December
of the population
2021
facing severe acute
food insecurity
(IPC Phase
3+/acute)

35 per cent of the
population currently
facing severe acute
food insecurity (IPC
Phase 3+/acute).

Urban: 10 per cent

According to the latest IPC
analysis (August 2020), the
percentage of the population
facing severe acute food
insecurity is now at 42 per cent
(4.09 million people in IPC 3+),
which is an increase compared
with the 40 per cent of people
in urgent need of assistance
between March and June 2020,
as projected by the 2019 IPC
exercise
Factors leading to the
deterioration of food security
include below-normal
precipitation in 2020, which has
affected the performance of the

26/29

20-12135

S/2020/944

Benchmark

Target

Target timeline

Baseline as of December 2019
if not otherwise specified

Update as of 10 August
(or as otherwise specified)

Trend

spring agricultural campaign.
These crop losses, combined
with high inflation (an increase
of approximately 29 per cent in
the value of the food basket
from June 2019 to June 2020),
in addition to the various
restrictions implemented to
manage the COVID-19
pandemic, significantly affected
the purchasing power of the
poorest households and their
ability to access food. The
passing of Tropical Storm
Laura at the end of August also
amplified the losses of harvests
in some areas, particularly the
south-east
It is important to note that the
sociopolitical instability
experienced by the country in
recent years, including last
year’s “peyi lok” period, in
addition to the anticipated
intensification of political
instability during the next few
months, will have consequences
for the country’s various
macroeconomic indicators,
including a projected drop in
investment (especially those
from the private sector), as well
as a disruption of household
livelihoods. These factors are
expected to contribute to
further deterioration in the
country’s already-concerning
food security situation
6.4.1. 397 maternal July 2023 a
deaths per 100,000
living births

20-12135

529 per 100,000
living births, as
stated in the 2017
Demographic and
Health Survey

No change as of 10 August
2020. However, early signs
indicate a negative trend in this
indicator owing to the COVID19 pandemic and other related
factors. Attendance at maternal
health centres has decreased by
up to 40 per cent.
Consequently, figures show that
the number of maternal deaths
increased from 25 to 30 per
cent between February to May

27/29

S/2020/944

Benchmark

Target

Target timeline

Baseline as of December 2019
if not otherwise specified

Update as of 10 August
(or as otherwise specified)

Trend

2020, compared with the same
period in 2019
The decrease of medical visits
to hospitals has also affected
the number of prenatal visits
provided to pregnant women,
and the percentage of
institutional deliveries dropped
significantly during the same
period. From June to August
2020, the Government actually
reported a decrease in maternal
deaths reported at the
institutional level (compared
with 2019), but that was likely
owing to pregnant women
choosing to give birth at home
during the pandemic; maternal
deaths in communities are not
reported

28/29

6.4.2. Under 5
mortality rate is
less than 81 per
1,000 living births

July 2023 a

81 per 1,000 living
births as stated in the
2017 Demographic
and Health Survey

No change as at 10 August
2020. However, the COVID-19
pandemic, as well as other
recent challenges, seem to have
had an impact on under-5
mortality. The first six months
of 2020, compared with the
same period in 2019, saw a
52 per cent decrease in new
consultations in health facilities
across the country for children
aged under 5, as well as a
40 per cent decrease in the
number of newborns who
received at least one home
health care visit

6.5.1. 11
operational
emergency centres
(1 national and 10
departmental)

December
2021

11 centres
established, but
0 centres possess an
improved capacity to
coordinate disaster
response (defined as
having received
management training
and implemented key
equipment and tools,
including a standard
contingency plan and
consolidated
operating manual)

The capacity of 11 centres to
coordinate disaster response has
been enhanced through
capacity-building efforts. In
July 2020, the National Plan for
Disaster and Risk Management
(2019–2030) was adopted,
following years of technical
work and advocacy with the
support of the United Nations,
and UNDP in particular. The
adoption of the Plan has
significantly strengthened the
role of the Directorate of Civil
20-12135

S/2020/944

Benchmark

Target

Target timeline

Baseline as of December 2019
if not otherwise specified

Update as of 10 August
(or as otherwise specified)

Trend

Protection, which should help
facilitate the country’s capacity
to effectively plan for and
respond to disasters

a

6.6.1. Track 1:
Incidence rate of
suspected cholera
cases less than
0.01 per 1,000
inhabitants (target
of national
elimination plan
for 2022)

December
2022

0.06 per 1,000
inhabitants

No new cholera case has been
confirmed since February 2019

6.6.2. Track 2: 20
community
projects
implemented in
cholera-affected
areas

December
2020

5 projects were
completed in 2019
under a pilot
initiative. Of the
20 community
projects planned as
part of a project
expansion,
18 communities have
completed
consultations to
identify projects,
while 2 communities
have not yet started
consultations

An assessment of project
feasibility is ongoing for
implementation, in spite of the
implementation challenges due
to the sociopolitical and
security context of 2019 and the
limitations imposed by the
COVID-19 context

Note that this target is based on the national mortality, morbidity and service utilization survey statistical tool, which is
released every five years. Intermediate updates will be provided based on other sources.

20-12135

29/29
