20

General Assembly- F'ortieth Session
--- - · - · · - - - - · - - · - - - - - - - - - ' - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

40/9. Solemn appeal to States in conflict to cease
armed action forthwith and to settle disputes
between them through negotiations, and to
States Members of the United Nations to
undertake to solve situations of tension and
conflict and existing disputes by political
means and to refrain from the threat or use of
force and from any intervention in the internal
affairs of other States
The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned at the persistence of armed conflicts,
acts of aggression and situations of tension in different
parts of the world, at the emergence of new sources of conflict and tension in international life and at the danger to
the independence and security of States and to international peace and security posed by the threat or use of
force in relations between States,
Convinced that all States should exert the utmost efforts
to settle any conflict or dispute between them exclusively
by peaceful means and that resorting to the threat or use of
force against other States can only aggravate the international situation and make more difficult the solution of
problems,
Considering that it is in the interest both of States
involved in conflict and other States, and of the general
cause of world peace and security, to put an end to armed
conflicts and to encourage and assist the solution of problems through peaceful means,
Solemnly reaffirming, on the occasion of the fortieth
anniversary of the United Nations, the resolute commitment of Member States to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and the obligations
which they assumed as Members of the Organization, in
particular their commitment to refrain in international
relations from the threat or use of force against the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of
any other State,
Reaffirming that all States shall settle their international
disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security. and justice. are not endangered.
Recalling the inherent nght of all States to individual or
collective self-defence. as enshnned in Article 51 of the
Charter,
Reaffirming the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of International Disputes, approved by the General Assemblv in its resolution 37/10 of 15 November
1982,
•
Considering that the question of the peaceful settlement
of disputes should constitute a central concern of all States
and of the United Nations.
I. Addresses a solemn appeal to States in conflict to put
an end to armed action forthwith and to proceed to the settlement of their disputes by negotiations and other peaceful means;
2. Calls upon all States to comply fully and consistently with the obligations they have assumed, in accordance with the purposes and p1inciples of the Charter of the
United Nations, to resolve conflicts and disputes by peaceful means and to refrain from the threat or use of force and
from any intervention in the internal affairs of other
States;
3. Invites the Security Council. which has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security, to act promptly in accordance with its functions under the Charter. in cases of conflict and dispute in
I 8 Resolution 40;:\ annn.
!9 A/401524.

different regions of the world, by recommending appropriate procedures or methods of adjustment, including designation of representatives of the United Nations, with a
view to settling disputes between States by peaceful means,
eliminating situations of tension and conflict, and establishing relations based on understanding, co-operation and
peace among all the States of the world;
4. Reaffirms the important role as conferred by the
Charter on the General Assembly in the areas of the peaceful settlement of disputes and the maintenance of international peace and security;
5. Encourages the Secretary-General to play an active
role within the scope of his functions under the Charter
with a view to promoting efforts for the peaceful settlement of disputes and conflicts between States;
6. Calls upon Member States to make full use, in
accordance with the Charter, of the framework provided
by the United Nations for the peaceful settlement of disputes and international problems;
7. Appeals to Member States to act resolutely, in view
of the purposes and principles of the Charter and in
accordance with their duties as Members, in order that the
Organization may harmonize the combined efforts of
States aimed at strengthening world peace and security,
solving the major issues confronting humanity and
ensuring conditions for the free and independent development of all peoples.
69th plenary meeting
8 November 1985

40/10.

Programme of the International Year of
Peace

The General Assembl_v,
Recalling its resolutions 37/16 of 16 November 1982,
38/56 of 7 December 1983 and 39/10 of 8 November
1984 on the International Year of Peace,
Recalling also the solemn Proclamation of the International Year of Peace approved on 24 October 1985, 18 the
fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, by which it
called upon all peoples to join with the United Nations in
resolute efforts to safeguard peace and the future of
humanity,
A ware that in the nuclear age the establishment of a lasting peace on Earth constitutes the primary condition for
the preservation of civilization and the survival of mankind.
Welcoming the contributions made to the Voluntary
Fund for the Programme of the International Year of
Peace.
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the regional seminars, 19 which served to increase awareness in each region of the need to take effective steps to
promote peace and also contributed towards the preparations for the Year.
Taking note also of the report of the Secretary-General
on the activities undertaken in the implementation of
General Assembly resolution 39/10 20 and the final version
of the draft programme of the International Year of Peace
annexed thereto,
1. Welcomes the efforts of Member States to achieve
substantive results in fulfilling the objectives of the lnternat1onal Year of Peace and to express the common aspiration of peoples for peace:
ill N40/669 and Add I
