S/2019/800

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 October 2019
Original: English

Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the presidential statement dated
26 October 2010 (S/PRST/2010/22), in which the Security Council requested annual
reports on the implementation of its resolution 1325 (2000), and resolution 2122
(2013), in which it called for updates on progress, challenges and gaps across all areas
of the women and peace and security agenda.
2.
The report for 2019 is presented on the eve of many significant benchmarks and
anniversaries in 2020: 75 years since the creation of the United Nations; 25 years
since the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action; and 20 years
since the adoption of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), which places women’s
participation as central to conflict prevention and resolution efforts. Commitments by
the United Nations, Member States and regional organizations to promote women’s
rights, gender equality and the full and meaningful participation of women across all
decision-making contexts, have continued to evolve over the past two decades. The
correlation between gender inequality and a society’s propensity for civil or
inter-State conflict is now well established. 1 Addressing the root causes of gender
inequality, prioritizing conflict prevention and emerging threats to peace and security,
and ensuring the holistic implementation of the women and peace a nd security agenda
must be priorities for all of us committed to conflict prevention, sustainable peace,
sustainable development and human rights.
3.
We still live in a world where women face exclusion from peace and political
processes; where the number of attacks against women human rights defenders,
humanitarians and peacebuilders continues to rise; where the attempted erosion of
international human rights standards persists; and where xenophobia, racism,
intolerance, homophobia, transphobia and violent misogyny continue to spread. We
also continue to see high levels of conflict, violence and instability and are grappling
with the imminent threat of climate change which, if unaddressed, will fuel further
global insecurity and crises. Bold and urgent action is needed to ensure that next
year’s twentieth anniversary of the women and peace and security agenda gives rise
to concrete commitments and impactful action rather than empty rhetoric.
__________________
1

19-17355 (E)

World Bank and United Nations, Pathways for Peace: Inclusive Approaches to Preventing
Violent Conflict (Washington, D.C., World Bank, 2018).

221019

*1917355*

S/2019/800

4.
In line with my previous report, I requested United Nations sys tem entities to
take stock of the implementation of the recommendations relating to women and
peace and security that are relevant to the United Nations system, as drawn from the
three peace and security reviews undertaken in 2015, so the United Nations, s upported
by Member States, can take immediate action to strengthen the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda, in the lead up to the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and beyond. In order to support this analysis,
the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) commissioned an independent assessment of the implement ation of the
gender recommendations contained in the three 2015 peace and security reviews. 2
The report is also informed by analysis of progress and trends based on data and
information provided by entities of the United Nations system, Member States,
regional organizations, civil society and globally recognized data sources. The report
captures advances that have been made by the United Nations, Member States and
regional organizations. It also contains a further call to action regarding the progress
still needed. Key findings include:
(a) Women still make up only 4.2 per cent of military personnel in United
Nations peacekeeping missions;
(b) Record levels of political violence targeting women were demonstrated in
new data published in May 2019;
(c) Over 50 parties to conflict are credibly suspected of having committed or
instigated patterns of rape and other forms of sexual violence in situations on the
agenda of the Security Council;
(d) At least 1 in 5 refugee or displaced women experience sexual violence and
9 out of the 10 countries with the highest rates of child marriage are in fragile
contexts;
(e) In 2019, nearly 132 million people need humanitarian aid and protection,
including an estimated 35 million women, young women and girls who requir e lifesaving sexual and reproductive health services, and interventions to prevent gender based violence and respond to the needs of survivors;
(f) Refugee girls at secondary level are only half as likely to enrol in school
as boys, even though girls make up half of the school-age refugee population;
(g) Findings by the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
defenders show that the rise of misogynistic, sexist and homophobic speech by
political leaders in recent years has contributed to incr eased violence against women,
against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex individuals, and against
women human rights defenders;
(h) Fewer than 20 per cent of all Security Council resolutions in 2018
contained references to the importance of and the need to ensure fundamental rights
and freedoms for civil society, women’s groups and women human rights defenders;
(i) In 2018, only 28 per cent of humanitarian needs overviews articulated the
differentiated impact faced by women and girls in crises, as well as the underlying
factors affecting vulnerability;
(j) In the period 2016–2017, only 0.2 per cent of total bilateral aid to fragile
and conflict-affected situations went directly to women’s organizations; 3
__________________

Louise Allen, “Mapping of the gender recommendations in the three 2015 peace and security
reviews”, UN-Women policy brief (forthcoming).
3
See www.oecd.org/dac/gender-development/dac-gender-equality-marker.htm.
2

2/38

19-17355

S/2019/800

(k) Nearly 40 per cent of economies limit women’s property rights and nearly
30 per cent restrict women’s freedom of movement. The lack of economic rights
increases women’s vulnerability in conflict and fragile settings and affects recovery;
(l) In 2018, the global share of parliamentary seats held by women only
slightly increased to 24.3 per cent, while for conflict and post -conflict countries, the
average stands at 19 per cent;
(m) In 2018, total world military expenditure reached $1.8 trillion. 4 The
Beijing Platform for Action contains a strategic objective to reduce excessive military
expenditures and control the availability of armaments; 5
(n) Only 41 per cent of Member States have adopted national action plans on
women and peace and security and just 22 per cent of all p lans included a budget for
the implementation thereof, at the time of adoption.
5.
At a moment when I am prioritizing efforts to do more and better in
implementing the women and peace and security agenda, the report presents
evidence-driven and time-bound commitments for the United Nations and
recommendations for Member States, regional organizations and the Security
Council, for 2020 and beyond. The collective scorecard is clear. There remains a stark
contrast between rhetoric and reality, where previousl y agreed commitments have not
been matched by action.

II. Where we stand on women and peace and security:
assessment of progress since the 2015 peace and
security reviews
A.

Findings and conclusions from an independent assessment
6.
In 2019, UN-Women initiated an independent assessment 6 of the implementation
of the recommendations relating to women and peace and security that are relevant to
the United Nations system from the three peace and security reviews undertaken in
2015, 7 which collectively found that women’s meaningful participation in peace and
security is critical to operational effectiveness. 8 The analysis identified three factors
that are central to successful implementation of the recommendations: the degree to
which gender equality and women and peace and security are consistently prioritized
and sufficiently resourced; the presence of specific accountability mechanisms, as well
as mechanisms to track and monitor progress; and the presence and influence of gender

__________________

Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, “World military expenditure grows to
$1.8 trillion in 2018”, 29 April 2019. https://www.sipri.org/media/press-release/2019/worldmilitary-expenditure-grows-18-trillion-2018.
5
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
6
Louise Allen, “Mapping of the gender recommendations in the three 2015 peace and security
reviews” (forthcoming).
7
The three reviews are as follows: Radhika Coomaraswamy, Preventing Conflict, Transforming
Justice, Securing the Peace: A Global Study on the Implementation of United Nations Security
Council resolution 1325 (United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN-Women), 2015); the report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (A/70/95-S/2015/446); and the report of the Advisory Group of Experts on the
Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture (A/69/968-S/2015/490).
8
The Secretary-General responded to the three reviews in his report to the Security Council on
women and peace and security (S/2015/716). Related outcomes of the reviews include Security
Council resolution 2242 (2015), General Assembly resolution 70/262 and Security Council
resolution 2282 (2016).
4

19-17355

3/38

S/2019/800

expertise at senior levels and across political and technical components of
peacekeeping and special political missions and other United Nations system entities.
7.
The three reviews 9 contained a total of 30 gender-specific recommendations
directed at the United Nations. According to the independent assessment, of the 30
recommendations, 50 per cent were found to have been implemented or in the process
thereof; 40 per cent were inconsistent in their implementation or required further
progress; and for 10 per cent of the recommendations, ground had been lost in terms
of implementation, or no progress had been made at all. Only two recommendations
were assessed as having been fully implemented: the establishment by the Security
Council of the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security and the
integration of gender perspectives and commitments at the World Humanitarian
Summit, in 2016. Both require dedicated follow-up, including accountability for the
implementation of the recommendations of the Expert Group and adequ ate
prioritization and resourcing of gender-responsive humanitarian responses.
8.
Recommendations on which there has been progress range from the integration
of gender perspectives into United Nations work relating to counter-terrorism and
countering violent extremism and strengthened responses to prevent and address
sexual exploitation and abuse. Since 2015, collaborative efforts undertaken between
Member States, United Nations system entities and civil society have contributed to
advancements in women’s access to transitional justice mechanisms and an increased
focus on survivor-centred approaches. United Nations system entities have made
progress on gender-sensitive early warning signs and analysis to inform conflict
prevention strategies and the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the
Department of Peace Operations and UN-Women have, in line with Security Council
resolution 2242 (2015), strengthened cooperation arrangements that allow for access
to the political, policy and technical women and peace and security expertise of
UN-Women and other system entities, in support of system-wide efforts. The adoption
of a gender strategy by the Peacebuilding Commission in 2016 was an important step
towards addressing the recommendations to further promote women ’s participation
in peacebuilding efforts. Finally, my system-wide strategy on gender parity and the
uniformed gender parity strategy 2018–2028 of the Department of Peace Operations
are contributing in tangible ways to the increased representation of women within
United Nations leadership and, in particular, in peace operations.
9.
Although I welcome those positive developments, a significant number of areas
are yet to fully be addressed. Ensuring the meaningful participation of women in all
phases of United Nations-backed peace processes remains a challenge. Gender
expertise has to be strengthened across all United Nations peace, security and
humanitarian entities. Gender expertise should also be included in all strategic
assessment reviews. Similarly, gender perspectives are not consistently included in
settings with protection concerns, including in humanitarian responses and protection
of civilians mandates. While the assessment noted efforts to improve engagement
with women civil society organizations, it concluded that in many cases such
engagement remains ad hoc and, in some instances, lacks sufficient follow -up.
10. Furthermore, the independent assessment found that the United Nations was not
integrating gender-responsive conflict analysis regularly into its work, including in
strategic planning and resource allocation processes. It is critical for gender expertise
and architecture within entities to be strengthened and for UN-Women to continue to
participate across key decision-making and strategic planning mechanisms and
processes on peace and security and humanitarian responses so as to further integrate
gender considerations in a consistent, quality and rights -based manner. Other areas
__________________
9

4/38

Louise Allen, “Mapping of the gender recommendations in the three 2015 peace and security
reviews” (forthcoming).
19-17355

S/2019/800

where further progress is needed are the integration of gender perspectives in
humanitarian action, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and in the broad
security sector, as well as the allocation and tracking by entitie s of funding to support
gender equality.
11. The findings demonstrate that despite many efforts and positive developments,
a significant amount of work remains to be done. Our determination to do better
within the context of a reformed United Nations is demonstrated by steps already
taken – notably, the new Women and Peace and Security Policy of the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the strong commitment to the women and
peace and security agenda within the Action for Peacekeeping initi ative.
Implementation of the recommendations from the reviews remains critical. Working
in partnership with Member States, we must act immediately to halt any loss of
momentum or inconsistency in the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda, deepen commitment where progress is building, and maintain the
course where results have been achieved.

B.

Women’s meaningful participation in negotiating peace and in the
implementation of agreements
12. Since 2015, formal international support for more inclusive peace processes, as
expressed, for example, in both the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the sustaining peace resolutions, 10 has grown. Yet women’s participation as delegates
and decision makers has become increasingly difficult. Violent conflicts around the
world have become more complex, fractured and protracted, creating additional
challenges for the United Nations in its response thereto. The proliferation of
non-State actors has complicated peacemaking, as has the rising nu mber of armed
groups for whom gender inequality is not only a vestige of historic social structures
but a strategic objective consistent with misogynist ideology and attitudes towards
the rights and roles of women. Meanwhile, influential partners in indivi dual peace
processes are inconsistent in their attention to the participation of women. In some
instances, their priorities are at odds with the pursuit of the just and inclusive
outcomes that are so central to the goals of the United Nations.
13. In this challenging environment, as documented in my previous reports,
mediators have explored a range of options to promote women ’s engagement in peace
processes, as recommended by the “Guidance on gender and inclusive mediation
strategies” prepared in 2017 by the then Department of Political Affairs. Those efforts
continued in 2018, despite strong resistance from many parties to conflict. The
strategies pursued by mediators varied according to the options available. My
Personal Envoy for Western Sahara, for example, continuously encouraged the
participation of women in official delegations, and three of the four delegations
participating in the two round tables convened in 2018 included a woman. In other
contexts, such as Yemen, where women were absent from the formal rounds of
consultations, my Special Envoy established a Yemeni Women’s Technical Advisory
Group to ensure the inclusion of a variety of input from and perspectives of Yemeni
women in the process and avail himself of their advice. Elsewhere, for examp le in the
Great Lakes Region, the Office of my Special Envoy, working in collaboration with

__________________
10

19-17355

See General Assembly resolution 70/1 (target 5.5 – ensure women’s full and effective
participation and equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of decision -making in political,
economic and public life, and target 16.7 – ensure responsive, inclusive, participatory and
representative decision-making at all levels); see also General Assembly resolution 70/262 and
Security Council resolution 2282 (2016).
5/38

S/2019/800

the Global Fund for Women, actively supported the contribution of women to peace
at the community level.
14. Such efforts notwithstanding, women from diverse settings, including
Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, Libya, South Sudan, the Sudan and Yemen
have faced and continue to face steep obstacles, direct resistance and great personal
risks in their efforts to ensure their participation in processes pertai ning to the future
of their countries, and we must recognize that, too frequently, we fall short of our
ambitions. Collectively, the United Nations, Member States, regional organizations
and other actors supporting peace processes are not on track to attai n sufficient
concrete progress in the area of the women and peace and security agenda by 2020.
Although the United Nations has ensured, since 2012, that all United Nations
mediation teams include women, the participation of women in negotiating
delegations has not improved in recent years. In 2018, of six active processes led or
co-led by the United Nations, women were included in 14 out of 19 delegations,
although the percentage of female delegates remained low. 11
15. Between 1990 and the end of 2018, according to the Peace Agreements
database 12 only 353 of 1,789 agreements (19.7 per cent), relating to more than 150
peace processes, included provisions addressing women, girls or gender. In 2018, of
52 agreements across a range of issues included in that database, only 4 (7.7 per cent)
contained provisions relating to gender, down from 39 per cent in 2015. The data
underline that the vast majority of agreements do not explicitly address gender
equality or the rights of women.
16. Where progress has been made in processes supported by the United Nations, it
is often the result of a combination of action by individual leaders and external
mobilization and advocacy. The efforts of my former Special Envoy for Syria to create
both a Syrian Women’s Advisory Board and a Civil Society Support Room to support
and inform his efforts towards a lasting political settlement, and in response to the
urgent demands for inclusion from the ground, were documented in my previous
reports. Throughout 2018, he consulted regularly with the Advisory Board and with
Syrian civil society groups, in person and remotely. On 30 September 2019, his
successor reported to the Security Council on the agreement of the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic and the Syrian Negotiation Commission rega rding the
nominees, Terms of Reference and Core Rules of Procedure for a Syrian -led, Syrianowned, credible, balanced and inclusive Constitutional Committee facilitated by the
United Nations in Geneva, which I had announced just a few days earlier (see
S/2019/775). This, the first concrete political agreement between the Government and
the opposition to begin to implement a key aspect of Security Council resolution 2254
(2015) – to set a schedule and process for a new constitution – was reached after
extensive consultations with a wide range of Syrian women and men, including
members of the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board and participants in the Civil Society
Support Room, from across the country. Women will constitute around 30 per ce nt of
the Committee’s 150 members.
17. Meanwhile, Libyan civil society actors engaged in rapid joint advocacy to
secure the invitation of four Libyan women parliamentarians, one civil society
representative and one minister to join the four Libyan delegations at the Palermo
__________________

In 2017, women were represented in 10 delegations, as part of four process es led or co-led by the
United Nations; in 2016, in 11 delegations, as part of seven processes; and in 2015, in 12
delegations, as part of eight processes.
12
The Peace Agreements Database (PA-X) is hosted by the University of Edinburgh and available
at www.peaceagreements.org/. It defines a peace agreement broadly as a “formal, publicly
available document, produced after discussion with conflict protagonists and mutually agreed to
by some or all of them, addressing conflict with a view to ending it”.
11

6/38

19-17355

S/2019/800

Conference held in November 2018, after it became clear tha t no women had been
invited. Advocacy and technical support were extended by the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and UN-Women, as well as the Mediterranean women
mediators network and the Nordic women mediators network. Such levels of las tminute global advocacy should not be required with respect to a long -agreed
commitment. Although those efforts and the participation of women contributed to
securing a reference to women’s engagement and inclusion in the final statement of
the conference, women still arrived at the talks with insufficient time to prepare,
which undermine the full potential of their efforts.
18. Drawing on the above experiences, a growing number of special political
missions established consultative mechanisms with women’s civil society
representatives. While some mechanisms have proven to serve a useful and
complementary function in supporting the inclusion of the perspectives of women ’s
civil society organizations, such bodies should not substitute women ’s direct and
meaningful participation in peace processes, or the responsibility of United Nations
system entities to continuously advocate such participation. In 2018, for example, the
Women’s Advisory Group on Reconciliation and Politics was established in Iraq, with
support from the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, to bring Iraqi women ’s
perspectives into the national political dialogue and reconciliation process. The
challenges that can be encountered by consultative mechanisms were illustrated by
the experience of the Yemeni Women’s Technical Advisory Group during the talks
held in Sweden in December 2018, when both parties refused the presence of the
Group and agreed to meet with the Group only outside negotiation rooms. The
resulting Stockholm Agreement did not include any gender provisions, address
women’s rights or the situation of women and girls in the conflict or refer to the
importance of women’s participation in future talks. Subsequent to those events, the
Office of my Special Envoy for Yemen conducted a review of its inclusion policies
with regard to the integration of women in the peace process.
19. In this difficult context, I welcome the new Women and Peace and Security
Policy of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and look forw ard to
supporting its implementation. The policy aims to strengthen gender-sensitive
political and conflict analysis and promote women’s participation across peace and
political processes. As part of such efforts, all heads of special political missions an d
my Special Envoys are instructed to regularly report on their efforts to promote
women’s direct participation throughout all stages of peace processes in ways that
ensure they have influence over the outcomes. While parties to conflict decide on
their own representation within peace processes, we should more ably use our
influence and incentives to ensure greater inclusion. We will also increase
consultations with women’s organizations to regularly inform decision-making
processes in peace negotiations, which as we learn from civil society actors and as
was corroborated by the independent assessment, is not being done consistently.
20. The efforts of the Department of Peace Operations to strengthen women ’s
participation in ongoing peace processes, specifically through joint political advocacy
and monitoring with both the African Union and the European Union, notably in the
Central African Republic and in Mali, are also to be commended. In the Central
African Republic, where the peace and reconciliation process has been marked by a
low rate of women’s participation, the joint advocacy of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
the African Union and partnership with regional and subregional women ’s networks
contributed to the inclusion of women leaders for the first time in the direct peace
talks between the Government and non-State armed groups, which were led by the
African Union in Khartoum in February 2019. In Mali, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali continues to advocate the
19-17355

7/38

S/2019/800

meaningful participation of women in the formal follow-up mechanisms established
as part of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Such examples
demonstrate the importance of partnering with regional and subregional organizations
and networks to promote women’s participation. Joint advocacy can have a greater
impact and should be considered as a tool to apply pressure on parties that reject the
involvement of women in peace processes.
21. Women’s equal participation is made more difficult when women face genderbased violence and discrimination. Several peacekeeping and special political
missions have reported discriminatory laws and political systems that exclude or
marginalize women from public life as a central obstacle to women ’s participation in
peace processes. With the compounding effects of harmful practices, restrictive
gender roles that exclude women from voicing opinions, resistance to greater power sharing by men, in particular from political elites, security challenges and obstacles
to women’s economic independence, addressing the root causes of women ’s
exclusion from peace processes is a long-term and multidisciplinary endeavour. I
recognize recent efforts by several conflict-affected countries to repeal discriminatory
laws, including the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Iraq, and call on all
Member States to follow suit and invest in evidence-based programming and
initiatives to transform harmful social norms.
22. The conflict resolution efforts of women peacebuilders and rights defenders at
the local level must be elevated and scaled up through technical, financial and
political support to individuals and groups working on the frontlines to prevent and
resolve conflicts. I am encouraged by recent initiatives by the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Department of Peace Operations to strengthen
support for local conflict resolution and mediation and consultation processes in
mission and non-mission settings, in partnership with United Nations country team
entities, including in Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, Colombia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, Myanmar, the Philippines and South Sudan.
Lessons identified include the need to address the fragmentation of actors and
processes and to identify and learn from different modalities for linking multiple
levels of political engagement. It has become clear, including through such
engagement, that the United Nations can play an effective role in supporting the
meaningful participation of women at the subnational level, with the right approach
and tools and good internal coordination.
23. Even where agreements have included specific gender provisions, the
implementation thereof has proven difficult. In Libya, more efforts are needed to ensure
that women are increasingly included in implementation committees and leadership
positions. Although the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace, signed in Colombia in 2016 to end the armed conflict with the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia-People’s Army (FARC-EP) is heralded as an
inclusive and gender-responsive model, an analysis of the implementation of the
agreement’s 130 gender provisions, including those centred on gender equality and
women’s rights, showed that as of June 2018, the implementation of 51 per cent of these
provisions had not yet been initiated. 13 Moreover, such provisions are being
implemented at a slower pace than others contained in the text. Finally, in South Sudan,
the 35 per cent quota for the representation of women in all pre-transitional and
transitional governance structures, as set out in the Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, has only been implemented in one committee.
__________________
13

8/38

Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies and others, “Special report of the Kroc Institute
and the International Accompaniment Component, UN-Women, Women’s International
Democratic Federation, and Sweden, on the monitoring of the gender perspective in the
implementation of the Colombian Final Peace Accord”, October 2018.
19-17355

S/2019/800

The analysis underscores how critical women’s leadership and meaningful participation
is in the implementation phase, after agreements have been signed.
24. My senior leadership and I will continue to work to secure inclusive processes
and agreements, including through joint and strategic high -level advocacy missions
on women and peace and security to support regional and national pe ace and security
processes. In October 2018, a high-level delegation from the African Union, the
Department of Peace Operations and UN-Women conducted a joint mission to South
Sudan to advocate with the Government and peace actors to prioritize women ’s
meaningful participation in the peace process led by the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development. In July 2019, the Deputy Secretary-General undertook a third highlevel women and peace and security mission, this time to Afghanistan, together with
the heads of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, UN -Women and
the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA).

C.

Prioritizing the women and peace and security agenda in
peacekeeping operations
25. Strengthening the integration of the women and peace and security agenda
across all stages of peacekeeping operations was a key recommendation from the
reviews conducted in 2015. I am pleased to report on several new initiatives launched
over the past year that are designed to contribute towards such integration.
26. During the seventy-third session of the General Assembly, alongside the
Department of Peace Operations, I launched the Action for Peacekeeping initiative,
calling upon Member States to renew their collective engagement with United
Nations peacekeeping. The initiative reaffirms the centrality of the women and peace
and security agenda as one of the eight priority pillars against which to measure
operational effectiveness for peacekeeping, and as of July 2019, is endorsed by over
150 Member States and four regional organizations.
27. In 2018, the Department of Peace Operations made progress across several areas,
from the launch of its new policy on gender-responsive peacekeeping operations to
guide peacekeeping operations on operationalizing the women and peace and security
mandates, to its work on accountability tools and guidance through a set of 15
indicators that are specific to peacekeeping missions. Those accountability tools,
specifically the indicators, have already been adopted by nine peacekeeping missions.
28. The reviews in 2015 underscored the importance of systematic engagement by
mission leadership with women’s organizations to understand and incorporate the
perspectives and expertise of women into decision-making. I welcome efforts by
peacekeeping missions, such as the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, to
meaningfully engage with women’s rights defenders. Their engagement contributes to
the long-term prevention of conflict by identifying the full scope of rights violation s,
needs, dynamics and solutions. In March 2019, the founder of Hope Restoration South
Sudan, Angelina Nyajima Simon Jial, told the Security Council that ensuring women
are central players in all aspects of peace and security, from the onset of an emergenc y
to the rebuilding phases, is essential: “We need not just to be consulted, but to be heard.
When we raise concerns about tensions mounting or the need for services, we speak
from an informed position of local knowledge” (see S/PV.8480).
29. Several peacekeeping missions, including in Cyprus, Darfur, Lebanon, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Kosovo, 14 have strengthened their strategic
engagement with women’s organizations, rights defenders and leaders. For example,

__________________
14

19-17355

All references to Kosovo in the present report shall be understood to be in the context of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999).
9/38

S/2019/800

the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus facilitated consensus -building on
women’s priorities in the peace process and developed a standardized methodology
to support a diverse range of women’s civil society organizations, in order to assist
in the development of an island-wide agenda. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo facilitated dialogues
with customary chiefs to promote women’s leadership in the national legislative
structures, leading to the election of two women among the 65 seats reserved for
customary chiefs across the provincial assemblies. It will be essential to further
systematize the integration of priorities identified by women’s civil society
organizations into mission planning and decisions.
30. As part of reform efforts, the United Nations is placing a stronger focus on
transitions, whether during the reconfiguration of peace operations or missions, or in
preparing for the drawdown of a mission from a country. Those moments are crucial
tests for the leadership of a country, for national and regional actors and for the United
Nations to safeguard progress and contribute to conflict prevention, sustainable
development, sustained peace and the women and peace and security agenda. I have
issued a directive in this regard and called for transition planning to be informed by
comprehensive and joint analysis that is human rights-based and gender-responsive.
I am encouraged by results following the joint gender-responsive conflict analysis
efforts led by the Department of Peace Operations and UN -Women in 2018. For
instance, analysis developed in Haiti and partnerships that evolved as part of that
analysis have helped to identify women and peace and security priorities for the new
mission configuration (the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti) and to translate
them into concrete goals for the United Nations team presence in the country. It is
important to ensure that such steps are taken in every transition process.
31. I have asked all relevant United Nations system entities to continue their efforts,
including but not limited to: (a) the integration of gender equality and women and
peace and security issues in analysis, assessment and planning tools; (b) the inclusion
of dedicated gender expertise in all assessment teams; (c) the development of
structures, expertise and coordination frameworks for the reconfiguration of the
United Nations presence in mission transition settings, with adequate gender capacity;
and (d) the allocation of dedicated resources to achieve results in implementing the
women and peace and security agenda, with a particular focus on addressing gender specific triggers to instability and conflict relapse.

D.

Protecting and promoting the human rights of women and girls, in
conflict settings and humanitarian emergencies
32. In 2018, the Security Council received information about serious violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law across multiple settings, including
civilian deaths and injuries resulting from indiscriminate attacks, record levels of
forced displacement combined with extended durations of displacement and a lack of
durable solutions, an increase in urban warfare, constraints on humanitarian access,
conflict-related starvation and continued high levels of conflict-related sexual
violence, including trafficking in persons for the purposes of sexual violence or
exploitation. The increasingly complex and fractured contexts that exist at present
require more cohesive action across the peace, humanitarian and development nexus,
including through providing support to women acting as first responders. This year
also demonstrated the impact of underlying gender inequality a nd violence against
women as root causes and consequences of conflict issues, including in the context
of displacement in northern Central America and the Andean region, and of intra -State
conflict, instability and displacement in Cameroon, the Central Afr ican Republic and
the Lake Chad Basin.

10/38

19-17355

S/2019/800

33. Our responses and prevention efforts will be ineffective without an analysis of
the gender-specific, short- and long-term effects of conflict and humanitarian
emergencies, including negative coping strategies and all categories of protection
risks. The consequences are particularly life-threatening during armed conflicts,
natural disasters, public health emergencies and other emergency situations, with such
situations accounting for over 50 per cent of preventable maternal deaths in countries
affected by fragility.
34. In such settings, attention needs to be focused, in particular, on realizing the
rights and addressing the needs of adolescent girls, who face greater risks of gender based violence, early and forced marriage, sexual exploitation and abuse, and
trafficking. High mortality rates as a result of pregnancy and childbirth are
preventable and thus unacceptable. The provision of access to sexual and reproductive
health in conflict and humanitarian emergencies must be acknowledged as life-saving.
In confronting such significant challenges, adolescent girls have shown tremendous
resilience, capacities and leadership in crises, including through the efforts of young
women leaders, who are often the first responders in protecting and supporting
themselves and their communities, but who can also be targeted as a result. We must
increase the recognition of and support for their work and skills and ensure that young
women have the space and protection to engage in decision-making in all matters that
affect them, their families and communities.
1.

Protecting civic space and the work of women peacebuilders and human
rights defenders
35. It is vital to prioritize women’s organizations, peacebuilders and women human
rights defenders as key political constituents who play pivotal roles in efforts relating
to conflict prevention, conflict resolution and sustaining peace. Those who experience
multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination are at particular risk. Yet, many
violations continue, undocumented and uninvestigated, thereby perpetuating
impunity and further entrenching gender inequality.
36. I remain gravely concerned at the increase in attacks, including threats and
harassment in digital spaces, against women human rights defenders and peacebuilders
and those who defy traditional gender norms. New data published in May 2019 show
unprecedented high levels of political violence targeting women over the past
12 months. 15 Such violence includes killings, sexual violence, abductions, forced
disappearances, physical assault and mob violence. The violations are perpetrated by
State and non-State armed groups, terrorist organizations and other groups.
37. The Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders reported that
a rise in misogynistic, sexist and homophobic speech by political leaders in recent
years is normalizing violence against women and gender non-conforming persons. 16
In 2018, a United Nations investigation in Yemen found human rights violations against
women human rights defenders, women journalists and women activists, including at
least 20 cases involving gender-based repression. 17 In Colombia, violence against
community leaders and women human rights defenders has continued to increase
dramatically since the signing of the peace accords in 2016. 18 In the first half of 2019
alone, the Ombudsman’s Office has recorded 447 threats, 20 homicides and 13
homicide attempts against women leaders, human rights defenders and peacebuilders

__________________

Roudabeh Kishi, Melissa Pavlik and Hilary Matfess, “Terrible and terrifying normal: political
violence targeting women” (May 2019).
16
A/HRC/40/60.
17
A/HRC/39/43, para. 82.
18
CEDAW/C/COL/CO/9.
15

19-17355

11/38

S/2019/800

in Colombia. 19 The most vulnerable groups of women, Colombian women of African
descent, indigenous, rural, lesbian, bisexual and transgender women and women with
disabilities, continue to suffer grave violations. 20 I recognize Colombia’s efforts to
address these critical issues, including through launching the comprehensive
programme of guarantees for the security of women leaders and human rights
defenders in June 2018. In the Sudan, in 2019, during the largest anti -government
protests in decades, in which women formed a core group of protesters, rapes and
gang rapes of protesters, women’s human rights defenders and women medical
personnel working in hospitals, as well as other forms of sexual violence and
intimidation, were widely reported. 21 In Libya, the United Nations received reports of
intimidation, including social media attacks, against women activists and lawmakers
in Libya and others living abroad. A stark example is the forced disappearance of a
lawmaker of the Libyan House of Representatives, Siham Sergewa, who was taken
by force from her home in Benghazi on 17 July 2019. 22 Across many other contexts,
women engaging or seeking to engage in public and political forums relating to peace
processes reported threats of violence, discrimination and intimidation, including in
Afghanistan and South Sudan.
38. I request peacekeeping and special political missions to continue to improve
their monitoring and reporting of threats and violence against activists, including
women human rights defenders, with data disaggregated by race, ethnicity, sexual
orientation, gender identity and disability, and for such monitoring and reporting to
be built into early warning signs of escalating conflict or instability. This should be
done in close consultation with women’s civil society organizations and other affected
groups of human rights defenders. I recognize efforts by multiple Member States,
including Bosnia and Herzegovina, Colombia, Mexico and Timor Leste, to strengthen
protection measures for women peacebuilders and activists. I welcome efforts such
as those of the United Nations Integrated Office for Peacebuilding in Guinea -Bissau,
which has established a network of nearly 900 human rights defenders, including
343 women, to enhance civic space and work towards the establishment of a country wide human rights early warning system.
39. I call on Member States to invest in creating safe and enabling environments for
human rights defenders and civil society organizatio ns to carry out their work and to
promptly investigate, prosecute and punish all threats, harassment and attacks. In
view of the anniversaries of the adoption of the frameworks that will be
commemorated in 2020, all leaders should stand in solidarity with the hundreds of
thousands of women human rights defenders and women peacebuilders leading the
fight for the equal enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms, including
by creating safe and enabling environments for them to carry out their work.
2.

Action to prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual violence
40. In my latest report to the Security Council on conflict -related sexual violence
(S/2019/280), I presented 19 situations of concern and an updated list of 50 parties to
conflict that were credibly suspected of having committed or instigated patterns of
rape and other forms of sexual violence in situations on the agenda of the Security
Council. The report contains harrowing accounts of violations and gaps in responses,
including in justice and services. It also highlights the impact of structural gender

__________________

Justice for Colombia, “Half of threatened social activists are women”, 5 July 2019.
CEDAW/C/COL/CO/9.
21
United Nations News, “Sudan: top United Nations official demands cessation of violence and
rape against civilians by security forces”, 13 June 2019.
22
See S/2019/682; United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), “UNSMIL deplores
enforced disappearance of elected honorary member Ms. Sergewa, calling for her immediate
release”, 18 July 2019.
19
20

12/38

19-17355

S/2019/800

inequalities and discrimination, which inhibit women ’s full, effective, equal and
meaningful participation in political, economic and soc ial life, as well as women’s
full access to responsive justice and security institutions. I call upon all relevant
stakeholders to implement the country-specific and overarching recommendations put
forward in S/2019/280 and in previous reports.
41. At the open debate on sexual violence in conflict, on 23 April 2019, the Security
Council adopted resolution 2467 (2019) as its ninth resolution on women and peace
and security. Among its components, resolution 2467 (2019) outlines the fact that
sexual violence in conflict occurs on a continuum of interrelated and recurring forms
of violence against women and girls, calls upon Member States to address structural
gender inequality and discrimination and encourages the adoption of survivor-centred
approaches in preventing and responding to sexual violence in conflict. I welcome
the resolution’s emphasis on accountability and encourage Member States to draw
upon the expertise of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict. I note with concern, however, that resolution 2467 (2019) was the first
Security Council resolution on women and peace and security that was not adopted
with unanimity, breaking 19 years of consensus on a critical issue.
3.

Promoting gender equality in humanitarian action
42. At the end of 2018, a staggering 70.8 million children, women and men were
forcibly displaced, most of whom were fleeing conflict. 23 As at September 2019,
148.7 million people were in need of humanitarian aid and protection, a figure that
reflects the increase in both the number and duration of humanitarian crises. At least
1 in 5 women refugees in complex humanitarian settings has experienced sexual
violence, 24 and 9 of the 10 countries with the highest rates of child marriage are in
fragile contexts. 25 UNFPA further estimates that 35 million women, 26 young women
and girls will require life-saving sexual and reproductive health services, as well as
interventions to prevent gender-based violence and respond to the needs of survivors.
Despite such numbers, funding allocated to gender-based violence in emergencies is
inadequate and covers only a fraction of what is required to prevent and res pond to
the needs. Overall humanitarian funding also remains low, as is the case in Nigeria,
for example, where $40 million was requested for the Humanitarian Response Plan
for 2018, for 1.5 million women and girls, but only $3.8 million was allocated (9.5 per
cent). The prevention of gender-based violence and the provision of life-saving and
essential services to women and girls requires adequate funding. The rights of
survivors, including the right to essential support and assistance for survivors, will g o
unfulfilled if humanitarian financing is not increased.
43. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
estimated only 61 per cent of refugee children have access to primary education,
compared to 91 per cent worldwide. At secondary level, the rate drops to 23 per cent
of refugee children, compared with 84 per cent globally. 27 Refugee girls at secondary
level are only half as likely to enrol in school as boys, even though girls make up half
of the school-age refugee population. 28 Such low enrolment of girls is caused by a
lack of protection measures, safe transport and affordability, as well as by inadequate

__________________

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), Global Trends: Forced
Displacement in 2018 (Geneva, 2019).
24
United Nations, Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Global Humanitarian
Overview: 2019 (2019).
25
Women’s Refugee Commission, A Girl No More: The Changing Norms of Child Marriage in
Conflict (New York, 2016).
26
United Nations Population Fund, “Humanitarian action: 2019 overview”, January 2019.
27
UNHCR, Left Behind: Refugee Education in Crisis, UNHCR (Geneva, 2016). Data from 2016.
28
Ibid.
23

19-17355

13/38

S/2019/800

teacher training to support girls’ access to school and to support their staying in
school. There is an urgent need to recruit and train more female teachers from within
both host and refugee communities and to ensure all teachers promote girls ’ human
rights and identify impediments that deter girls from attending school.
44. In 2018, the Inter-Agency Standing Committee endorsed its new policy on
gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls in humanitarian action and
a corresponding new accountability framework to monitor and measure performance
by humanitarian actors, which is contributing to progress. Prior to 2018, fewer than
half of all humanitarian responses included a gender analysis and related data. In
2018, figures from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs indicate
that 95 per cent of humanitarian needs overviews mention gender-based violence or
include some form of gender analysis. However, only 28 per cent of those overviews
articulated the differentiated impact faced by women, men, girls and boys in crises,
as well as the underlying factors affecting vulnerability.
45. The Emergency Relief Coordinator has acknowledged that while the work of
the world’s humanitarian agencies saves lives and reduces suffering, their efforts in
support of women and girls are insufficient. The Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs will continue to strengthen its prioritization of gender equality
and issues affecting women and girls, including the prevention of and response to
gender-based violence, through its humanitarian financing mechanisms, advocacy
and guidance to humanitarian coordinators and humanitarian country teams, as well
as undertaking research and enhancing strategic planning documents and processes.
Closer collaboration between all humanitarian actors and entities with gender
expertise, including UN-Women, is strongly encouraged, as outlined in the
independent assessment.
46. I reiterate the need to secure resourcing for the full range of medical, legal,
psychosocial and livelihood services, including donor support to ensure access for
women and girls to the full range of protection, sexual and reproductive health
information and services, including regarding pregnancies resulting from rape, without
discrimination, as noted in Security Council resolution 2122 (2013) and existing
obligations in international law. 29 In 2018, UNFPA dispatched 12,000 emergency
reproductive health kits, including over 1,700 tons of life -saving medicines and
supplies worth over $9 million, to 50 countries in order to support life -saving
emergency obstetric and newborn care, the clinical management of rape survivors,
voluntary family planning and the prevention and treatment of sexually transmitted
infections. In addition, UNFPA work on gender-based violence surge deployments,
along with that of other actors, provides invaluable support to affected women and
girls.
47. The participation of women and organizations working on gender equality and
women’s human rights, including women with disabilities, displaced women and
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex individuals, is critical to ensure
that humanitarian responses address the differentiated needs of individuals of all ages
and diversities. Local organizations, including women’s groups, are often the best
placed to support, design and implement context-specific responses and negotiate
humanitarian access, and play a pivotal role in raising awareness and mobilizing
communities. For instance, members of the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board provided
advice to the Special Envoy for Syria to better understand the deteriorating
humanitarian conditions and protection concerns of civilians in Idlib, before the
escalation in fighting in 2018. In its 2018 Global Strategic Priorities Progress Report,
UNHCR reported improved participation of women in leadership and management
structures across 23 refugee situations and in three contexts involving internally
__________________
29

14/38

See S/2013/525 and E/2013/27-E/CN.6/2013/11.
19-17355

S/2019/800

displaced persons. 30 The agency warned, however, that women’s participation
continues to be hampered by negative gender stereotypes and societal norms . In
August 2018, Iraqi civil society leader Suzan Araf Maroof informed the Security
Council that 8.2 million Iraqis required immediate protection, most of them women,
who are denied access to their rights, face security threats and lack protection service s
and access to facilities, clean water and sanitation. She added that 91 per cent of camps
across Iraq still had no women in their management, which prevents their needs from
being addressed adequately. Another key example from 2018 includes the pilot
initiatives of the gender-based violence area of responsibility led by UNFPA, in northeast Nigeria and in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which were designed with
the participation of local civil society actors and women ’s organizations.
48. Without an analysis of the gender-specific short- and long-term effects of
conflict and humanitarian emergencies, including negative coping strategies, and of
the host of protection risks, such as conflict-related sexual violence and other forms
of gender-based violence, our responses and prevention efforts will be ineffective. In
May 2019, the Governments of Norway, Iraq, Somalia and the United Arab Emirates,
with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, UNFPA and the
International Committee of the Red Cross, co-hosted the conference on ending sexual
and gender-based violence in humanitarian crises, working together with women ’s
civil society organizations to highlight the funding gaps and needs for the prevention
of and response to gender-based violence, including sexual violence and conflictrelated sexual violence. The conference was an opportunity for collective action to
prioritize the protection of women and girls, and brought together over 100 Member
States. I commend such partnerships among the United Nations, Member States, civil
society and survivors to step up efforts to mobilize resources and political action so
as to protect women and girls and promote their leadership.

E.

Preventing conflict and sustaining peace
49. Conflict prevention and advancing gender equality have been among my central
priorities since taking office. In the Global Study and the other reviews conducted in
2015, emphasis was placed on the importance of both short-term prevention
measures, including identifying and responding to early warning signs and curbing
the flow of small arms, and of long-term approaches that address the root causes and
structural drivers of conflict, such as exclusion, discrimination, attacks on human
rights and structural inequality. The Security Council, along with 71 Member States
that co-sponsored resolution 2242 (2015), reaffirmed in 2015 that gender equality and
the rights of women and girls are critical to conflict prevention and noted that barriers
to the full implementation of the women and peace and security agenda will only be
dismantled through dedicated commitment to women ’s participation and human
rights. In 2018, in a joint study on preventing violent con flict, the United Nations and
the World Bank found that little attention is focused on addressing the harmful
societal norms that underpin gender inequalities and called for the monitoring of
gender equality developments as part of broader preventive measu res. 31 As Member
States increase intergovernmental support for conflict prevention and sustaining
peace (A/73/890-S/2019/448), it is vital that such efforts prioritize the promotion of
gender equality, women’s political and economic empowerment and the substantive
advancement of women’s human rights. Progress at the national level can be tracked
through data disaggregated by sex and age across key development indicators. The

__________________
30
31

19-17355

UNHCR, 2018 Global Strategic Priorities Progress Report (2018).
World Bank and United Nations, Pathways for Peace.
15/38

S/2019/800

United Nations must strengthen its data collection efforts to support evidence-based
policy development and decision-making.
1.

Economic recovery and access to resources
50. In 2015, the United Nations heard from women across diverse conflict settings,
who made it clear that initiatives aimed at economic recovery, for women, are
overwhelmingly limited to microcredit or micro-enterprises, while large-scale
reconstruction is dominated by and overwhelmingly benefits men. Prioritizing
women’s economic empowerment and building their capacities for a future -oriented
economy, rather than a return to the skills of a pre-conflict economy, was a key
recommendation of the Global Study. Action in this area remains insufficient. In
previous reports, I have emphasized that addressing economic empowerment issues
during conflict and post-conflict phases is a prevention strategy, as disputes over
access to economic resources are one of the most prevalent drivers of conflict. If we
are serious about sustaining peace, we can no longer allow women ’s economic rights
to remain a blind spot in efforts to respond to crises and plan for peace.
51. Discrimination against women in terms of access to assets and productive
resources, including land, property and inheritance, credit, technology and banking,
and the lack of decent work, violates women’s human rights and leaves them
vulnerable to extreme poverty and gender-based violence in all countries. Such
violations of their rights not only persist, but in many cases have worsened as a result
of increased and protracted crises. Illicit economies that profit from and fuel conflict
also exploit and violate the rights of women, young women and girls, including
through human trafficking.
52. Despite the depth and breadth of the problem, the bulk of United Nations work
remains centred around short-term and temporary initiatives that fail to generate longterm impact. Economic exclusion and the failure to promote the economic rights of
women or remove barriers to their economic inclusion, including those faced by
disabled women, widows and female heads of households, are often rooted in harmful
social mores that require long-term, transformative change. Awareness-raising does
not suffice, nor do small-scale initiatives that focus solely on livelihoods, the number
of which has also declined. In 2018, the total number and ratio of female temporary
employment beneficiaries in early economic recovery programmes deliver ed by the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) decreased to 1.2 million (32 per
cent of total beneficiaries, compared with 36 per cent the year before).
53. Women must be included in all processes, including on macroeconomic
development, infrastructure, private business management and in dialogue with
international financial institutions on reconstruction. In fragile and conflict -affected
countries, only 4 out of 10 women are in paid work, compared with 7 out of 10 men.
The employment gap is worsened by the weak retention of female staff as a result of
sexual harassment, lack of safety and poor labour standards in the workplace,
inadequate social protections and unpaid care work. For countries experiencing
protracted conflict, the figures worsen significantly, including in Afghanistan, where
there is a 60-percentage-point gap between male and female employment rates, and
gaps of over 50 percentage points in the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen. New data
also show that nearly 40 per cent of economies limit women’s property rights and
nearly 30 per cent of economies restrict women’s freedom of movement, thereby
increasing women’s vulnerability in general, but particularly in conflict-affected
settings. 32

__________________
32

16/38

World Bank, “Women, business and the law 2019: a decade of reform”, 2019.
19-17355

S/2019/800

54. We must also address the fact that in a number of situations around the world,
actors driving post-conflict development, in large part, plan for extractive or
agro-industrial megaprojects without accounting for the collective and individual
human rights of indigenous women, women of African descent and rural women, and
their communities, and without due attention to the human, non -human and
environmental costs. An increased global focus on the meaningful participation of
women, at all levels of political economy of foreign aid, reco nstruction and economic
revitalization, are urgently needed and this is an area in which I hope new partnerships
will be immediately formed.
2.

Inclusive governance and gender-balance in elected and appointed positions
55. Worldwide, the majority of lawmakers are men. Globally, only 24.3 per cent of
parliamentary seats are held by women. 33 For conflict and post-conflict countries, the
ratio is even lower, at 19 per cent. Gender quotas and other temporary special
measures have proven to be effective tools to remedy this challenge. In conflict and
post-conflict countries with legislated quotas, the share of women in parliament is
more than twice that of those without such quotas (24.3 per cent compared to 10.6 per
cent). I urge Member States to use these measures in order to increase the
representation of women in elected and appointed positions. There are still countries
without women in parliament or in ministerial positions.
56. The extent to which women hold elected and political positions, at all level s of
government, can demonstrate important changes in social norms and the acceptance
of women in leadership roles historically awarded only to men. Each of the challenges
described throughout the present report cannot be addressed without adequate
governance structures, especially at the subnational and national levels.
Commitments to inclusive and participatory governance go beyond the number of
women who participate, as gender balance alone in leadership roles will not produce
a better quality of governance. Feminist approaches to governance that embrace
inclusivity, social justice and the protection and promotion of fundamental human
rights are central to these global goals. In addition, despite the compounding levels
of exclusion faced by young women, they and their organizations continue to mobilize
for peace often and quickly, using innovation and digital technology for social good.
Investing in young women’s leadership is essential to ensure a more inclusive future.
57. Between 2017 and 2019, Ethiopia demonstrated the largest increase in the
representation of women in the executive branch of government, with the
parliamentary election of a female President, the appointment of women as ministers,
making up 47.6 per cent of the Cabinet (up from 10 per ce nt in 2017), including a
woman as Minister of Peace; in addition, women are the speakers of both
parliamentary chambers. 34 I am encouraged by the unanimous passage in Guinea of a
law to institute gender parity, and by advances made in Tunisia, which not onl y
reformed electoral laws to ensure gender parity, but also reformed laws so as to ensure
gender parity in local and municipal governance bodies and commissions. Rwanda,
South Africa and other countries established full gender parity in their cabinets in
2019. I hope such examples will inspire other countries.
58. Discriminatory practices and attitudes among constituents and colleagues also
result in serious violence against women participating in or seeking to participate in
politics. This is a formidable barrier to women’s political participation that is not only
pervasive, but often perpetrated publicly without any accountability. During elections
in both Iraq and Afghanistan in recent years, women candidates faced major
challenges, including intimidation, online harassment and direct targeting of their

__________________
33
34

19-17355

UN-Women and Inter-Parliamentary Union, “Map of women in politics”, 2019.
See http://archive.ipu.org/wmn-e/speakers.htm.
17/38

S/2019/800

campaign events. Female candidates and their families are also at heightened risk of
kidnapping and murder. Despite such serious risks to their lives, women continue to
defy such violence. In Iraq, 2,000 women ran for office and won 84 of the
parliamentary seats (25.5 per cent) in 2018. 35 In Afghanistan, 391 women ran for the
Wolesi Jirga (House of the People) in October 2018. Despite persistent security
threats, women made up 15 per cent of the candidates.
3.

Disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control
59. Disarmament and arms control are essential to preventing and ending violent
conflict, yet the world is moving in the opposite direction, towards increased
militarization, the continued spread of small arms and light weapons, the development
of new weapons and growing tensions among nuclear-armed rivals. The rising trend
in military spending continued, in contrast to social spending and investment in
conflict prevention, gender equality and sustaining peace. In 2018, total world
military expenditure reached $1.8 trillion. 36
60. Those trends stand in direct opposition to the calls of women peacebuilders
around the world, who have been fighting to stop the proliferation of weapons that
are exacerbating local conflicts and sexual and gender-based violence for decades. In
April 2019, Inas Miloud from Libya told the Security Council that patriarchal norms,
amplified by the presence of armed groups and the widespread availability of weapons
in every household, are the central cause of gender-based violence and lack of security
for women. She added that despite the United Nations arms embargo, weapons
continue to flow into Libya unchecked. 37
61. Continued efforts are needed to realize the commitments to women’s
meaningful participation in arms control and disarmament efforts and to gender responsive action, as set out in global and regional frameworks such as the Arms
Trade Treaty, the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner,
Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons, relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council, and initiatives such as the African Union initiative,
Silencing the Guns by 2020. In the outcome document adopted in June 2018 at the
Third United Nations Conference to Review Progress Made in the Implementation of
the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, Member States reiterated the need to
strengthen the participation of women in related implementation processes. States
also recognized that eradicating the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons is a
key part of combating gender-based violence. I welcome continued efforts to enhance
women’s meaningful participation in the design and implementation of all
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes, community violence
reduction initiatives and mine action. Inclusive and well -designed initiatives are
important contributors to preventing violence, building confidence among
communities and facilitating local peacebuilding.
62. A review of national reports on the implementation of the Programme of Action
and the International Tracing Instrument submitted in 2018 shows that most countries
(117 out of 120 countries reporting) have legal frameworks for the control of illicit

__________________

See http://archive.ipu.org/parline/reports/2151.htm.
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, “World military expenditure grows to
$1.8 trillion in 2018”.
37
Inas Miloud, Director of the Tamazight Women’s Movement, statement to the Security Council at
its open debate on sexual violence and conflict, New York, 23 April 2019.
35
36

18/38

19-17355

S/2019/800

small arms and light weapons. 38 Among them, 54 countries have considered gender
in policymaking, planning and implementation of the Programme of Action, and
16 countries have collected gender-disaggregated data to recognize and respond to
the gender-specific risks linked to illicit trade. I urge other Member States to ensure
the collection of such data and to strengthen national coordination between those
working to eradicate the proliferation of small arms and to promote conflict
prevention and the prevention of violence against women.
4.

Rule of law and women’s access to justice
63. Survivor-centred and inclusive justice processes increase the likelihood that the
outcomes of those processes will constitute an effective redress, as defined by victim survivors, thereby helping to maximize the contribution of transitional justice to
conflict prevention. 39 Survivors continue to demonstrate the necessity of their
participation as a first step towards the restoration of their human rights and dignity
and towards obtaining justice for violations of their human rights and of humanitarian
law in conflict. In Nepal, survivors of sexual violence have created their own online
campaign calling for truth, justice, dignity and reparations. 40 In the Gambia, women’s
rights activists engaged with the authorities on addressing barriers to women ’s
participation in the country’s truth commission, resulting in the formation of a
women’s affairs unit within the commission. 41 A global network of survivors,
alongside Nobel laureates Denis Mukwege and Nadia Murad, have also driven the
movement to establish an international fund which will facilitate access to assistance
and other forms of redress for survivors of conflict-related sexual violence globally. 42
64. For sexual violence and other forms of gender-based violence, however, severe
underreporting remains the norm, owing to the fear of reprisals, stigma and the many
structural and cultural barriers for survivors. The ethical and professional collection
of evidence in cases of sexual and gender-based violence requires respect for the
fundamental principle of “do no harm”. By way of example, the Commission on
Human Rights in South Sudan reported having received information indicating that
basic principles, such as the “do no harm” principle, were not uniformly applied by
some actors documenting the rape of more than 125 women in Bentiu, committed
over a timespan of about 10 days in November 2018. 43 Similar reports have emerged
in other contexts, including among the Yazidi and Rohingya communities. I call for
the consistent application of ethical and professional principles and for enhanced
coordination between actors collecting information on sexual and gender-based
violence. I encourage all those conducting investigations to refer to guidance,
including the International Protocol on the Documentation and Investigation of
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and the tool launched by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in September 2018, 44 which
provides concrete examples to support the integration of a gender perspective into
human rights investigations.
65. The adoption of gender-responsive policies in national security institutions,
together with the dedicated support of the United Nations, such as in the Central
African Republic, Mali and South Sudan, remains critical to advance the rule of law

__________________

See https://www.un.org/disarmament/convarms/salw/programme-of-action/.
Security Council resolution 2467 (2019).
40
See https://breakingsilenceendingimpunity.org/.
41
All Africa, “Gambia: TRRC update – the journey so far”, 2 May 2019.
42
See www.mukwegefoundation.org.
43
A/HRC/40/CRP.1, para. 459.
44
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Integrating a Gender
Perspective into Human Rights Investigations: Guidance and Practice (New York and Geneva,
2018).
38
39

19-17355

19/38

S/2019/800

and equal opportunities for women. Although such progress is encouraging, concerted
efforts are still needed to ensure all security sector institutions, including law
enforcement bodies, are inclusive, professional and accountable. Transitional justice
processes should seek to address the underlying gender inequality in societies.
Redressing such inequality entails addressing the needs and priorities of all women
and girls, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex individuals, and
survivors of sexual and gender-based violence, including men and boys, as well as
guaranteeing their safe and meaningful participation in those processes. As a means
of guaranteeing non-recurrence, transitional justice should advance legal regimes that
incorporate the full range of gender-based violence crimes and create a culture that
respects women’s human rights. The changes necessary include the reform of
discriminatory laws, policies and practices; the appointment of women in justice and
prison institutions; providing gender training to judges, magistrates and prison
officers; and the provision of legal aid and access to justice, the separation of
prisoners and the improvement of detention conditions for women. I commend the
adoption by the African Union of its Transitional Justice Policy Framework, in 2019,
including its comprehensive approach to gender justice, and call on relevant entities
to support the implementation thereof.
66. A holistic approach to transitional justice also requires strengthening
accountability for gender-based violence crimes under international law. In 2018, the
United Nations worked closely with host governments, including through the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Global Focal
Point for the Rule of Law, on supporting the prosecution of cases in the Central
African Republic, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Guinea, Iraq, Liberia, Mali, Myanmar, Nigeria, Somalia, South Sudan and the Sudan.
They also supported the protection of victims and witnesses and continued to call for
the necessary legal, medical and psychosocial assistance. At the international level, it
is also notable that in July 2019, the International Criminal Court convicted Bosco
Ntaganda for war crimes and crimes against humanity committed in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in 2002 and 2003, including rape and sexual slavery.
67. I recognize the role of international human rights bodies and mechanisms in
holding States accountable for all human rights obligations, including in relation to
sexual and gender-based violence. From June 2018 to June 2019, the Human Rights
Council received reports from investigations it had ma ndated in Burundi, the Kasai
Regions of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Myanmar, South Sudan, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Yemen and the Occupied Palestinian Territory. Despite their vastly
different contexts, each report described a wide range of women ’s human rights
violations. In August 2019, the independent international fact -finding mission on
Myanmar produced a thematic paper on sexual and gender-based violence, which
found a direct nexus between gender inequality in the country and the prevalence of
sexual and gender-based violence, and that some women and girls are doubly
victimized as a result of their gender and ethnicity. 45 The effective collaboration
between UN-Women, OHCHR and the Justice Rapid Response initiative ensures that
all investigations mandated by the Human Rights Council benefit from the expertise
of a gender adviser or investigator on sexual and gender-based violence.
68. Information relating to violations of women’s human rights in conflict and
post-conflict countries also continued to be communicated through the special
procedures of the Human Rights council and, in accordance with its general
recommendation No. 30 (2013) on women in conflict prevention, conflict and
post-conflict situations, the Committee on the Elimination of Di scrimination against
Women addressed the women and peace and security agenda in the concluding
__________________
45

20/38

See A/HRC/42/CRP.4.
19-17355

S/2019/800

observations for 12 of the 24 States parties it examined in 2018. In July 2018, the
Committee and my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict signed a
framework of cooperation agreement to advance the rights of women and girls by
combating conflict-related sexual violence. In February 2019, the Committee
considered the report submitted by Myanmar, under the exceptional reporting
procedure, on the situation of Rohingya women and girls from Northern Rakhine
State, and issued recommendations. 46
69. I encourage States to implement the recommendations of treaty bodies, special
procedures mechanisms and the universal periodic review process and to ratify or l ift
current reservations to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women. For example, Ukraine is following up on the
Committee’s recommendations in its concluding observations, in 2017, by adopting,
in September 2018, the first-ever action plan for the implementation of the
Committee’s concluding observations. National human rights institutions play an
important role in ensuring that women’s rights, as set out in international human
rights law, are protected by legislation and respected at the national level. However,
less than half of the conflict-affected countries reviewed for the present report 47 (20
out of 43) had accredited national human rights institutions. 48
5.

Preventing and countering violent extremism conducive to terrorism and
countering terrorism
70. Violence perpetrated by terrorist groups that are designated by the Security
Council and subject to sanctions and by violent extremist groups continues to hav e a
devastating impact, including indiscriminate violence against civilian populations,
the targeting of civilian objects, violence and discrimination targeting women and
girls, and the strategic manipulation of gender norms and stereotypes as part of
recruitment tactics, which has a negative effect on the rights of women and on the
overall resilience of communities against extremist narratives. Many groups have
common strategic objectives aimed at the subjugation of women, resulting in broad
violations of women’s human rights, including their basics rights to freedom of
speech, access to education and participation in public life. Violent extremist groups
work to eradicate women’s agency, in both public and private spheres, and to
subordinate women’s existence in order to achieve their agendas. As such, there is a
direct link between violent misogyny and violent extremism, whether it be in the
individual histories of mass shooters or as a core principle of extremist groups.
71. Such violence has a lasting impact on communities at large and on girls and
women, who are disproportionately affected. Social stigma, economic hardship and
structural inequality and discrimination, including when such conditions predate the
harm experienced by victims of terrorism, negatively affect the rights of victims of
terrorism who, like all victims, have a right to justice and reparation. 49 In order to
address the needs of women who have been victimized by terrorism, particularly
women returnees, responses must address the underlying structural inequalities and
discrimination that exist in order to be effective in respecting the full scope of
women’s rights in this context.

__________________

See CEDAW/C/MMR/EP/1 and CEDAW/C/MMR/EP/CO/1.
For the present report, this includes agenda items of which the Security Council is currently
seized and which were considered by the Council at a formal meeting during the pe riod from
1 January 2018 to 31 December 2018, countries with peacekeeping or special political missions
in 2018 and countries that received programmatic funds from the Peacebuilding Fund in 2018.
48
Accreditation status as of 4 March 2019.
49
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and International Civil Society Action
Network, Invisible Women: Gendered Dimensions of Return, Rehabilitation and Reintegration
from Violent Extremism (New York, UNDP, 2019).
46
47

19-17355

21/38

S/2019/800

72. In line with resolution 2242 (2015), increased references to gender
mainstreaming in United Nations and Member State public statements, programmatic
activities and dedicated research efforts are necessary and welcome. 50 However, much
more must be done to ensure that the application of gender mainstrea ming
commitments is meaningful and rooted in the promotion and protection of women ’s
human rights. Across many contexts, including in Kenya and Somalia with
Al-Shabaab, Nigeria and the Lake Chad Basin with Boko Haram, and Iraq, the Syrian
Arab Republic and other countries affected by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), protection, recovery and resilience services continue to be limited and gaps
must be identified and addressed through outreach to affected communities, including
direct and indirect victims and survivors. 51 In addition, consultation and engagement
with women’s civil society organizations, peacebuilders and activists is crucial, as is
investment in substantive local research on women’s perspectives on and experience
with designated terrorist or violent extremist groups, and the increased availability of
data on the actions of such groups, disaggregated by sex and age.
73. Women peacebuilders around the world continue to call for women ’s
participation, underlining that it is an essential factor in ensuring the effectiveness of
counter-terrorism and of efforts to prevent and counter violent extremism, and in
ensuring that such legislation and efforts to counter terrorism are not used as a means
to suppress their decades-long activism, peacebuilding and rights advocacy. Recent
reports continue to highlight the fact that national counter-terrorism legislation has
been, and continues to risk being, used against civil society and human rights defenders,
and that it may disproportionately affect women’s civil society organizations that
often take on the role of peacebuilders and human rights defenders. 52 We must deepen
the integration of the full scope of women’s human rights and gender mainstreaming,
including through the application of the previously proposed minimum financing
target of 15 per cent of funding for peacebuilding and counter-terrorism efforts, in
particular during the preparations for the United Nations Global Counter -Terrorism
Strategy Review, in 2020. Institutional progress has been made through the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact, specifically, the working
group on adopting a gender-sensitive approach to preventing and countering terrorism
and the appointment of a dedicated gender adviser in the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate. However, significant work remains to ensure that
all initiatives funded by the United Nations and implemented through the working
group have fully integrated gender analysis and impact into their pro gramme design
and evaluation mechanisms. I look forward to the deepening of partnerships between
UN-Women, OHCHR, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the
Office of Counter-Terrorism, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and other
United Nations system entities in this area, including by advancing mechanisms for
consistent and meaningful dialogue with women’s civil society organizations and a
dedicated focus on women’s human rights.

__________________

For example, see Nelly Lahoud, Empowerment or Subjugation: An Analysis of ISIL’s Gendered
Messaging (UN-Women, 2018); Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, “Gender
dimensions of the response to returning foreign terrorist fighters: research perspectives ”,
February 2019; and United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Handbook on Gender
Dimensions of Criminal Justice Responses to Terrorism (Vienna, 2019).
51
In April 2019, the United Nations produced a set of key principles for the protection,
prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration of women and children with links to United Nations listed terrorist groups, which clarifies the vital elements that must be met by all entities in their
support to these efforts.
52
A/73/361.
50

22/38

19-17355

S/2019/800

III. Delivering results in the lead-up to 2020 and beyond
74. The convergence of milestone anniversaries in 2020 should be a moment for
highlighting successes at all levels, from local to global, but also for addressing the
persistent barriers preventing progress, including the devastating human, so cietal and
environmental costs of collective failures to act on and stand up for women and peace
and security principles when it was most needed, failures which have multigenerational
consequences. To date, few actors have fully implemented commitments to those
principles. Many initiatives remain small in scale, ad hoc and project -based, without
guarantees of longer-term support. Increased political leadership, resourcing and
accountability for results is needed from all actors.

A.

Taking action and monitoring results at the national and
regional levels
75. Building on commitments made at the high-level meeting on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), held in 2015, and at the World
Humanitarian Summit in 2016, in April 2019, Germany and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland invited Member States, regional organizations and
United Nations entities to commit to specific actions on the women and peace and
security agenda to be implemented by October 2020. In total, 64 Member States, eight
United Nations entities and three regional organizations made commitments ranging
from the adoption of new national action plans to funding pledges and institutional
arrangements. 53 Follow-up on those commitments will be monitored by UN-Women
and the Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom. I urge all stakeholders
to ensure their full implementation and to take new transformative steps that can close
commitment gaps and make an impact by 2020 and beyond.
76. The Women, Peace and Security Focal Points Network, currently chaired by
Namibia, with Canada, Germany and Uruguay as members of the leadership troika and
UN-Women serving as the secretariat, held its third meeting in April 2019 , in
Windhoek. Such meetings enable national and regional focal points, along with civil
society partners, to take stock of progress achieved and to share reflections and
innovative strategies on operationalizing and financing the agenda at all levels. For
the first time, the annual meeting was focused on the often overlooked contributions
of young women in implementing the agenda and the need to strengthen the nexus
between disarmament, small arms and light weapons control and women and peace
and security. I recognize the Network’s role in providing leadership in the lead-up to
October 2020 and encourage it to be a space for mutual accountability, in which
commitments made are regularly reviewed for action. I also encourage additional
Member States and regional organizations to join the Network i n such efforts.
77. During the reporting period, four additional Member States adopted national
action plans on women and peace and security, bringing the total number of countries
and territories with such action plans to 81 as at August 2019. It marks a 50 per cent
increase since 2015 but constitutes less than half of States Members of the United
Nations and observers (41 per cent). Many are, however, in the process of developing
or renewing action plans in time for the 20-year anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), which provides opportunities for addressing common
challenges identified in terms of policy coordination, monitoring and evaluation,
financing, political leadership and flexibility to respond to emerging issues and
increase inclusivity. While developing its third national action plan in 2018, Ireland

__________________
53

19-17355

See www.unwomen.org/-/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/what%20we%20do/peace security/wps-commitments-for-2020-en.pdf?la=en&vs=2227.
23/38

S/2019/800

sought to capture input from and the perspectives of rural women and those of
migrants, refugees and asylum seekers from conflict and post confl ict-affected
countries who were living in Ireland. It was aimed at positioning those women as
agents of change and as sources of expertise in understanding conflict prevention and
fragile States. 54
78. Several countries, including Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ir aq, Liberia, Serbia and
Uganda, have adopted action plans on women and peace and security at the state,
zone, local or county levels, with 19 such plans adopted in Nigeria, 18 in Ukraine and
11 in Liberia. Some countries have integrated the women and peace and security
agenda into local and community development plans and policies. The Global
Network of Women Peacebuilders, with the support of UN-Women, developed a
toolkit to complement and inform ongoing and planned processes on localization,
which was launched in March 2019. 55
79. I welcome the initiatives of regional and subregional organizations to mainstream
the women and peace and security agenda through regional frameworks, action plans
and strategies and encourage coherence between those initiatives and those at the
national level on conflict prevention, resolution and peacebuilding. During the reporting
period, the European Union adopted a new strategic approach to implementing the
women and peace and security agenda and its action plan. The International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Economic Community of Central
African States adopted regional action plans on women and peace and security,
contributing to the growing number of such initiatives by 12 regional and subregional
organizations. North Atlantic Treaty Organization nations endorsed its new action
plan on women and peace and security in July 2018. Regional organizations have the
potential to accelerate and monitor the women and peace and security agenda at the
national and regional levels through increased information-sharing and collaboration
between regional and subregional organizations and with civil society. This can be
done through meaningfully and consistently engaging with women mediators and
women peacebuilders in peace interventions, including through networks such as the
African Women Leaders Network and the Network of African Women in Conflict
Prevention and Mediation (Femwise-Africa), as well as other members of the newly
formed Global Alliance of Regional Women Mediator Networks, 56 and promoting
streamlined reporting processes on the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda, as does the continental results framework of the African Union.
80. The leadership role of special envoys, ambassadors and high-level advisers on
gender equality and the women and peace and security agenda should be harnessed
through strengthened financial and human resource capacity.
81. I recognize the important roles that national parliaments can play in supporting
the national implementation of the women and peace and security agenda, through
the passage of inclusive and non-discriminatory legislation, monitoring national
action plans and allocating budgets for their implementation, and supporting the
participation of women in all political processes and institutions. The United
Kingdom has a cross-party women and peace and security parliamentary group and
Canada, Italy and Montenegro are among the Member States with parliamentary
oversight of national action plans. The UNDP global project on the role of parliaments
__________________

Ireland, Women, Peace and Security: Ireland’s Third National Action Plan on UNSCR 1325
(2000) and Related Resolutions 2019–2024 (2019).
55
Mavic Cabrera-Balleza and Agnieszka Fal Dutra Santos, From Best Practice to Standard
Practice: A Toolkit on the Localization of the UN Security Council Resolution 1325 (2000) on
Women and Peace and Security (New York, Global Network of Women Peacebuilders, 2018).
56
The Global Alliance was launched at Headquarters on 28 September 2019. In addition to
Femwise-Africa, its founding members include the Mediterranean women mediators network, the
Nordic women mediators network and the Women mediators across the Commonwealth.
54

24/38

19-17355

S/2019/800

as partners for the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda,
supported by Norway and piloted in Jordan, Kyrgyzstan, Sierra Leone and Sri Lanka,
is yielding results. 57 I urge more parliaments to further identify ways in which they
can support the localization of the agenda.

B.

Positioning of the women and peace and security agenda within
United Nations reform streams: opportunities and challenges
82. Progress is being made across the three reform streams – management,
development and peace and security – with prevention being the common thread (see
A/73/890-S/2019/448). In the lead up to October 2020, my aim is, within the
continued implementation of the reforms, to continue to place stronger emphasis on
ensuring that the Organization is fit to deliver on its commitments in the areas of
gender equality and women and peace and security. This includes shaping an
Organization that actively and publicly challenges sexist and discriminatory attitudes,
policies and actions that allow for gender inequality to prevail, addresses hate speech
in line with the Organization’s new plan of action and strategy, takes a fir m stand of
zero tolerance of sexual exploitation and abuse (see A/73/744) and champions and
models inclusion.

1.

Gender parity in peace and security
83. Since 2015, the share of women leading United Natio ns peace operations has
continued to show an upward trend (see figure I). As at December 2018, women
comprised 35 per cent of heads and 48 per cent of deputy heads of United Nations
peacekeeping and special political missions, compared with 26 per cent and 35 per
cent, respectively, in 2017. Gender parity has been achieved among resident
coordinators globally.
Figure I
Women heads and deputy heads of United Nations field missions, 2010–2018

Source: United Nations, Gender Parity Dashboard. Available at www.un.org/gender/content/unsecretariat-gender-parity-dashboard.
__________________
57

19-17355

Nika Saeedi and Agata Walczak, “How parliaments can work with women to create peace”,
Medium, 11 March 2019.
25/38

S/2019/800

84. Progress is lagging in the appointment of women as lead mediators, and only
two women have held the position of Force Commander of a United Nations
peacekeeping force.
85. I remain concerned about the lack of progress made in increasing the number of
women at all levels of civilian staff in peace operations. The numbers are the lowest,
and the rate of change the slowest, in United Nations missions. To address the gap, in
2018, I requested the senior leadership to form a working group on emergency
measures to achieve gender parity in peace operations by a target date of 2028. The
group has been working on a range of measures, including enforcing existing policies
on temporary special measures, increasing the number of women on rosters,
proposing needed changes to staff rules and regulations and mak ing missions more
inclusive in their infrastructure and facilities. I have also instructed that all new
missions and entities should be set up with parity and greater geographical diversity
of staff, from their inception.
86. I note the importance of Member States modelling the fulfilment of
commitments to gender balance. In June 2019, 49 of 193 (25 per cent) permanent
representatives of Member States to the United Nations in New York were women,
up slightly from 40 in 2018. Of the 15 Security Council seats, three (Poland, the
United Kingdom and the United States of America) were filled by women
ambassadors in 2018 and 2019.
87. The representation of women among uniformed personnel remains low, with
figures among military troops and personnel holding steady at 4.2 per cent and women
police personnel increasing to 12.8 per cent as at December 2018 (see figure II). The
strategy on gender parity among uniformed personnel of the Department of Peace
Operations is aimed at increasing the number of women deployed a mong military,
police, corrections and justice personnel. A gender perspective has been
mainstreamed into all materials developed by the Department for the predeployment
and in-mission training of civilian and uniformed personnel.
88. I am pleased to report the launch of the Canadian-led Elsie Initiative for Women
in Peace Operations, which marks a renewed ambition to making systematic the
recruitment, training, deployment and retention of women in peacekeeping missions,
through financial and practical assistance and incentivization, in line with Security
Council resolution 2242 (2015). The year 2019 is the start of renewed efforts to
employ both incentives and disincentives and to holistically address that challenge.
I continue to recognize increases by several troop-contributing countries in the
number of women deployed to peacekeeping missions and applaud the continued
support of donors for the course for women military officers, offered by UN -Women,
which assists Member States in meeting their commitments and contributes to
increasing the deployment of uniformed women.

26/38

19-17355

S/2019/800

Figure II
Women police and military personnel in United Nations peacekeeping missions,
2010–2018

Source: United Nations Peacekeeping, Gender. Available at https://peacekeeping.un.org/en/gender
(accessed in May 2019).

2.

Increasing accountability and expertise for the integration of gender
perspectives into peace and security measures
89. I am committed to strengthening accountability measures on the women and
peace and security agenda for my senior leaders and all those in management roles.
Increasing gender balance does not replace or supersede the need for shared
responsibility in integrating gender perspectives into all areas in which the United
Nations works and, more broadly, in addressing the cultural norms that perpetuate
gender inequality. We must fight the assumptions that “gender” is equivalent to
“women” and that women automatically bear the responsibility or have the capacity
for conducting gender analysis. The implementation of gender parity and the women
and peace and security agenda is necessary to achieve gender equality, but it is
important that those efforts be recognized as being separate and distinct from one
another. Senior managers have a responsibility to ensure that the implementation of
related goals and commitments are fully integrated into all the policies, strategies,
budgets and resourcing requests specific to their entities.
90. While progress has been made over time in strengthening expertise in gender
equality and adequate staffing to ensure the effective operationalization of women
and peace and security mandates, many challenges persist. Notably, ensuring the
adequate resourcing of and seniority of gender advisers, ensuring that vacant posts
are filled and placing gender units in the offices of the heads of missions.
91. In 2018, the Department of Political Affairs (now part of the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs) had 19 full-time gender advisers deployed to 16
field missions or offices of special envoys, of which only four positions (21 per cent)
were at the senior level (P-5 level and above), as recommended in the context of the
reviews conducted in 2015. Six were at the P-4 level (32 per cent) and nine (47 per

19-17355

27/38

S/2019/800

cent) were at the P-3 level or below. 58 A dedicated gender and inclusion expert was
also available, upon request, through the standby team of me diation experts, and was
deployed 11 times during 2018; all members of the standby team are assessed for their
expertise in gender mainstreaming. An additional 94 staff were assigned gender focal
point duties, however only 28 (30 per cent) were at the P -4 level or above.
92. For the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (now the Department of Peace
Operations), 10 of the 15 peacekeeping missions active in 2018 had gender units with
dedicated staff to ensure the provision of direct strategic and technical s upport to
senior leadership at the mission level. However, only eight of those missions 59 had
relocated their gender units into the office of the head of mission and, of the 61 gender
advisers working across the 10 missions, only in three 60 missions (5 per cent) were
the advisers at the senior level (P-5). There were 12 advisers with expertise in gender
and combating sexual and gender-based violence placed in police components, 61
19 gender and protection advisers in military components 62 and two United Nations
Police specialized teams focused on combating sexual and gender-based violence
were deployed in Haiti and South Sudan. There were also 21 women ’s protection
advisers deployed in seven United Nations field missions. 63
93. Senior leaders within the United Nations recognize the need to improve
dedicated gender advisory capacity, in mission settings and at headquarters, ensuring
access for such advisers to influence decision-making. All United Nations entities,
particularly the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Department
of Peace Operations, will continue to advocate and integrate into budget discussions
recommendations to maintain the gender advisory capacity at senior levels,
demonstrating the centrality of gender analysis to long-term and sustainable
transitions out of conflict. I urge Member States to support the United Nations in
tackling this challenge by dedicating the necessary political and financial support.
94. Beyond peace operations, various members of United Nations country teams,
and particularly UN-Women, continued to provide dedicated support for the
implementation of commitments related to the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. UN-Women maintained a country presence in 82 countries,
including 39 conflict and post-conflict countries, and continued to implement a range
of peace, security and humanitarian initiatives in 55 countries. UN -Women has, in
line with United Nations reform initiatives, contributed its technical, political and
policy expertise to conducting joint assessments, analysis and cooperation plans for
countries such as Haiti and the Sudan.
95. The ability of the United Nations to respond to the challenges of ensuring
women’s human rights and development on the ground is contingent on the
consistency, quality and coherence of the gender analysis employed and its
__________________

Three staff members at the P-3 level, three at the P-2/P-1 level and two General Service level
staff members, as well as one United Nations Volunteer.
59
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA), United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP), United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL).
60
MONUSCO, United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and UNAMID.
61
UNMIK, United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), UNAMID,
MONUSCO, United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), UNMISS, MINUSMA
and MINUSCA.
62
MINUSMA, UNMISS, UNAMID, MINUSCA, MONUSCO, UNIFIL and UNISFA.
63
MINUSCA, MINUSMA, MONUSCO, UNAMID, UNMISS, United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq and United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM).
58

28/38

19-17355

S/2019/800

examination of the specific impact of conflict on women and girls, including on the
realization of their human rights. In my previous report, I illustrated not only the
utility of making this standard practice, but also the potential risks and costs
associated with the failure to do so, through the example of the gender-sensitive
conflict analysis undertaken in the Central African Republic (S/2018/900, para. 20),
where a wide range of issues related to the human rights of women and girls could
have gone entirely unrecognized.
3.

Financing the women and peace and security agenda
96. Resourcing is a key indicator of political will. An analysis of the financing
trends since 2015 indicates that, aside from a few promising developments and much
welcomed singular initiatives by individual funds and donors, there is still a massive
gap to close. If the gap remains unaddressed, I am afraid that the backslides in
progress made will continue, alongside a push-back against gender equality. In the
lead up to October 2020, I call upon all actors to back their political commitments by
demonstrated and scaled-up investment in efforts to realize gender equality and the
women and peace and security agenda. Not only is this essential on its own, but it
will also catalyse progress across other global commitments, including those outlined
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
97. Bilateral aid in support of mainstreaming gender equality and women ’s human
rights 64 in fragile and conflict-affected contexts reached an average of $19.5 billion
per year in the period 2016–2017. The overall share of aid for the promotion of gender
equality in some form in fragile country situations has increased to 42.6 per cent –
higher than ever before. However, only 4.9 per cent of that aid supported dedicated
programmes or projects with the primary objective of improving gender equality and
the empowerment of women, a level similar to previous years (see figure III).
Figure III
Bilateral aid targeting gender equality and the empowerment of women in
fragile or conflict-affected situations, 2010–2017

Source: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Creditor Reporting
System data. Available at http://stats.oecd.org (accessed in April 2019).

__________________
64

19-17355

Data collected through the OECD Development Assistance Committee gender equality policy
marker. Available at www.oecd.org/dac/gender-development/dac-gender-equality-marker.htm.
29/38

S/2019/800

98. The dedicated aid for gender equality initiatives continued to be contributed
mainly by a small group of major donors. 65 Some countries, such as the Netherlands,
Spain and Sweden, each committed more than 20 per cent of their aid with the
dedicated objective of advancing gender equality. Sweden now integrates women and
peace and security perspectives into all new strategies for development cooperation,
the latest of which are for Iraq and South Sudan.
99. In the coming year, I hope to see increased and diverse funding sources for
implementing the women and peace and security agenda. I welcome in this regard the
discussions on greater donor coordination taking place within the Women, Peace and
Security Focal Points Network. Noting that, in resolution 2467 (2019), the Security
Council recognized the importance of Member States fully funding national action
plans in order to make progress in the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda, I urge the Network to put forward recommendations to ensure that
action plans are adequately resourced and that allocations and expenditures can be
tracked. To date, only 18 plans (22 per cent) have included a budget at adoption.
National action plans with pooled funding mechanisms attached, as in the case of
Jordan, and the mainstreaming of actions across sectoral budgets, as in the fourth
plans of Norway, Switzerland and the United Kingdom, offer positive examples for
financing action plans.
100. Another issue requiring attention ahead of October 2020 is the gap between the
expressed recognition of the vital role that women’s organizations and movements
play in conflict-affected and fragile contexts and their continued lack of access to
sustainable funding sources. With regard to bilateral aid i n the period 2016–17,
$82 million went directly to women’s organizations, accounting for only 0.2 per cent
of total bilateral aid to fragile and conflict-affected situations. I welcome initiatives
such the new Equality Fund under the leadership of Canada, which is aimed at
activating a minimum of $1 billion over the next 15 years. In Myanmar, the Joint
Peace Fund, funded by the European Union and some of its States members, is another
example, allocating at least 15 per cent of funds to women and peace and security
projects implemented by civil society organizations. When Norway launched its third
national action plan in January 2019, it committed to doubling the funds made
available for the work of international and local civil society organizations on wome n
and peace and security initiatives in the context of peace and reconciliation efforts.
101. Increased efforts are also needed within the United Nations system. The high level task force on financing for gender equality, established in 2018, completed its
review of United Nations budgets and expenditure in 2019. The task force presented
a set of recommendations centred around the human and financial investment needed
for the Organization to deliver on its gender equality commitments. In the
recommendations, the task force emphasized the importance of establishing and
resourcing gender equality priorities in strategic plans, establishing baselines, targets
and financial benchmarks to ensure a robust gender architecture, ensuring systematic
financial tracking and reporting across the United Nations system and identifying
ways to increase the overall resource envelope for financing for gender equality.
102. Across the United Nations system, resource tracking and allocation remains one
of the poorest performing progress indicators, with only 16 entities reporting that they
are “meeting” or “exceeding” the requirements for this indicator. Additionally, in
relation to women and peace and security, the task force concluded that inadequate
resourcing of gender units, or their equivalents, undermined efforts to mainstream a

__________________
65

30/38

Including Canada, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States
and European Union institutions.
19-17355

S/2019/800

gender perspective and carry out mandates relating to gender equality, including those
set by the Security Council.
103. Only a few entities have committed to achieving minimum targets on allocatio n
or expenditure for gender equality, to date. Lack of baselines and weaknesses in
tracking systems, the screening of all expenditures and accountability frameworks
have all contributed to limited progress and measurability in this area. In contrast,
among the United Nations entities that have established financial targets and tracking,
there has been some progress made in linking financial resources with the achievement
of results. UNDP has increased its financing for gender equality in developing
countries from 48 per cent in 2017 to 56 per cent in 2018. Of the 56 per cent in 2018,
7 per cent had gender equality as a principal objective and 49 per cent had it as a
significant objective. In addition, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs has highlighted women and girls, including the prevention of and response to
gender-based violence, as a one of four key priority areas for funding consideration
as part of its Central Emergency Response Fund.
104. The demands on UN-Women for programming continued to rise. In 2018, total
expenditure by UN Women on peace and security programming and humanitarian
interventions rose to $89.44 million.
105. Pooled funds, as demonstrated by the Peacebuilding Fund, can be strategic tools
to incentivize financing for gender equality in peace and security programming. Since
2004, the United Nations multi-partner trust fund office has managed over $10 billion
in funding through 148 funds, supporting activities in over 110 countries, with
52 participating United Nations entities and 98 donors. Among the 90 funds analysed,
57 had explicit commitments 66 to promoting gender equality (63 per cent). However,
strong commitments to gender equality reflected in language are not always supported
by the actual programme design and financing. As at June 2019, only 10 funds used
gender equality markers to track and report the proportion of funding allocated for
gender equality programming. 67 The progress made by the Peacebuilding Fund is
attributable to several factors, including its having a feasible action plan and a clear
methodology for tracking resource allocation and consistent championing by senior
management to meet and surpass minimum funding targets. Of the $183 million
approved in 2018, 40 per cent was dedicated to promoting gender equality and the
empowerment of women, exceeding the United Nations minimum target of 15 per
cent and the revised 30 per cent target set by the Peacebuilding Fund. 68 I welcome the
United Nations multi-partner trust fund office’s new initiative to incorporate gender
equality markers into standardized reporting for pooled funds and encourage
participating organizations to integrate gender equality into their planning,
implementation and reporting.
106. Analysis shows that not all multi-partner trust funds are equally financed and,
when compared with four of the largest pooled funds by contribution, the three United

__________________

Each fund’s terms of reference and operational manual was analysed.
UN-Women analysis of the annual narrative report of the United Nations multi-donor trust fund
for 2018, issued by the United Nations multi-partner trust fund office in June 2019. The 10 funds
included: Afghanistan Humanitarian Fund, Central African Republic Humanitarian Fund,
Democratic Republic of the Congo Stabilization Coherence Fund, Peacebuilding Fund, Somalia
Humanitarian Fund, South Sudan Humanitarian Fund, Sudan Humanitarian Fund, Women ’s
Peace and Humanitarian Fund, Central Emergency Response Fund of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and country-based pooled fund of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
68
Peacebuilding Fund strategic plan for the period 2017–2019. Available at www.un.org/
peacebuilding/sites/www.un.org.peacebuilding/files/documents/pbf_sp_2017 -19_final_180327.pdf.
66
67

19-17355

31/38

S/2019/800

Nations funds that address gender equality and the empowerment of women have very
limited resources (see figure IV).
Figure IV
Financial contributions received by multi-donor trust funds, 2018

Source: UNDP multi-partner trust fund office (http://mptf.undp.org) and the response of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to the women and peace and security survey conducted in 2019.
Abbreviation: M, millions of United States dollars.

107. The Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund has established its role as an
innovative mechanism supporting impactful peacebuilding and humanitarian
initiatives led by grass-roots civil society organizations. To date, the Fund has funded
56 civil society organizations in Burundi, Colombia, Fiji, Iraq, Jordan, Palau, Samoa,
Solomon Islands, Tonga and Vanuatu. Within its three years of operation, the Fund
has reached over 76,000 women and girls directly and over 3 million individuals in
total. 69 In 2018, I called upon Member States to increase their funding to the Fund to
help it reach its target of $40 million by the end of 2020. I am pleased to report that
the Fund has experienced significant growth during the reporting period and has
already raised $20 million of its $40 million goal. The additional contributions made
by Member States, companies and individuals have allowed the Fund to open offices
in six new countries in Africa and in the Occupied Palestinian Territory. I welcome
the dedicated funding from the Spotlight Initiative, the joint effort of the European
Union and the United Nations to eliminate violence against women and girls, and I
encourage the documenting of the synergies across the Fund, the Initiative and the
Peacebuilding Fund and the recognition of the peace, humanitarian and development
linkages.

IV. Work of the Security Council
108. I am pleased to report progress made in several areas of the work of the Security
Council. In 2018, 72 per cent of all decisions adopted by the Security Council
contained explicit references to women and peace and security issues, a higher
percentage than in any other year except 2013. In 2018, all of the visiting missions
undertaken by the Security Council, to Afghanistan, to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, to South Sudan and to Bangladesh and Myanmar integrated elements
__________________
69

32/38

See https://wphfund.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/WHPF-4Pager-7-Aug-2019.pdf.
19-17355

S/2019/800

concerning women and peace and security and included meetings with local women’s
groups. In the past few years, the Security Council has also strengthened the mandates
of peace operations by calling for strengthened consideration of gender equality as a
cross-cutting mandate, concerted support for the participation of women in peace and
political processes, the conduct of more robust gender analyses and stronger and more
explicit reporting on such progress.
109. While all of my reports on the work of special political missions (100 pe r cent)
and 90 per cent of reports by peacekeeping missions included information on women
and peace and security or the violation of the human rights of women and girls, I
recognize that the analytical quality of this information and links to actionable
recommendations must be strengthened. Fewer than 20 per cent of Security Council
resolutions in 2018 contained references to the importance of, and the need to ensure,
the fundamental rights and freedoms of women human rights defenders and members
of civil society and women’s groups. The overall trend has been a decrease in such
references over time.
110. I welcome the call, in Security Council resolution 2467 (2019), for States to
condemn threats, attacks and restrictions on the work of civil society organizations,
and I recognize the need to develop gender-sensitive measures, in consultation with
defenders, to protect them and to enable them to do their work. I cannot emphasize
enough the importance of the Security Council expressing support for the invaluable
work carried out by civil society actors, particularly women human rights defenders
and peacebuilders, in particular those in conflict-affected settings, and speaking out
against threats and attacks.
111. In 2018, the Security Council invited a total of 350 speakers under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure, of whom 30 per cent were women, an increase
compared with the previous record of 24 per cent in 2017. The Deputy Secretary General provided a briefing to the Council on the joint high-level visit that she led to
the Sahel, which was undertaken by United Nations and African Union officials. The
Executive Director of UN-Women and my Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict also provided briefings to the Council on their respective mandates.
Briefings provided by women representing civil society are important opportunities
for providing the Council with their perspectives. In 2018, women civil society
representatives were invited to provide briefings at 13 country-specific meetings and
at 13 thematic meetings.
112. It is encouraging that the invitations for country-specific meetings, called for in
resolution 2242 (2015), have gradually become an established feature of the practice
and working methods of the Security Council. I recognize and thank the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security for its crucial role in selecting the
speakers and facilitating their participation. Women civil society representatives that
are directly affected by the crises and conflicts under consideration provide critical
insights and recommendations for Security Council members. In 2018, women from
civil society groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo described the political
representation barriers that they faced in the lead up to the country’s first election
since 2011. South Sudanese women civil society activists warned of non -compliance
with the gender equality-related provisions of the peace agreement. Others demanded
respect for women’s rights and the meaningful participation of women in peace
negotiations in Afghanistan, Libya and Yemen and gave visibility to both the
peacebuilding work of local women’s organizations and the limitations that they must
overcome, from limited funding to targeted attacks against women activists. I
encourage Security Council members to consider how they can assist in implementing
the strategic recommendations put forward by civil society repres entatives.

19-17355

33/38

S/2019/800

113. I am extremely concerned to hear reports of civil society members having been
threatened after they have delivered briefings to the Security Council. I urge Council
members to explicitly condemn all forms of intimidation and reprisals again st civil
society representatives and those who provide briefings to the Council and to work
with those individuals to determine the appropriate responses, on a case by case basis.
114. The formation of the Security Council Informal Expert Group on Women a nd
Peace and Security in 2016 emanated from the global study on the implementation of
Council resolution 1325 (2000), conducted in 2015. I am pleased that it has since
become a proven conduit for strengthened analysis on matters relating to women and
peace and security and for discussions on the more considered implementation of the
results of its analysis among senior mission leadership and Council members. I
continue to urge all Council members to draw on the information and analysis
discussed at those meetings and actively participate in this important platform. In
2018, the Expert Group was chaired jointly by Peru and Sweden, in partnership with
the United Kingdom, and convened meetings on the situations in the Central African
Republic (S/2018/1087), the Democratic Republic of Congo (S/2018/362 and
S/2018/885), Iraq (S/2018/475), Libya (S/2018/881 and S/2018/1139), Mali and the
Sahel region (S/2018/688) and the Lake Chad Basin (S/2018/188).
115. Effective follow-up on Informal Expert Group recommendations must involve
subsidiary bodies, including sanctions committees. Nine of 14 existing sanctions
regimes now include direct or indirect references to combating sexual and gender based violence in their recommendations. 70 Expert groups that are the primary source
of information and recommendations for designations to sanctions committees must
have adequate resources and dedicated expertise in gender equality and conflict related sexual violence and make recommendations to list individuals and entities on
that basis, as well as update the narrative accounts of individuals already listed to
reflect crimes of gender-based and sexual violence. In resolution 2467 (2019), the
Council reiterated this imperative, and I will task the relevant entities to su pport those
efforts.

V. Concluding observations and recommendations
116. The report highlights a number of areas in which progress has been made in
advancing the women and peace and security agenda, yet much more remains to be
done. We cannot afford to backslide – not least because progress on the women and
peace and security agenda is closely linked to the full realization of the Sustainable
Development Goals. Women are missing from negotiating tables, and peace
agreements are passed without provisions considering the needs and priorities of
women and girls. Violent misogyny is on the rise, and sexual and gender-based
violence continues to be used as a weapon of war and terror and the survivors of such
violence left without justice or support. The rep eated calls of women’s civil society
groups and peacebuilders for disarmament, arms control and the shifting of military
__________________
70

34/38

Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the
Central African Republic, Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017) concerning Mali, Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia, Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan, Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan and
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014).
19-17355

S/2019/800

spending to social investment are left unanswered. Insufficient action has been taken
to align national laws and policies with global commitments on gender equality.
117. We must do better to ensure that we meet our own commitments. I recommit to
elevating the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda – a central
objective of my tenure as Secretary-General. I urge Member States to join me in
efforts in this regard.
118. We must accept our shared responsibility to increase inclusion and eradicate
discrimination on the basis of race, religion, sexual orientation and gender identity,
ability, age or other status. Efforts to support and resource the meaningful
participation of women in peace and security processes must be urgently enhanced,
as must endeavours to promote women’s civil society organizations, peacebuilders
and human rights defenders as key political constituents in the maintenance of peace
and security. The collective promotion of women’s human rights must ensure access
for women to political, economic, financial and natural resources, decision -making
and comprehensive sexual and reproductive health services, without discrimination.
It is essential to the fulfilment of normative commitments and legal obligations and a
necessary response to an evidence base that cannot be ignored: the existence of gender
inequality and gender-based violence in a society is deeply connected to that society’s
risk of descending into violent conflict. The global threat of climate change and
environmental degradation is poised to exacerbate the already increasing number of
complex emergencies, which disproportionately affect women and girls. There is
therefore an urgent need for better analysis and concrete, immediate actions to address
the linkages between climate change and conflict from a gender perspective.
119. In the months leading up to the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), I urge United Nations entities, Member States and regional
organizations and other actors to join together to take action in the following six areas:
• Make leadership accountable for the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda, through targeted data collection, joined-up
analysis, strategic planning and raised visibility;
• Enable, facilitate and ensure the meaningful participation of women in
peace processes, the implementation of peace agreements and in all peace
and security decision-making processes;
• Publicly condemn human rights violations and discrimination and prevent
all forms of gender-based violence, including against women human rights
defenders;
• Increase the number and influence of women uniformed personnel in
peacekeeping missions and national security services;
• Guarantee access for women to economic security and resources;
• Finance the women and peace and security agenda and invest in women
peacebuilders.

A.

Immediate actions to be taken by the United Nations
120. United Nations entities must take steps to accelerate progress in delivering on
the recommendations of the three reviews conducted in 2015, as reflected in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2015/716), complemented by the findings of the
independent assessment, particularly on the urgent need for leadership, accountability
and financial support. The relevant departments and entities and I have therefore
agreed upon the following ten core commitments:

19-17355

35/38

S/2019/800

(a) Senior compacts, terms of reference and directives for senior leadership at
headquarters, missions and country offices, including heads of entities, special
envoys, special representatives, resident coordinators and humanitarian coordinators
will be updated, as appropriate, to reflect the fulfilment of commitments on the
women and peace and security agenda and gender mainstreaming. An objective
related to women and peace and security has been included in all senior managers’
compacts related to core peace and security mandates for the 2019/20 cycle;
(b) All senior United Nations officials will ensure that public messages and
statements, as well as other forms of engagement, with all stakeholders, reinforce the
importance of realizing the full range of women’s human rights, gender equality, the
women and peace and security agenda and the legitimacy and value of the work of
women human rights defenders and peacebuilders;
(c) Gender equality and the women and peace and security agenda, as both
stand-alone and integrated goals, with provisions for expertise in gender equality,
resources and monitoring and reporting will be included in United Nations strategic
planning and prioritization policies, processes, frameworks, initiatives and guidance
tools at the global, regional and country levels, which includes the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, priority peacebuilding plans,
humanitarian needs overviews, humanitarian response plans and integrated planning
policies, including in transition processes and planning. United Nations entities will
strengthen accountability to the women and peace and security agenda by reinforcing
internal monitoring frameworks in support of system-wide efforts;
(d) Heads of responsible entities will ensure that all country-specific and
thematic reports to the Security Council, briefings provided by senior staff and all
country-specific and regional United Nations strategies and plans consistently
integrate gender-responsive conflict analysis and engagement with diverse women ’s
civil society organizations;
(e) All United Nations entities operating in fragile, conflict and crisis affected
settings will meaningfully engage, consult and partner with diverse women’s human
rights actors, including civil society and rights defenders, to inform their analysis,
planning, programmatic work, its implementation, the monitoring of outcomes and
messaging;
(f) Heads of entities and missions will prioritize and budget for dedicated
capacity and expertise within their offices, including at senior levels, on the
implementation of the women and peace and security agenda in assessed budget and
extrabudgetary requests to Member States in special political missions and
peacekeeping operations and ensure that posts are filled and placed within offices of
senior leadership;
(g) United Nations country teams will set benchmarks to reach the target to
allocate a minimum of 15 per cent of programmatic budgets to gender equality and
the empowerment of women and improve the mainstreaming of gender in all areas of
expenditure. In line with the recommendations of the high -level task force on
financing for gender equality, by 2020, targets and financial allocations on gender
equality must increase and an accountability mechanism be established to track
allocations;
(h) The Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs will be responsible
for organizing context-specific high-level strategy meetings with each special envoy
or special representative, key staff and experts on designing and supporting inclusive
processes, at the start of every mediation process and every subsequent year for
ongoing processes;

36/38

19-17355

S/2019/800

(i) Special representatives and special envoys, during the conduct of peace
processes led by the United Nations, will actively promote and facilitate the
meaningful participation of women, including with the parties to the process, and
consistently advocate for the direct participation of women leaders a nd local women’s
organizations in all peace processes, including through partnership and joint efforts
with regional organizations and other relevant stakeholders;
(j) United Nations entities are requested to identify resources in support of
the meaningful participation of women in peace negotiations and the implementation
of peace agreements, and the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund is called upon
to consider opening a rapid response window that allows for such support for women
to participate in peace negotiations and the implementation of peace agreements.

B.

Actions that Member States and regional organizations are
encouraged to take
121. The implementation of the women and peace and security agenda is the
responsibility of all Member States. I encourage all Member States to implement the
operational paragraphs of the related Security Council resolutions and fulfil their
human rights obligations, as well as to implement the recommendations contained in
my previous reports on women and peace and security. The year 2020 is an
opportunity to report on progress made and to take action to close the remaining gaps.
I urge all Member States and regional and subregional organizations:
(a) To track and report on gender-specific measures in national and foreign
policies, development and humanitarian assistance and diplomatic engagements and
appointments to identify progress and gaps relating to women and peace and security
priorities, with a view to stepping up action;
(b) To adopt a national action plan on women and peace and security that is
impact driven, inclusive, resourced and monitored and ensure that localization is a
key priority and output;
(c) To create dedicated legal, social and physical protection measures for, and
in consultation with, women civil society actors who experience threats, harassment,
violence and hate speech by State and non-State actors;
(d) To increase funding on efforts to implement the women and peace and
security agenda, including direct, dedicated and flexible financing for women’s civil
society, support to the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund to surpass its
$40 million target by 2020 and funding to global, regional and local women ’s funds.
Integrate recommendations on maintaining a gender advisory capacity at senior l evels
in budget negotiations, including in the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly,
and support UN-Women.
(e) To nominate and support the appointment of women as mediators and
negotiators participating in all formal peace processes, ensure inclusive delegations
and consistently demand the increased, direct and meaningful participation of women
in monitoring and the implementation of peace agreements;
(f) To support rapid response funds to advance the meaningful participation
of women in peace processes, which includes financial support for travel, visas,
childcare, translation and related expenses, in particular by providing resources to the
new window in the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund;
(g) To increase the number of women deployed as uniformed personnel to
peace operations, including in senior roles, and adopt specific measures to address

19-17355

37/38

S/2019/800

persistent social, cultural and political barriers to the full participation of women in
the security sector and in law enforcement bodies;
(h) To ensure the participation of women’s civil society organizations in
planning and decision-making on post-conflict reconstruction and recovery financing,
management and monitoring, including in resource allocations;
(i) To undertake gender-sensitive assessments of counter-terrorism policies to
ensure their compliance with international human rights law and international
humanitarian law;
(j) To consider ratifying the Arms Trade Treaty, reducing excessive military
expenditures and controlling the availability of armaments, and promote the
participation of women in all arms control and disarmament processes and forums,
including at global disarmament meetings.

C.

Immediate action that the Security Council is encouraged to take
122. I strongly urge Security Council members, with the support of UN-Women as
secretariat of the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security, and the
Security Council Affairs Division to undertake the following:
(a) Ensure that statements raise relevant women and peace and se curity issues
in both country-specific and thematic meetings;
(b) Ensure that mission mandates include concrete language requiring the
meaningful participation of women in peace and security efforts, including in the
monitoring and implementation of ceasefires and the follow-up mechanisms
contained in peace agreements;
(c) Require reporting from the United Nations on specific steps undertaken
and progress towards achieving those requirements as part of a mission ’s priority
tasks and ensure reporting from senior leadership in their briefings to the Council;
(d) Require gender analyses and concrete recommendations at all stages of
mission analysis, planning, implementation, including transitions, and reporting and,
when information provided in reports or briefings by senior officials is insufficient,
make note of the omission and formally request its inclusion;
(e) Track and regularly follow up on the implementation of recommendations
presented at meetings of the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security and raised by civil society members who provide briefings, including by
requesting updates from the senior leadership through periodic reports and briefings;
(f) The joint chairs of the Expert Group should circulate annually a
comprehensive update on progress towards implementing recommendations of the
Expert Group, to be issued as an official document of the Security Council. In all
formal Council meetings on situations discussed by the Expert Group, the joint chairs
should include updates related to the recommendations contained in their regular
statements to the body;
(g) Ensure that expert groups and monitoring teams have adequate resources
and dedicated expertise in gender equality and sexual and gender-based violence.

38/38

19-17355
