A /75/PV.55

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

55th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 23 February 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 65 (continued)
The situation in the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): The United Nations is a
critical pillar of multilateralism and plays a central role
in ensuring that all involved in addressing peace and
security concerns uphold the purposes and principles of
the Organization. There is no alternative to commonly
agreed norms and their universal application.
Support for that role of the United Nations and
for safeguarding its collective security, political
and humanitarian mechanisms is crucial for the
maintenance of peace, stability and sustainable
development. Coherent global responses and common
efforts coordinated by the United Nations are the most
effective ways to address conflicts; fight climate change
and global terrorism; manage forced displacement and
migratory flows; address the challenges arising from
the coronavirus disease pandemic; and achieve the
goals of peace, inclusive sustainable development and
human rights for all.
Azerbaijan voted in favour of resolution 68/262
of 27 March 2014, entitled “Territorial integrity of
Ukraine”, and our position on the support for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders remains unchanged.
In situations involving international disputes, armed
conflicts or political crises in inter-State relations,

solutions must be consistent with international law,
particularly where fundamental norms are concerned,
such as those relating to the obligation to respect
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of States. Strict compliance with the
norms and principles of international law concerning
friendly relations and cooperation among States and the
fulfilment in good faith of the obligations assumed by
States are of the greatest importance for the maintenance
of international peace and security.
Mr. Altarsha (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My country has always been committed to
respecting the sovereignty of States and non-interference
in their internal affairs. We have supported attempts to
impose security and stability on any unstable place in
the world given our belief in and the value of dialogue
in international relations.
Consequently, the Syrian Arab Republic remains
convinced that the inclusion of the item entitled “The
situation in the temporarily occupied territories of
Ukraine” on the agenda of the General Assembly
constitutes an irresponsible unilateral politicized
action that reflects the desire of some Governments
to aggravate the situation in that region so as to settle
scores with the Russian Federation, even at the expense
of regional and international security and stability and
to the detriment of the established historical relations
between the two countries.
That issue is governed by clear and transparent
legal principles based on the Charter of the United
Nations and relevant international conventions, as well

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-04975 (E)

*2104975*

A/75/PV.55

as international law. That is why we should reconsider
the issue of including this item on the General
Assembly’s agenda.
Allow me to elucidate most of those important legal
and procedural principles.
First, the consideration of this matter by the
General Assembly is at odds with the Security Council’s
mandate and violates Article 12 of the United Nations
Charter, which stipulates in paragraph 1 that,
“[w]hile the Security Council is exercising in
respect of any dispute or situation the functions
assigned to it in the present Charter, the General
Assembly shall not make any recommendation
with regard to that dispute or situation unless the
Security Council so requests”.
In that context, we stress that the imposition of
the term “temporarily occupied territories” in the title
of this agenda item does not change the reality of the
matter, which falls within the purview of the Security
Council as reflected in resolution 2202 (2015).
Secondly, the situation in that region is governed
by the provisions of the Minsk agreements and other
agreements supported by the United Nations through
resolution 2202 (2015), including annexes I and II
to that resolution, as well as presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/12.
We reiterate that the implementation of Minsk
agreements and resolution 2202 (2015) requires the
genuine political will of all the parties. Joint action
is needed in order to restore security and stability
in Ukraine and normalize the historical relations
between the two neighbourly countries, Ukraine and
the Russian Federation. That must be achieved without
any negative interference by Governments that claim to
be committed to the interests of Ukraine even as they
escalate tensions in that country, call for a return to the
Cold War, establish a hostile environment and create
imaginary enemies, while supplying heavy weaponry,
including intermediate and long-range missiles, thus
undermining security in that region.
We therefore consider agenda item 65 and today’s
meeting as a new and unfortunate attempt to hinder the
implementation of the Minsk agreements and resolution
2202 (2015) and to undermine international efforts
to resolve the dispute and implement the measures
supported under the Normandy format.
2/19

23/02/2021

In conclusion, we will always caution against the
negative tendency of certain Member States that seek
to take advantage of the General Assembly agenda
and exhaust the energy and resources of the United
Nations so as to undermine the fundamental and noble
objectives and purposes of this Organization. They are
using it as a means to exercise polarization and deepen
divisions, rather than promoting unity, peace, security
and sustainable development for all, including Ukraine.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, my
delegation aligns itself with the statement made earlier
today by the observer of the European Union (see A/75/
PV.54) . I would like to add the following comments in
my national capacity.
This month marks seven years since the Russian
armed aggression against Ukraine. After seven
years, the security, humanitarian and human rights
situation on the ground continues to deteriorate on a
daily basis. To date, Russia’s aggression against its
sovereign neighbour Ukraine has claimed the lives of
more than 13,000 Ukrainian citizens and injured more
than 29,000. Up to 3.5 million people are in need of
humanitarian assistance and up to 1.5 million have
been displaced — forced to flee their homes and
communities in eastern Ukraine.
The Russian Federation continues to supply its
occupation forces with heavy weaponry, regular
troops and mercenaries. According to the United
Nations, the territory has already become one of the
most mine-contaminated in the world. In addition to
conventional warfare, the hybrid war against Ukraine is
in full swing through, inter alia, the use of propaganda,
disinformation, economic pressure and cyberattacks.
Against the backdrop of the Secretary-General’s
appeal for an immediate global ceasefire amid the
pandemic, we note with concern the recent spike in
violations. We are very concerned about the continuing
civilian casualties, which result in large part from
mines and other explosive devices. The figures are
alarming. Of the 51 cases reported, 38 were caused by
mines and unexploded ordnance and regrettably 12 of
them were fatalities.
In that regard, we believe that the agreements on
security issues, including those on the identification
of new demining areas, have to be finalized in the
Trilateral Contact Group. Following the Group’s
first meeting in 2021, we call upon Russia to engage
constructively in the Group’s work in order to achieve
21-04975

23/02/2021

progress on important issues, particularly the mutual
release of detainees and the opening of the Zolote and
Schastya entry and exit checkpoints.
We remain very concerned about the humanitarian
situation, the human rights violations and the harsh
living conditions of the population affected by the
ongoing Russian aggression in the temporarily
occupied territories of Ukraine, including restrictions
on the freedom of movement, the freedom of opinion
and expression, the freedom of association, the freedom
of thought and the freedom of religion; extrajudicial
killings; arbitrary detentions; torture and ill treatment
in detention; forced transfers; violations of fair trial
rights; violations of property rights; and violations of
the right to maintain one’s identity, culture and tradition.
We are concerned about the persecution and
harassment of civil society activists, human rights
advocates, journalists and lawyers, including ethnic
Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars, who are particular
targets of the violations I mentioned. Many of them,
after being detained on political grounds, remain
illegally imprisoned in Russia-occupied Crimea and
continue to face inhumane conditions, intimidation,
torture and ill-treatment and to receive inadequate
medical assistance.
The introduction of the Russian currency, language
and legislation in the temporarily occupied territories of
eastern Ukraine is unacceptable and must be reversed.
Moreover, we condemn the targeted policy of the
occupying Power with respect to the forced imposition
of Russian citizenship and the illegal conscription of
Ukrainian citizens living in Crimea to serve in the
armed forces of the Russian Federation, as well as the
artificial change in the demographic make-up of the
population of the temporarily occupied Crimea.
It is alarming that even amid the pandemic, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights has been once again denied access to
the temporarily occupied territories. The Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe has also been
systematically denied access to the illegally annexed
Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol, and the area along the Ukraine-Russia State
border — in clear violation of the Mission’s mandate,
which covers the whole territory of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders.

A/75/PV.55

Unfortunately, Russia’s aggression and occupation
policy against its neighbours is not new but rather
a part of its clear-cut operational pattern, well tested
against my own country, Georgia, since we regained
independence in 1991. Instigating conflicts, exercising
direct military aggression, using a combination of
political, economic and military pressure, launching
cyberattacks, coordinating disinformation campaigns
and derailing the peace process have been systematically
used by Russia to thwart the foreign policy aspirations
of its neighbouring States, including my own country.
The cases of Georgia and Ukraine represent a vivid and
unmistakable attestation of Russia’s maligned strategy
in the region.
We once again urge the Russian Federation to
comply with its obligation as an occupying Power
under international humanitarian law and to fulfil its
neglected commitments. I also take this opportunity
to once again call on Russia to fulfil its international
obligations, inter alia, the European Union-mediated
ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008. We also reiterate
our call on Russia to grant international and regional
human rights monitoring mechanisms unimpeded and
immediate access to the occupied territories of Ukraine
and Georgia.
In conclusion, Georgia reiterates its firm support
for Ukrainian independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders
and territorial waters. We do not and will not recognize
the illegal annexation of Crimea. We call on all
other States to refrain from any action that might be
interpreted as a recognition of Crimea.
Mr. Poveda Brito (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela takes the floor to reiterate its desire for a
peaceful settlement in Ukraine.
That is why our delegation considers it inappropriate
to alter any of the existing settlement formats. In that
regard, resolution 2202 (2015), which endorsed the
Minsk agreements and makes no reference to “occupied
territories”, as well as the package of measures for their
implementation, provide a solid basis for a peaceful
settlement under international law, while allowing for
a political and goodwill solution so that stability and
peace can prevail in that region. Moreover, addressing
that issue here is in itself a violation of the provisions of
Article 12 of the United Nations Charter.

21-049753/19

A/75/PV.55

23/02/2021

It is our delegation’s firm conviction that the issue
at hand primarily concerns the two States involved. An
external solution will not work unless it is supported
by both States. We therefore make a call to avoid
politicizing the work of the General Assembly and
attempting to use this organ to attack another full
Member State of our Organization, particularly in
these difficult times of the pandemic, when we are on
the contrary called upon to work together to strengthen
international cooperation and solidarity in order to
overcome a human crisis without precedent in the past
100 years.

First, the Republic of Moldova recalls its steadfast
support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
We believe that the bilateral and multilateral agreements
reached constitute international law and need to be
observed, including in the case of Ukraine.

Finally, we respectfully call on the Ukrainian
Government to show concrete signs of its political will
to engage in genuine dialogue and work collectively for
the restoration of peace and stability in that country, as
well as for the normalization of relations between the
two neighbouring countries of Ukraine and Russia.

Secondly, the Republic of Moldova supports
international efforts to identify a peaceful solution to
the conflict in eastern Ukraine on the basis of the Minsk
agreements and under the auspices of the Normandy
format. The current ceasefire shows that the Normandy
format, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and the Trilateral Contact Group
are well positioned to promote the de-escalation of the
situation in the conflict zone.

Mr. Nicolenco (Republic of Moldova): The situation
in and around Ukraine remains a matter of ongoing and
serious concern for the international community.
The Republic of Moldova continues to follow
with great concern the situation in Ukraine, a friendly
neighbouring country. In that context, my delegation
co-sponsored all resolutions on Ukraine adopted by
the General Assembly and supported the inclusion
of item 65, entitled “The situation in the temporarily
occupied territories of Ukraine”, in the agenda of the
current session.
There is no alternative to the peaceful settlement
of conflicts based on respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of countries within their
internationally recognized borders. In that connection,
we particularly support diplomatic efforts aimed at the
political resolution of the crisis in Ukraine.
Moreover, we reaffirm that by considering the
matters arising from challenges to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Member States in a constructive
and non-politicized manner, the General Assembly can
encourage and promote approaches and solutions based
on the strict observance of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the European Union (see A/75/
PV.54). I would also like to make the following remarks
in my national capacity.
4/19

Furthermore, my country does not recognize the
illegal annexation of the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, which constitutes
a violation of the principles and norms of international
law, with serious repercussions for the international
legal order and international security.

In that vein, the Republic of Moldova calls upon
all sides to swiftly and fully implement the Minsk
agreements and deliver on their commitments in
strict compliance with, and with full respect for, the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Thirdly, in accordance with Ukraine’s requests,
we consider that the deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping mission on the ground that would act
in unison with the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine (SMM) could give impetus to the political
process for a peaceful settlement.
Last but not least, the Republic of Moldova
commends the SMM’s activities and will continue to
contribute to the fulfilment of the Mission’s mandate,
including through the participation of more than 40
Moldovan citizens.
Against that backdrop, it is worth mentioning that
as a neighbouring country, Ukraine has played and
continues to play an important role as a mediator in the
“5+2” format of the Transnistrian conflict settlement.
Likewise, its military observers continue to be a part
of the peacekeeping mechanism in the eastern part of
our country.
We acknowledge and appreciate Ukraine’s
invaluable support and reaffirm the interest of the
21-04975

23/02/2021

A/75/PV.55

Republic of Moldova in boosting the excellent bilateral
cooperation with Ukraine.
In conclusion, the central reason for today’s
deliberation is not only the situation in and around
Ukraine but also the stability and security of our
region, which cannot be achieved if the international
community and especially the United Nations continue
to tolerate acts that threaten and undermine the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, along
with that of other countries in the region.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 65.
Agenda item 9 (continued)
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Draft decision (A/75/L.58)
The President: The General Assembly will now
take action on the draft decision entitled “2021 United
Nations Population Award”, issued as document
A/75/L.58. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
adopt draft decision A/75/L.58?
Draft
decision
(decision 75/557).

A/75/L.58

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 9.
Agenda item 10
Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment
on HIV/AIDS and the political declarations on HIV/
AIDS
Draft resolution (A/75/L.59)
Draft amendments (A/75/L.60 and A/75/L.61)
The President: The General Assembly will now
take action on the draft resolution entitled “Organization
of the 2021 high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS”, issued
as document A/75/L.59, and the draft amendments
contained in documents A/75/L.60 and A/75/L.61.
Members are reminded that debate on the item will
be held during the high-level meeting.
In June 2016, the General Assembly adopted its
resolution 70/266, entitled “Political Declaration on

HIV and AIDS: On the Fast Track to Accelerating the
Fight against HIV and to Ending the AIDS Epidemic
by 2030”. Through that resolution, the Assembly
decided to convene a high-level meeting on HIV and
AIDS to review progress on the commitments made in
the Declaration towards ending the AIDS epidemic by
2030 and how the response, in its social, economic and
political dimensions, continues to contribute optimally
to progress on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the global health goal.
In accordance with that mandate, the two
co-Chairs, His Excellency Ambassador Mitchell
Fifield, Permanent Representative of Australia, and
His Excellency Mr. Neville Melvin Gertze, Permanent
Representative of Namibia, have been working with
Member States to determine the modalities of the highlevel meeting on HIV and AIDS.
On behalf of all Member States, I would like to
express my thanks and appreciation to Ambassador
Fifield and Ambassador Gertze for their valuable
work on this process over the past months. As I have
transmitted in my letter dated 18 February 2021, the
co-facilitators informed the membership about the steps
that they have taken to find a compromise proposal
on the draft modalities of the high-level meeting, and
they submitted the final version of the draft resolution
for adoption during the next plenary of the General
Assembly; hence the draft is before members today.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
United Kingdom to introduce the draft amendment
contained in document A/75/L.60.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): May I begin by
joining you, Mr. President, in warmly thanking our
co-facilitators, the Permanent Representatives of
Australia and Namibia, for their excellent work on this
text. We look forward to participating fully in the highlevel meeting on HIV and AIDS to be held in June.
We bring draft amendment A/75/L.60 today with
support from more than 50 countries, because we have
serious concerns about the restrictive language on
civil-society participation and access created by the
current text.
Our proposed amendment is not controversial. Full
civil-society participation in this meeting has a long
history. Quite rightly, HIV and AIDS is an issue where
civil society has played a critical role over the years. But
language in the 2016 text allowed a handful of Member

21-049755/19

A/75/PV.55

States to arbitrarily block certain non-governmental
organizations. So we propose this draft amendment to
return to the practice before 2016 and to ensure that all
civil-society voices can be heard.
The amendment seeks to return the Assembly to
our consensus approach of 2001, 2006 and 2011. It
amends the language from 2016 because that language
allowed individual Member States to unilaterally and
arbitrarily block 22 civil-society organizations from
participating in the meeting. In doing so, they denied
the voices of legitimate partners, people with real
experience of this issue and people we ought to hear
from — people, indeed, who can inform our thinking
with their knowledge and experience.
Our draft amendment does not remove all check
or control. It simply seeks to give the decision-making
power back to the General Assembly as a whole rather
than to any single Member State. It empowers us to take
a corporate decision on whom we as the Assembly can
and cannot hear, and it removes the power of censorship
from individual States.
For me, this is also slightly personal. I grew up in
South Africa, where I saw first-hand the critical role
that civil society had played over the last decades in
the fight against HIV and AIDS. They are on the front
line fighting stigma, championing facts and working
to bring medicine to those who need it, as well as
standing up for the poor and the vulnerable. Their voice
is invaluable and irreplaceable.
So we call on all Member States to join us in
co-sponsoring the draft amendment and to vote in
favour. Hearing from all relevant voices in our global
fight against HIV depends on their support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation to introduce
the draft amendment contained in document A/75/L.61.
Mr. Konstantinopolskiy (Russian Federation)
(spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation, the
Republic of Belarus, the Republic of Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran and the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia are proposing draft amendment A/75/L.61 to
operative paragraph 8 of draft resolution A/75/L.59,
with the following content:
“In operative paragraph 8, delete ‘including
key populations,’.
6/19

23/02/2021

During the negotiations on the draft, Member States
were not able to reach a consensus on that passage,
which is on something that is not the subject of the draft
resolution — the modalities for the high-level meeting.
From the point of view of the content, that is already
taken into account in the wording: “people living with,
at risk of or affected by HIV”.
The President: The Assembly will now proceed
to consider draft resolution A/75/L.59 and the draft
amendments contained in documents A/75/L.60 and
A/75/L.61.
In that connection, I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The present statement is
made in the context of rule 153 of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of operative paragraphs 1, 2, 8,
13 and 15 of draft resolution A/75/L.59, the General
Assembly would, in operative paragraph 1, decide
“to convene a high-level meeting from 8 to 10 June
2021, which will undertake a comprehensive
review of the progress on the commitments made
in the 2016 Political Declaration towards ending
the AIDS epidemic by 2030, and how the response,
in its social, economic and political dimensions,
continues to contribute optimally to progress on
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the global health goal, including successes,
best practices, lessons learned, obstacles and
gaps, challenges and opportunities, including
with regard to partnership and cooperation, and
recommendations to guide and monitor the HIV/
AIDS response beyond 2021, including new
concrete commitments to accelerate action to end
the AIDS epidemic by 2030 as well as to promote the
renewed commitment and engagement of leaders,
countries, communities and partners to accelerate
and implement a comprehensive universal and
integrated response to HIV/AIDS”;
Under operative paragraph 2, it would also decide
“that the organizational arrangements for the highlevel meeting should be as follows:
(a) The high-level meeting will consist of:
(i) An opening segment with statements by the
President of the General Assembly, the Secretary21-04975

23/02/2021

A/75/PV.55

General, the Executive Director of the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, a person openly
living with HIV and an eminent person actively
engaged in the response to HIV/AIDS;
(ii) A general debate with statements by Member
States and observers of the General Assembly; the
list of speakers shall be established in accordance
with the established practices of the Assembly,
and the time limit for the statements will be three
minutes for individual delegations and five minutes
for statements made on behalf of a group of States;
(iii) Up to five thematic panel discussions, which
shall be held consecutively with the general debate;
(iv) A closing segment with statements from
the chairs of the panel discussions, presenting
summaries of the discussions;
(b) The meetings will take place from 10 a.m. to 1
p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.;
(c) The format of the meeting, in person, virtual
or a hybrid, will be decided by April 2021 by the
President of the General Assembly on the basis of
an assessment of the health conditions and in close
consultation with Member States”.
Operative paragraph 8 would request
“the President of the General Assembly to
organize, no later than April 2021, and preside over
an interactive multi-stakeholder hearing, with the
active participation of people living with, at risk
of and affected by HIV, including key populations,
representatives of Member States and observers
of the General Assembly, parliamentarians,
representatives of local governments, invited civilsociety organizations, including non-governmental
organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council, philanthropic
foundations, academia, medical associations,
the private sector and broader communities, as
part of the preparatory process for the high-level
meeting, and further requests the President to
prepare a summary of the hearing prior to the highlevel meeting”.
Under operative paragraph
Assembly would request

13,

the

General

“the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/
AIDS to continue to facilitate, to the extent
possible, inclusive consultations at the country and

regional levels, with the participation of relevant
stakeholders, such as Governments, civil society,
including non-governmental organizations and the
private sector, to review the progress made towards
the achievement of the time-bound goals set out in
the 2016 Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS to
be met by 2020, as well as opportunities to address
gaps, obstacles and challenges”.
Under operative paragraph 15, it would request
“the President of the General Assembly to
hold timely, open, transparent and inclusive
consultations with all Member States, giving
due consideration to the report of the SecretaryGeneral and other inputs to the preparatory process
for the high-level meeting, with a view to adopting
a concise and action-oriented declaration as an
outcome of the high-level meeting, to be agreed
upon by Member States, which reaffirms and
builds on the Declaration of Commitment and the
political declarations on HIV/AIDS to guide and
monitor the HIV/AIDS response beyond 2020,
towards achieving the commitment of ending the
AIDS epidemic by 2030”.
With regard to operative paragraphs 2, 8, 13
and 15, the Secretariat understands that the highlevel meeting to be held from 8 to 10 June 2021, the
multi-stakeholder hearing and consultations would use
the meeting entitlements of the General Assembly. If
any of the meetings, hearings or consultations is held
in a virtual or hybrid format rather than an in-person
format, their respective programmes would be adjusted
to two hours, taking into consideration the fact that
remote simultaneous interpretation is available for
only two hours per meeting. Otherwise, additional cost
implications would arise that cannot be met within the
approved 2021 programme budget.
Moreover, with regard to operative paragraph 2, to
stay within the entitlements of the General Assembly,
the organizational arrangements for the high-level
meeting, comprising an opening segment, a general
debate, up to five thematic panel discussions and a
closing segment, would be held consecutively from 10
a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m. and not in
parallel or consecutively for two hours in the morning
and two hours in the afternoon if meetings are held in
a virtual or hybrid format. Otherwise additional cost
implications would arise that cannot be met within the
approved 2021 programme budget.

21-049757/19

A/75/PV.55

Accordingly, the adoption of draft resolution
A/75/L.59 would not entail any budgetary implications
with regard to the programme budget.
The statement that I just read out was distributed
through the plenary site of the e-deleGATE portal
and will be made available in the Journal under the
e-statements link for the meeting.
The President: Before we proceed to take a decision
on draft resolution A/75/L.59 and draft amendments
A/75/L.60 and A/75/L.61, delegations wishing to make
a statement in explanation of vote before the voting on
the draft resolution and/or the draft amendments are
invited to do so now in one intervention.
Before giving the floor for explanations of vote
before the voting, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): I simply wanted
to respond to the amendment proposed by the Russian
delegation and to say very clearly that the United
Kingdom does not support the removal of the phrase
“including key populations” from the text.
To remove the phrase is an attempt to ignore the
fact that there are groups disproportionately affected
by HIV/AIDS. As per UNAIDS guidelines, the term
“key populations” or “key populations at higher risk of
HIV exposure” refers to those most likely to be exposed
to HIV or indeed to transmit it. The engagement of
those groups is critical to a successful HIV response
and to refuse to acknowledge — indeed to delete the
fact — that there are groups disproportionately affected
by HIV/AIDS is discriminatory and ignores the reality
of both the work of UNAIDS and the fight against HIV/
AIDS globally.
We therefore hope that others will join us in voting
against draft amendment A/75/L.61 proposed by the
Russian Federation.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): I will
be brief. The United States also does not support
draft amendment A/75/L.61 proposed by the Russian
Federation, which would remove the term “key
populations” from the text of draft resolution A/75/L.59.
We completely agree with the arguments put
forward by our colleague, the representative of the
United Kingdom. I would only add that, at a time when
the World Health Organization has underscored the
8/19

23/02/2021

importance of prioritizing those with health concerns
and the most vulnerable, the Russian amendment
does just the opposite by excluding mention of them
in modalities for a United Nations event focused on
one of the most significant health crises known in
our generation and prior to the coronavirus disease
pandemic — and it is still with us today.
We will vote against the amendment and encourage
others to do so as well.
Mr. Konstantinopolskiy (Russian Federation)
(spoke in Russian): My delegation does not agree
with amendment A/75/L.60. It does not correspond to
established practice in the General Assembly and does
not take into account the differing positions among
Member States. We hereby request that it be put to
the vote.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of draft amendment
A/75/L.60 and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
co-sponsors of draft amendment A/75/L.60: Andorra,
Argentina, Canada, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Kiribati, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Monaco, Montenegro,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, the Republic of
Moldova, San Marino, Switzerland, Timor-Leste
and Ukraine.
I should like to announce that since the submission
of draft amendment A/75/L.61 and in addition to those
delegations listed in the document, the following
countries have become co-sponsors of draft amendment
A/75/L.61: Libya and Senegal.
The President: Before we proceed to take a decision
on draft resolution A/75/L.59, in accordance with rule
90 of the rules of procedure, the Assembly shall first
take a decision on draft amendments A/75/L.60 and
A/75/L.61, one by one.
The Assembly will first take a decision on draft
amendment A/75/L.60.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
21-04975

23/02/2021

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Timor-Leste, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay
Against:
Algeria, Bahrain, Belarus, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, China,
Cuba, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini,
Ghana, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Jamaica,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, Mauritius, Morocco,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Russian
Federation, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka,
Syrian Arab Republic, United Arab Emirates,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Bangladesh, Barbados, Bhutan, Cabo Verde, Chile,
Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Madagascar,
Mali, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Singapore,
South Africa, Sudan, Thailand, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, United Republic of Tanzania,
Zambia
Draft amendment A/75/L.60 was adopted by 77
votes to 40, with 21 abstentions.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft amendment A/75/L.61.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

A/75/PV.55

In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Belarus, Brunei
Darussalam, Cameroon, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ghana, Guinea, Indonesia, Iraq, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Libya, Malaysia,
Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo
Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia,
Eswatini, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kiribati, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro,
Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, TimorLeste, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay, Zambia
Abstaining:
China, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Liberia, Madagascar,
Mali, Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, Singapore,
South Africa, United Republic of Tanzania
Draft amendment A/75/L.61 was rejected by 30
votes to 91, with 14 abstentions.
The President: Since the draft amendment
contained in document A/75/L.60 has been adopted,
we shall proceed to take a decision on draft resolution
A/75/L.59 as thereby amended.
I give the floor to the representative of the Russian
Federation on a point of order.
Mr. Konstantinopolskiy (Russian Federation)
(spoke in Russian): Since draft amendment A/75/L.60

21-049759/19

A/75/PV.55

has already been adopted, we propose the following
draft oral amendment to draft resolution A/75/L.59.
We propose that after paragraph 11, a new paragraph
be inserted to read:
(spoke in English)
“Decides that the arrangements outlined in
paragraph 11 above shall not be considered a
precedent for other similar events.”
(spoke in Russian)
The proposed new paragraph reproduces exactly
the wording of resolutions 70/228, 65/180 and 60/224
on modalities for the high-level meetings of the General
Assembly on HIV/AIDS held in 2016, 2011 and 2006,
respectively. Similar wording was also contained in
resolution 55/242 on the special session on HIV/AIDS
held in 2001.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the United Kingdom on a point of order.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): I take the floor
to object to the draft oral amendment proposed by the
Russian Federation to insert a new paragraph after
paragraph 11 because the Russian Federation, having
just resoundingly lost the vote on draft amendment
A/75/L.61, is now trying to bind the hands of the
General Assembly on future decisions by the back door.
It is not the case that the General Assembly can
have future decisions made for it now on a hypothetical
basis by adopting that kind of draft amendment. I
would therefore encourage all Member States to decide,
as we will decide, that the General Assembly will make
decisions on those matters as and when the modality
resolutions for future meetings arise and not try to tie
the hands of the General Assembly in considering its
future decisions in that way.
I would also remind Member States that this is
not a new decision. This is not a new departure. We
are reverting to the previous, established practice in
three consecutive modalities resolutions — resolutions
55/242, 60/224 and 65/180 adopted in 2001, 2005
and 2011, respectively. Therefore, I would encourage
Member States, as they did a few moments ago, to vote
against the draft oral amendment proposed by Russia.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Portugal on a point of order.
10/19

23/02/2021

Mr. Castelbranco Soares (Portugal): We too would
like to encourage the membership to vote against the
draft oral amendment proposed by the representative
of Russia for the same reasons already given by the
representative of the United Kingdom.
The President: A recorded vote has been
requested on the draft oral amendment proposed by the
representative of the Russian Federation.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Bahrain, Belarus, Brunei Darussalam,
Cameroon, China, Cuba, Egypt, Eritrea,
Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Libya, Morocco,
Mozambique, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, South Africa, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria,
Cabo Verde, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kiribati, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Tunisia, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay
Abstaining:
Bhutan, Brazil, Chile, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Ghana, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Mali, Namibia, Sri Lanka, United Republic of
Tanzania, Zambia
21-04975

23/02/2021

The draft oral amendment was rejected by 34 votes
to 78, with 18 abstentions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Konstantinopolskiy (Russian Federation)
(spoke in Russian): We would like to propose another
draft amendment to paragraph 8 of draft resolution
A/75/L.59. We would like to request that, for the wording
“key populations”, we include the following footnote:
(spoke in English)
“Each country should define the specific
populations that are key to its HIV/AIDS response
based on the national epidemiological and
social context.”
(spoke in Russian)
That footnote is based on the provisions and strategies
of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
from 2011 to 2015 and from 2016 to 2020.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): I do not
know where to begin with this particular draft oral
amendment. There is a footnote. There is so much to
unpack from the substantive, political and technical
perspective in it. We believe that it is inappropriate to
try and introduce that kind of amendment on the floor
given the importance of our collective action on HIV/
AIDS over many years, during which we have never
had to confront something like that in a modalities
draft resolution. It is clearly politicizing the language
of the modalities draft resolution. Therefore, we oppose
the draft oral amendment, and we encourage other
delegations to vote against it as well.
Mr. Castelbranco Soares (Portugal): I believe
that it is not appropriate to weaken the United Nations
language with regard to HIV/AIDS. Unfortunately, it is
also not the right time to introduce, at the last minute,
wording that, as we are not experts, most of us are
probably not able to confirm exactly with respect to
the terms of the draft footnote and its implications. I
therefore encourage all the membership to vote against
this draft oral amendment.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): Again, I will
speak very briefly. Setting aside the fact that this is an
unfortunate attempt to ambush the General Assembly
with such language after the modalities draft resolution,
contained in document A/75/L.59, was negotiated over
several months and where those of us who put forward

A/75/PV.55

amendments gave the usual 48 hours’ notice for those
amendments to be considered, it strikes me as a slightly
bizarre footnote, because, of course, nothing that the
General Assembly does in any way impedes the ability
of any Member State to independently determine what
it is that it wants to do in terms of its own ways of
addressing the HIV/AIDS epidemic. All that we are
trying to do, as we always do in this Hall, is to offer
advice, guidance and best practice to Member States.
At best, this draft footnote is therefore redundant, but
I think what is behind it is something that is slightly
more sinister. I therefore hope others will join me in
voting against it.
Mr. Alfayez (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I
believe that if the co-facilitators made concessions
and listened to all the views during the discussions,
we would not have resorted to doing what is currently
taking place. My country’s delegation consequently
regrets the fact that we could not include the draft
amendments introduced during the negotiations by
some Member States and that those draft amendments
were not taken into account, particularly given that the
issue under consideration is the topic of a high-level
meeting that must enjoy consensus. I therefore align
myself with the Russian Federation.
The President: A recorded vote has been
requested on the draft oral amendment proposed by the
Russian Federation.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Bahrain, Belarus, Brunei Darussalam,
Cameroon, China, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Guinea, India, Indonesia, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Libya, Malaysia, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian
Arab Republic, United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Barbados, Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,

21-0497511/19

A/75/PV.55

Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Latvia,
Liberia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Tunisia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay
Abstaining:
Bangladesh, Cabo Verde, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Eswatini, Fiji,
Ghana, Iraq, Kiribati, Lesotho, Madagascar, Mali,
Mozambique, Namibia, Singapore, South Africa,
Zambia
The draft oral amendment was rejected by 30 votes
to 81, with 18 abstentions.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.59, entitled
“Organization of the 2021 high-level meeting on HIV/
AIDS”, as amended.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Russian Federation.
Mr. Konstantinopolskiy (Russian Federation)
(spoke in Russian): We are forced to note that draft
resolution A/75/L.59 does not take into account most
of the proposals made by our delegation, despite the
fact that a number of States supported them during the
negotiations. We are therefore forced to ask that the
draft resolution be put to a vote.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested
on draft resolution A/75/L.59, as amended.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados,
Belarus,
Belgium,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
12/19

23/02/2021

Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Algeria, Egypt, Madagascar, Russian Federation,
Syrian Arab Republic
Draft resolution A/75/L.59, as amended, was
adopted by 139 votes to 0, with 5 abstentions
(resolution 75/260).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): We
would like to thank the facilitator for his leadership on
resolution 75/260. The United States of America was
pleased to vote in favour of the resolution, although we
would have preferred that it would have been adopted
by consensus today. We would like to make several
points on the final text.
21-04975

23/02/2021

The United States is proud of its strong and longstanding support for the fight against HIV/AIDS and
the mandate of the Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS). We are also proud of the
Programme’s work to protect the most vulnerable
and the strong commitment to data, science and datadriven and science-based decisions, with a platform of
comprehensive epidemiological data.
The United States is pleased about the outcome
regarding the draft amendment A/75/L.60, on
paragraph 11. Civil society participation is critical to
the high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS. Without those
who lead efforts on the fight against HIV/AIDS on
the ground, we would not have a high-level meeting.
Today’s vote is an important step towards ensuring
civil society participation in that critical meeting and
a broader victory for civil society participation at the
United Nations.
Civil society is our eyes and ears on the ground
and gives us critical information and perspectives on a
number of issues. It should be at the table in all United
Nations meetings, including the high-level meeting on
HIV/AIDS. We saw first-hand the negative impacts of
restrictive language during the 2016 meeting, where
more than 20 non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
were blocked from participating without transparency,
and often without the knowledge of the countries in
which they work. My own delegation had one NGO
blocked by others at that meeting in 2016. We cannot
allow critical civil society voices to be excluded again
as we plan this year’s meeting.
We are also disappointed to see that some
delegations put forward a draft amendment to delete
“key populations”. Those clearly identified by
UNAIDS as key populations are individuals who are
particularly vulnerable to HIV/AIDS and frequently
lack adequate access to services. They are central to
the fight against HIV/AIDS and must be present at the
high-level meeting.
The United States looks forward to the next steps
ahead of the meeting, including negotiations on the
political declaration.
Ms. Shmat (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus voted in favour of resolution
75/260, entitled “Organization of the 2021 high-level
meeting on HIV/AIDS”.

A/75/PV.55

We attach great importance to combating the spread
of HIV/AIDS. The system for combating the spread of
HIV/AIDS in Belarus and the organization of medical
care, treatment and support is based on principles
consistent with the framework of the Sustainable
Development Goals.
Through sustained and dynamic partnerships
with international organizations such as the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, the United
Nations Development Programme, UNICEF and
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), supported
by the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria, Belarus has succeeded in significantly
reducing the spread of HIV.
We view the upcoming high-level meeting as an
important element in strengthening the fight against
HIV/AIDS worldwide and as an important platform for
the exchange of best practices, views and experience.
In addition to substantive issues, we believe the
resolution to be an important element in establishing
specific procedures and modalities for the upcoming
meeting. In that regard, we are concerned about
the nature of the negotiations and the inclusion
of deliberately controversial language in the final
text, as well as the departure from past practice for
similar events.
First, Belarus co-sponsored the draft amendment
to paragraph 8, contained in document A/75/L.61, and
voted in favour of deleting the term “key populations”
from that paragraph. That is based on existing practice
whereby interactive consultations and discussions as
part of upcoming meetings on HIV/AIDS are informal
in nature. We believe that the lack of a definition of
the nature of the consultations, together with the
inclusion of the term “key populations”, which did not
receive universal support, significantly hinders the
achievement of universal consensus on the resolution.
Secondly, Belarus supported the draft
amendment proposed by the Russian Federation.

oral

Thirdly, Belarus voted against draft amendment
A/75/L.60, on the procedure for participation by NGOs.
We believe that the draft amendment is inconsistent
with past practice and substantially limits the sovereign
prerogatives of States Members of the United Nations to
determine the parameters for NGO participation in that
kind of meeting. Previously adopted resolutions already
mentioned on this subject stipulated, as proposed by

21-0497513/19

A/75/PV.55

the Russian Federation, that such procedures for NGO
participants would not constitute a precedent for other
similar events.
Mr. Konstantinopolskiy (Russian Federation)
(spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation abstained
in the voting on resolution 75/260. We note with regret
that the consultation process on the resolution was not
balanced or transparent and it was concluded ahead of
time. I would therefore like to say to the representative
of Portugal that it is for that reason that we were not able
to submit the draft footnote during the negotiations,
in which experts who would have been able to assess
from an expert point of view were present. In addition,
despite the fact that I participated in all stages of the
negotiations, I am hearing for the first time that the
negotiations dragged on for months.
Our delegation fully agrees with the very important
goal of combating HIV/AIDS and comprehensively
supports the relevance of resolution 75/260 as well as
the importance of holding this high-level meeting of
the General Assembly. A confirmation of this is our
specialized work at the national level and the resource
support for a joint project with the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS to support those countries
that need assistance in combating HIV/AIDS and
encouraging international cooperation in this area.
Therefore, using this sort of resolution to
force through provisions that are known to be
contentious — with certain delegations knowingly
undermining the unity of the General Assembly,
particularly in the context of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) restrictions — is simply disappointing. It
is not a question of recognizing the contribution of civil
society organizations in the fight against HIV/AIDS.
Nobody doubts the importance and necessity of that
work. Rather, the problem is in the consistent desire of
a number of countries to erode the intergovernmental
nature of decision-making in the General Assembly and
ignoring the rules of work in this organ.

23/02/2021

meeting on HIV/AIDS. We commend the facilitators
for engaging in extensive consultations with Member
States to ensure that resolution 75/260 would focus
on the organization of the high-level meeting and the
modalities for making it achieve expected results.
China participated in the consultations on the
resolution in a constructive manner. We support the
convening of a high-level meeting to promote greater
international attention for the prevention and control of
HIV/AIDS, further strengthen international cooperation
and provide support and assistance to countries facing
severe challenges in terms of prevention and control.
With regard to the participation of non-governmental
organizations at the high-level meeting, China believes
that, as the most representative and authoritative
international organization, the United Nations must
embody the membership-driven principle and its
intergovernmental nature. The participation of
non-governmental organizations should strictly comply
with the no-objection principle, which is important for
upholding the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and in ensuring the orderly
participation of non-governmental organizations in
United Nations activities.
China opposes some countries’ actions of searching
far and wide instead of using what is readily available
or at hand. Those countries deviate from the consensus
reached by Member States at the 2016 high-level meeting
on the participation of non-governmental organizations
by making reference to language in the 2011 resolution
(resolution 65/277, annex.). Such backtracking runs
counter to the United Nations mission and goal of
staying relevant as times change. It is also contrary to
the customary good practices of the Organization, as it
undermines the spirit of cooperation among Member
States and will not help the facilitators make progress
on the preparatory process for the high-level meeting.

In these conditions, we are forced to dissociate
ourselves from the wording in paragraph 8 on key
populations and paragraph 11 concerning the procedure
for selecting non-governmental organizations for
participating at the high-level meeting. Our delegation
will not be guided by those non-consensual provisions.

China attaches great importance to the participation
of many stakeholders in United Nations activities,
including members of civil society. The latter’s
participation should be conducive to helping relevant
countries strengthen their capacities in the prevention
and treatment of HIV/AIDS, mobilize greater resources
in that regard and tackle the prevention and treatment
challenges related thereto.

Mr. Jisheng Xing (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Namibia and Australia for their efforts as
facilitators of the preparatory process for the high-level

At the same time, we believe that the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of these countries should be
respected. We believe that it is important to respect

14/19

21-04975

23/02/2021

and follow well-established rules and practices in this
context in order to ensure that those organizations’
participation be orderly and rules-based, because doing
so is in line with the long-term interests of the United
Nations and with the common interests of Member
States. In the spirit of mutually beneficial cooperation,
China stands ready to work with all parties to achieve
positive outcomes at the high-level meeting.
Mr. Mulachela (Indonesia): Indonesia would like
to thank Australia and Namibia for their efforts as
facilitators in drafting resolution 75/260.
My delegation voted in favour of the resolution on
the organization of the 2021 high-level meeting on HIV/
AIDS under agenda item 10 because Indonesia sees the
resolution in its entirety as a package on the important
and relevant topic of halting the spread of HIV/AIDS.
Nevertheless, Indonesia has reservations on
paragraph 8 of the resolution. We reiterate that Indonesia
acknowledges and supports the broader community’s
role in the efforts aimed at implementing an HIV/AIDS
response without necessarily specifying a segment of
the population. Our reservation is based solely on our
national regulations and the context and culture that
apply in Indonesia. Our position today therefore cannot
be understood as accepting those references as agreed
language for the future outcome document of the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly.
Mr. Alfayez (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
First of all, I agree with what my colleague from the
Russian Federation said about the negotiations in his
last statement.
My country’s delegation voted in favour of
resolution 75/260 so as not to undermine consensus,
in particular because this topic is important and will
be discussed in a high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS,
at which there must be a consensus among all States
Members.
Nevertheless, my delegation wishes to lodge our
reservation on the inclusion of the phrase “including
key populations”, in paragraph 8 of the resolution, as
well as our reservation on paragraph 11 as a whole.
We hope that our reservation will be included in the
meeting’s record.
Mr. Almansouri (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, the State of Qatar would like to express its
thanks and appreciation to Australia and Namibia, the
two facilitators of the negotiations on resolution 75/260,

A/75/PV.55

entitled “Organization of the 2021 high-level meeting
on HIV/AIDS”. They made constructive efforts that led
to this text.
The State of Qatar voted in favour of the resolution
because we are sure and convinced of its importance
and timing with a view to implementing the objectives
set forth in the 2016 Political Declaration towards
ending the AIDS epidemic by 2030. That is all the more
so because we are suffering more setbacks as a result of
the coronavirus disease pandemic.
However, regarding paragraph 8, we stress that
my country would consider this paragraph within the
context of respecting its national laws and legislations,
particularly pertaining to the phrase “key populations”.
My country’s delegation emphasizes that this phrase
must take into account our national legislation as well
as the religious and cultural values of our society.
Every State has the responsibility to determine the key
populations within its national and social context,
In conclusion, we request that this statement be
included in the meeting’s record.
Mrs. Ndaw Dieng (Senegal) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to correct an error with
respect to the draft amendment contained in document
A/75/L.61, which my delegation did not co-sponsor. It
was just a technical error, for which I apologize.
I take the floor to state that my delegation welcomes
the initiative of holding the 2021 high-level meeting on
HIV/AIDS, which is a major health issue. We would
also like to congratulate the facilitators of resolution
75/260, who throughout the negotiations spared no
effort to reach a consensus thereon.
Nevertheless, while joining the consensus, Senegal
dissociates itself from the reference in paragraph 8 of
the text to “key populations”. The definition of this
ambiguous term includes references to notions that
contradict our national position on the issue. It is also
for this reason that we supported the draft amendment.
Mr. Kita (Japan): On behalf of Japan, we welcome
resolution 75/260, on the organization of the 2021 highlevel meeting on HIV/AIDS. We are grateful to the two
facilitators, Namibia and Australia, for their leadership
and dedicated work.
First of all, while we value the resolution on the
preparation of the high-level meeting to be held in June,
we would like to reiterate the importance of placing

21-0497515/19

A/75/PV.55

a range of health issues, including HIV/AIDS, in the
context of universal health coverage and health systems
with a view to raising the profile of the health agenda as
a whole within the United Nations system.
We should call for universal health coverage
to take HIV/AIDS out of isolation and integrate it
into a comprehensive approach to a range of health
issues beyond individual disease control, including
tuberculosis,
non-communicable
diseases
and
emerging maladies. We should now aim to integrate the
efforts on individual items on the health agenda into a
comprehensive approach ahead of the 2023 high-level
meeting on universal health coverage.
Secondly, we would like to reiterate the importance
of the participation of civil society. In particular, we
should look back at the important role that civil society
has played in the history of HIV/AIDS treatment
and control. In Japan, too, there is a tragic history of
HIV infection from blood products for haemophilia
patients, but there is no doubt that institutional
progress, disease-control measures and awarenessraising have made forward strides as a result of the
collaborative efforts of patient groups, professional
groups, Governments and others. The initiatives of
those civil society groups remind us of the importance
of a bottom-up approach to human security.
In the context of the fight against HIV/AIDS,
civil society organizations have contributed greatly to
the protection and empowerment of every vulnerable
individual. For this reason, Japan supported the
proposed draft amendment to paragraph 11, submitted
by the United Kingdom and other Member States
(A/75/L.60).
We look forward to a meaningful discussion
at the upcoming high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS
with the participation of a wide range of civil society
organizations.
Mr. Al-khalidi (Iraq): Iraq welcomes the adoption
by the General Assembly of resolution A/75/260,
entitled “Organization of the 2021 high-level meeting
on HIV/AIDS”, and would like to thank the facilitators
for enabling that process. Iraq attaches great importance
to the fight against HIV/AIDS and recognizes that the
syndrome remains an urgent health and development
challenge. Based on this, Iraq voted in favour of the
resolution.
16/19

23/02/2021

However, Iraq does not consider this resolution
as a precedent for other modality resolutions. In that
regard, Iraq would like to dissociate itself from the
term “key populations”, set forth in paragraph 8.
Furthermore, Iraq recognizes the major contributions
that civil society organizations and non-governmental
organizations provide in this context.
Yet Iraq believes that the amendment contained
in document A/75/L.60 to paragraph 11 creates a new
precedent and paves the way for different interpretations,
which is an approach that does not lead to constructive
results. Iraq therefore voted against the amendment and
does not consider it consensual or precedent for other
modality resolutions. Accordingly, Iraq dissociates
itself from paragraph 11, as amended.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I am pleased to deliver
this statement on behalf of my fellow facilitator, the
representative of Australia, Ambassador Fifield, and,
of course, on my own behalf and on behalf of Namibia.
It was an honour for us to co-facilitate the modalities
resolution for the 2021 high-level meeting on HIV/
AIDS (resolution 75/260). We thank the President
of the General Assembly for entrusting us with that
important task.
Since the HIV/AIDS epidemic first emerged, in
the early 1980s, approximately 76 million people have
become infected with the human immunodeficiency
virus, and 33 million people have died from AIDSrelated illnesses. However, there have been many gains
in the fight against HIV/AIDS. In 2016, HIV/AIDS was
dropped from the list of the top 10 leading causes of
death identified by the World Health Organization.
By the end of 2019, approximately 25.4 million people
were getting antiretroviral therapy.
Nevertheless, significant challenges remain. The
world has not met the 2020 targets that we set for
ourselves in the political declaration following the
2016 high-level meeting (resolution 70/266, annex).
The coronavirus disease has further threatened current
progress as health services, resources and investment
are diverted.
The HIV/AIDS movement has a strong history of
mobilizing political engagement. This year’s meeting
is an important opportunity to take stock of our
achievements and the gains that must be protected if we
are to end the AIDS epidemic by 2030.
21-04975

23/02/2021

The adoption of resolution 75/260 today, although
regrettably by means of a vote, is an important first
step towards the holding of the high-level meeting. It
provides the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/
AIDS (UNAIDS) and the Office of the President of the
General Assembly with a mandate to begin preparations.
As co-facilitators, we had a number of objectives
that we sought to achieve in this process. First, we
sought to ensure that the modalities resolution would be
adopted in a timely manner that would allow sufficient
time for the Office of the President of the General
Assembly and UNAIDS to prepare for the high-level
meeting. We also sought to present a text that addressed
some of the challenges encountered the last time the
high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS was convened and
equally showed our commitment to the global HIV/
AIDS response. Finally, we sought to present a text that
could find common ground and ensure the broadest
possible support.
Throughout the process, we have not lost sight
of our common goal, which is the convening of the
high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS later this year to
review progress on the commitments made in the 2016
political declaration. Therefore, while we recognize
that resolution 75/260 is not a perfect text for some
delegations, we strongly believe that it presents the best
balance and helps us to move forward to prepare for
the meeting.
We commend all delegations for their active and
constructive participation in the negotiations and their
willingness to engage with us and our teams. We are
conscious that this year’s meeting will look different
from what we are used to, but we are committed to
working creatively to ensure that there are opportunities
for the meaningful engagement and participation of
all stakeholders.
As we turn our minds towards the political
declaration, we would like to reaffirm our commitment
to working with representatives to deliver an ambitious
text that reflects the progress and new challenges we
face in our global response.
You, Mr. President, can count on our support
and dedication on the road ahead. I wish to thank all
the delegations for their kind words expressed to the
co-facilitators.
Mr. Black (Canada): The delegation of Canada had
not planned to take the floor today, having shared its

A/75/PV.55

strong views during the course of the negotiations on
resolution 75/260. However, I have grown increasingly
concerned by the implicit criticism I heard over the
course of the past half an hour with respect to the
nature of the negotiations for the resolution.
I would like to take this opportunity to express our
strong support for the Permanent Representatives of
Australia and Namibia and their teams. As one of the
delegations that participated actively throughout the
negotiations, I can assure the Assembly that they were
respectful and afforded ample time to all participants
and their various proposals. In fact, as the letter from
the co-facilitators makes clear, they worked until the
eleventh hour to try to find balance in the text and we
are appreciative of their efforts to seek consensus.
Canada was proud to vote in favour of this important
resolution adopted today and to have co-sponsored
draft amendment A/75/L.60 with the United Kingdom,
the European Union and the United States. We remain
focused on ensuring the meaningful participation of
people most affected by HIV/AIDS. We look forward to
the negotiation of an ambitious outcome document and
achieving our shared goal of ending the AIDS epidemic
by 2030.
Mr. Izourar (Algeria): I take the floor to explain
the vote of my delegation on resolution 75/260, entitled
“Organization of the 2021 high-level meeting on HIV/
AIDS”.
We would like to thank the Permanent
Representatives of Namibia and Australia for their
valuable efforts in facilitating this important resolution.
With regard to the reference to “key populations” in
paragraph 8 relating to the interactive multi-stakeholder
hearing, we believe that a broad reference to
representatives of people living with HIV would have
provided a better consensual term and one in line with
our national legislation and regulations.
As stated in the previous modalities resolution
(resolution 70/228), the multi-stakeholder hearing
remains informal, including its outcome document.
The deletion of the text taken from paragraph 12 of
resolution 70/228 concerning the arrangement outlined
in paragraph 11 of resolution 75/260 as adopted was
unfortunate. As we recognize the specificity of each
process, we believe that paragraph 11 of resolution
75/260 should not set a precedent for other similar events.

21-0497517/19

A/75/PV.55

Mr. Mohamed Salih (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, the Sudan would like to thank the moderators
of resolution 75/260, the Permanent Representatives of
Namibia and Australia, for their efforts.
The Sudan voted in favour of the resolution
because it was convinced of its importance in the fight
against HIV/AIDS. However, we wish to record our
reservations about the use of the term “key populations”
in paragraph 8.
Mr. Al Khalil (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): First of all, we would like to thank the
facilitators for their efforts.
I take the floor to state that, with respect to
resolution 75/260, we disassociate ourselves from
the term “key populations” in paragraph 8 and from
paragraph 11.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
European Union, who wishes to make a statement
following the adoption of resolution 75/260.
Ms. Ludwig (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its 27
member States. The candidate countries the Republic
of North Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; and
the European Free Trade Association countries Iceland,
Liechtenstein and Norway, members of the European
Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
We welcome today’s meeting and would like to
thank the President of the General Assembly and
the co-facilitators, Namibia and Australia, for their
tireless efforts.
Agreeing on the modalities for the high-level meeting
is an important milestone for the meeting and therefore
in the fight against HIV/AIDS. In that connection, we
welcome the adoption of resolution 75/260.
The fight against HIV/AIDS is not over; it is a
long-term fight. HIV/AIDS claims lives on a daily
basis and shatters families and communities. Every
case that can be prevented saves lives and spares cases,
grievances and life-long treatment, as well as economic
resources. Every case that receives treatment gives
18/19

23/02/2021

new hope not only to an individual but also to families
and communities. Still, about 2 million people became
newly infected with HIV in 2019, about 40 million are
living with it and an estimated 7 million do not even
know their status and might spread the disease further.
So there is much work to do.
The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/
AIDS, as the key United Nations body for HIV/AIDS,
has identified five main key population groups that
are particularly vulnerable to HIV and frequently lack
adequate access to services — key populations and their
sexual partners account for up to 80 per cent of new
HIV infections. We therefore welcome the retention of
the reference to “key populations” in paragraph 8 of
resolution 75/260.
Let me turn to the importance of civil society
participation in the high-level meeting. It is a priority
for the European Union and that is why — together
with others in a broad cross-regional initiative — we
submitted an amendment, which we are glad to see
gathered broad support and which will not only provide
more transparency but also bring back to the Assembly
the power of decision-making on the participation of
civil service organizations.
The fight against HIV/AIDS was — right from
the beginning — one in which all stakeholders joined
forces and in which experience clearly shows that
we need to look at and work through specifically
adapted approaches in order to reach communities and
individuals everywhere and target high-risk groups.
The activities of civil society organizations have
been crucial for decades and deserve huge recognition
for the success and progress achieved to date. They
work to promote knowledge about prevention and
treatment and also work against stigmatization. Their
valuable outreach and mobilization capabilities have
been acknowledged and taken into consideration since
the beginning of this fight.
As the high-level meeting will discuss progress
made towards the elimination of HIV/AIDS as an
epidemic to date and pave the way for achieving our
ambitious but achievable goal in the coming years,
we need to be informed by hearing from all those
involved about their experiences. We cannot afford to
have experiences unheard. We cannot afford to lack
the support of any stakeholder in the fight against
this disease.
21-04975

23/02/2021

The text of paragraph 11 now prevents the abuse
of the non-objection clause. Rejections will not be
exercised in an arbitrary manner, as we have seen in the
past, and the final decision on the list of civil society
organizations will be taken by the General Assembly as
a whole and not by a single Member State. That brings
the power of decision-making back to the Assembly.
Let me be clear on two issues — this is not about
decision-making with respect to any civil society
organization. It is only about ensuring that all voices
are heard and enabling broad experience-sharing. We
have no reason to be afraid of hearing all voices in
reaching our decisions. I would like to underline that
we would have favoured an even more open clause on
the participation of civil society organizations — as

A/75/PV.55

we saw in the zero draft of resolution 75/260. But we
listened carefully to delegations to whom a right of
objection is important. In that spirit of compromise,
we are very happy to see that adopted amendment
A/75/L.60, which was drafted together with a broad
cross-regional coalition, gained huge support.
We are looking forward to an inclusive and
successful high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS.
The President: We have heard the last speaker on
this item.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 10.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

21-0497519/19
