United Nations

S/PV.4525

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-seventh year

4525

th meeting
Friday, 3 May 2002, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mahbubani . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Singapore)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Raytchev
Mr. Belinga-Eboutou
Mr. Wang Donghua
Mr. Franco
Mr. Doutriaux
Mr. Cheick Ahmed Tidiane Camara
Mr. Ryan
Mr. Gokool
Ms. Lajous
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Atieh
Mr. Eldon
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
Letter dated 2 May 2002 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of the Sudan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2002/510).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

02-36513 (E)

*0236513*

S/PV.4525

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
Letter dated 2 May 2002 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the
Sudan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2002/510)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Canada, Chile, Cuba,
Egypt, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel,
Japan, Jordan, Malaysia, Morocco, Pakistan, South
Africa, Spain, the Sudan, Tunisia, Turkey and the
United Arab Emirates, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lancry
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Listre (Argentina), Mr. Heinbecker (Canada),
Mr. Valdés (Chile), Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla
(Cuba), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Hidayat
(Indonesia), Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic
Republic of Iran), Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan),
Mr. Al-Hadidi (Jordan), Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia),
Mr. Bennouna (Morocco), Mr. Khalid (Pakistan),
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr. Arias (Spain),
Mr. Manis (Sudan), Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia),
Mr. Bilman (Turkey), and Mr. Al-Shamsi (United
Arab Emirates) took the seats reserved for them
at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 3 May 2002
from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations, which will be issued as document S/2002/506,
and which reads as follows:

2

“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council to be held
today, Friday, 3 May 2002, regarding the situation
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
Jerusalem.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure and with
previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Council is meeting in response to the request
contained in the letter dated 2 May 2002 from the
Chargé d’affaires of the Permanent Mission of Sudan
to the United Nations in his capacity as Chairman of
the Arab Group, which is contained in document
S/2002/510.
Before we begin the proceedings, I would like to
make two procedural announcements. I would like to
inform members and non-members that we plan to
suspend the meeting at around 4.30 p.m. to hear a
briefing by the Secretary-General. We will then resume
our deliberations at around 6 p.m. Since we may be
going on late into the night, I hope that my colleagues
around this room will not mind if I make a request: can
they — except, of course, for the principal parties —
shorten their speeches to five or ten minutes? I hope
that that is not an unreasonable request.
The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
Permanent Observer of Palestine, on whom I now call.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
wish at the outset to congratulate you warmly,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. We have full
confidence in you, Sir, and in your friendly country,
Singapore. Allow me also to express our deep
appreciation to Ambassador Sergey Lavrov, Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation, for his great

S/PV.4525

skills and personal contributions to the Council’s
achieving important successes under his leadership.
Fourteen days ago the Security Council adopted
resolution 1405 (2002), which welcomed the initiative
of the Secretary-General to develop accurate
information on recent events in the Jenin refugee camp
through a fact-finding team. That resolution also
requested the Secretary-General to keep the Security
Council seized of the matter. It came as a natural and
responsible response to increasing reports about the
humanitarian catastrophe caused by the Israeli
occupation forces, particularly in the Jenin refugee
camp. Resolution 1405 (2002) addressed the horrific
humanitarian situation of the civilian Palestinian
population in a general way and established the
framework for addressing the events in Jenin. It is
impossible to fully understand what occurred there
without putting it in the context of the activities of the
Israeli occupation forces in all the re-occupied
Palestinian cities and towns.
Following the adoption of resolution 1405 (2002),
the Secretary-General formed the team, which was
made up of three widely respected personalities. It also
included two high-level senior advisers. Two others
were subsequently added, as were several experts in
various areas. The Palestinian side and the entire world
welcomed the composition of this team as a serious
step toward finding out exactly what happened in the
Jenin refugee camp.
Subsequently, we all have seen how the Israelis
completely reneged on accepting the fact-finding team.
We have also seen a series of Israeli positions aimed at
undermining the team and jeopardizing any results that
it might reach, as well as attempts to blackmail the
Secretary-General and the United Nations Secretariat.
Despite
the
Secretary-General’s
response
to
accommodate the Israeli side’s concern regarding
clarifications — on which we had reservations — the
Israeli positions deteriorated and basically represented
rejection of the Secretary-General’s initiative, his factfinding team and Security Council resolution 1405
(2002).
The Secretary-General sent letters to the
Permanent Observer of Palestine and the Permanent
Representative of Israel on 27 April 2002, in which he
outlined the parameters and modalities of the work of
the fact-finding team. We agreed generally with the
content of those letters, and we had intended to clarify

fully our position once we had received an indication
that the team was proceeding to the region. I wish to
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his efforts and his insistence on maintaining his basic
position and for preserving the integrity of the team’s
mandate.
The day before yesterday, the Secretary-General
sent a letter to the Security Council on this matter,
which contained a description of Israeli positions and
of the Secretary-General’s conclusions and announced
his intention to disband the team. The content of the
Secretary-General’s letter itself constitutes full
condemnation of the position of Israel — the
occupying Power — regarding the team. We strongly
condemn the decision of Israel — the occupying
Power — to refuse compliance with resolution 1405
(2002) and to impede the work of the fact-finding
team.
We believe that the entire world should fully
condemn Israel’s position. We also believe that the
Security Council should have supported the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts a few days earlier. Indeed, we
proposed that to the Council, but, to our deep regret,
the Council did not respond accordingly.
Following the Secretary-General’s decision, we
thought that the Council should take a drastic step to
stress the need to implement resolution 1405 (2002),
order Israel not to impede the team, request the
Secretary-General to dispatch the team immediately
and request both sides to cooperate with the team
without obstacles or conditions. The Arab Group had
indeed submitted a draft resolution along those lines.
Unfortunately, it did not receive adequate support
because of the objections of one of the permanent
members of the Security Council.
The Council’s backtracking before the Israeli
rejection will constitute a real scandal for the Council.
It will constitute a breach of the provisions of the
Charter and abrogation on the part of the Council of its
responsibilities, and it will have serious political and
operational implications on the ground. We still hope
that the Council will be able today to adopt an
appropriate resolution even at a minimum level. Even
if the Council fails to do so, we will resort to a
resumption of the tenth emergency special session of
the General Assembly in order to address this situation,
if only partly.

3

S/PV.4525

The fact that we all should bear in mind — and
that must be the focus of any analysis of the
situation — is that Israel is the occupying Power and
that the Palestinian territories are occupied territories
to which the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949
applies, as has been set forth in 25 resolutions adopted
by the Security Council.
The position of Israel towards the fact-finding
team, among other things, proves beyond any doubt
that the Israeli occupation forces have indeed
committed unspeakable atrocities against our people,
especially in the Jenin refugee camp. Israel committed
war crimes and probably carried out a massacre of the
camp population. The atrocities committed by the
Israeli occupation forces are now established facts. The
firing of missiles from helicopter gunships at that very
tiny, densely populated area; the use of tanks and
armoured bulldozers to demolish houses, in some cases
while civilians were still inside them; the obstruction
of the delivery of food and medicine; the denial of
access of humanitarian agencies to the camp for 11
days; and, last but not least, the use of human beings as
shields are all established facts. These acts constitute
war crimes. What remains now is to establish the scope
of those crimes and whether they indeed constituted a
massacre and crimes against humanity.
The world must investigate these crimes and get
to the bottom of the facts in full. It must adopt the
measures necessary to prosecute the war criminals and
the commanders and members of military units who
deliberately killed civilians and wreaked unwarranted,
wide-scale destruction, especially, as we indicated
earlier, General Shaul Mofaz, chief of staff of the
Israeli occupation army.
Resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002) have
not yet been fully implemented. It has now been more
than a month since their adoption and the resolutions
have yet to be implemented in full. After several weeks
of sweeping Israeli military assault, the Israeli
occupation forces have left some towns, but they have
tightened their siege against all of them and the
occupation forces remain inside some cities. The
compound of Chairman Yasser Arafat in Ramallah was,
until the day before yesterday, under military siege.
The end of that siege, despite the fact that it was a
positive step, is not a source of satisfaction to us. The
situation arising from the Israeli military assault is
illegal and represents a gross breach of the Security
Council resolutions I have just mentioned. The Church

4

of the Nativity is still under military siege and
yesterday was a target of another military assault that
set a Franciscan convent and a Greek Orthodox church
on fire, which constitutes another Israeli crime. Israel,
the occupying Power, continues to tighten its siege of
all Palestinian towns and is reoccupying some parts of
those towns, as has happened recently in Hebron,
Qalqilya and other Palestinian towns and villages and,
today, in Nablus.
The purpose of the Israeli military campaign
remains the same: to cause devastating harm to our
population and to the Palestinian Authority and to
prevent the situation from returning to where it was
before the campaign, let alone before September 2000.
It is not, of course, to put an end to the Israeli
occupation of all Palestinian territories occupied since
1967, including Jerusalem. The essence of the position
of Mr. Sharon and his Government has not changed,
notwithstanding the resolutions of the Security Council
and the position of the international community in this
regard and the efforts of some parties, which we fully
appreciate. Still, those efforts have not yet led to the
full implementation of resolutions 1402 (2002) and
1403 (2002).
The entire issue requires the Security Council to
take a more serious position on the basis of the Charter.
That is precisely what we now look forward to.
The President: I thank the Permanent Observer
of Palestine for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Israel, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Lancry (Israel): At the outset, I would like
to extend to you, Sir, my congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I
also wish to congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Sergey Lavrov, on his outstanding
performance.
As Council members are aware, constructive
discussions were held one week ago between United
Nations officials and an Israeli delegation regarding the
parameters for the Secretary-General’s initiative to
establish a fact-finding team with regard to recent
events in the Jenin refugee camp. Since the
presentation of the Secretary-General’s initiative and
the adoption of resolution 1405 (2002), considerable
disinformation and confusion have been generated
regarding the mandate of the fact-finding team. Israel’s

S/PV.4525

position is that any fact-finding team must have its
objectives and parameters clearly established prior to
its departure to the region.
In Israel’s view, the principles governing the
operation of the team should have been based on both
the language of operative paragraph 2 of resolution
1405 (2002) and on established United Nations
guidelines for fact-finding. Resolution 1405 (2002)
determined that the team must “develop accurate
information”, not reach any legal conclusions or make
recommendations. In calling for an examination of
events, Israel did not think it too much to expect that
the team address the activities of both sides, including
the use of a United Nations-administered camp as a
centre for terrorist activity, in violation of international
humanitarian law and Security Council resolutions.
United Nations fact-finding principles, as set out
in General Assembly resolution 46/59 of 1991,
stipulate that the fact-finding report be limited “to a
presentation of findings of a factual nature”. The
resolution
includes
provisions
regarding
confidentiality, the right of States “at all stages of the
fact-finding process” to express their views, the
obligation for the fact-finding team to respect local
laws and regulations and to engage in its mission in
cooperation with the parties concerned. Israel had a
right to expect that the United Nations would accept
the very guidelines and practices it itself has
established regarding the conduct of fact-finding
missions.
It is these considerations that lie behind Israel’s
reservations regarding the mandate of the fact-finding
team. The six points of concern which the Israeli
Cabinet raised, and sought to resolve, stem directly
from those established guidelines and from operative
paragraph 2 of resolution 1405 (2002), which set out
the parametres for the Secretary General’s initiative.
I should like to point out that while we
understand the international community’s wish to
develop an accurate, thorough and balanced report on
the recent events in Jenin, we should not ignore the
reports of the international press and of representatives
of independent organizations present in Jenin that have
surfaced in recent days. Those reports have confirmed
Israel’s position that what occurred in Jenin was an
intense battle between the Israeli military and
Palestinian terrorists, that weapons were widespread in

the camps, and that many buildings had been boobytrapped with explosive devices.
From the very beginning, Palestinian statements
were overly alarmist, which is actually quite
symptomatic of their hyperbolic discourse regarding
Israel’s actions in general. With respect to the alleged
massacre in Jenin, Palestinian spokesmen had initially
claimed that thousands of bodies were buried under the
rubble; then the figure was reduced to hundreds; and
now they must face the unfortunate outcome of the
fierce battle that took place: 47 Palestinian gunmen
killed, 23 Israeli soldiers killed, as well as seven
Palestinian civilians, whose deaths we profoundly
regret.
Indeed, today it is reported that Palestinian
officials themselves are now putting the number of
people killed in the Jenin camp at 56, and presenting
the events in Jenin not as a massacre but as a fierce
battle. That finding was disclosed to reporters by the
Director of Chairman Arafat’s Fatah movement for the
Northern West Bank, Kadoura Mousa Kadoura, after a
team of four Palestinian-appointed investigators had
visited the camp.
Although we will surely be accused of quoting
out of context, it is still necessary to relay the words of
a Palestinian gunman who fought in the battle in Jenin,
which have confirmed this. A member of Islamic Jihad
who was responsible for building and hiding explosive
devices in Jenin was interviewed by Al-Ahram Weekly
and related how Palestinians in Jenin prepared
themselves to trap and ambush Israeli soldiers. He said:
“We had more than 50 houses boobytrapped around the camp. We cut off lengths of
main water pipes and packed them with
explosives and nails. Then we placed them about
four metres apart throughout the houses — in
cupboards, under sinks, in sofas”.
Another, senior member of Islamic Jihad, Tabaat
Mardawi, told CNN that 1,000 to 2,000 bombs and
booby traps were spread throughout the camp.
Although there were unintended civilian
casualties in the gun battle in Jenin, as there are in any
conflict, those deaths, regrettable and saddening as
they may be, do not constitute a massacre. Those
casualties stem from the fact that armed Palestinians
fired from populated areas and built a terrorist network
in the very midst of the civilian population, with

5

S/PV.4525

blatant disregard for the safety and well-being of
Palestinian civilians. The accusations that hundreds or
thousands of civilians were killed in Jenin — made just
a short while ago in this very Council — have been
shown to be deliberate acts of misinformation. We have
even received reports that Palestinians have dug up
bodies buried elsewhere and reburied them in mass
graves in Jenin to bolster their claims of Israeli
atrocities.
I believe that these facts might serve to caution
the Council against accepting every allegation as fact
and heeding every call for an investigation. Had the
international community known two weeks ago what is
known today about the nature of the events in Jenin, it
is doubtful that a fact-finding effort would have been
considered appropriate.
I believe the Council might also wish to consider
why massacres such as those that have claimed the
lives of hundreds of Israeli civilians — including that
on Passover eve — in pizza parlours and in
discotheques do not also merit the most serious
international attention. Would it not be fair, beyond the
condemnation of Palestinian suicide bombings as
“morally repugnant”, to investigate such deliberate
massacres of Israeli civilians or to examine Chairman
Arafat’s direct involvement in such attacks? Is the
Palestinian
terrorist
campaign
immune
from
humanitarian law or from serious international
scrutiny? I hope that Council members can appreciate
the sense of dismay that has been generated among
many Israelis by the Security Council’s failure to adopt
resolutions that respond adequately and decisively to
the countless deliberate terrorist atrocities against
Israelis.
With regard to the situation at the Church of the
Nativity in Bethlehem, the Palestinian side has sought
to portray as an Israeli siege what is in reality a hostage
crisis. Armed Palestinian terrorists, in violation of
basic humanitarian norms, have taken over a religious
shrine, fired from it, prevented the individuals inside
from leaving and desecrated the sanctity of that holy
place, as confirmed by three Armenian monks who
managed to escape from the scene.
Fortunately, negotiations between Palestinian and
Israeli representatives have been constructive. A
number of Palestinians have been released from the
Church in recent days, and we are hopeful that a full

6

and non-violent resolution of the stand-off will be
reached very shortly.
We have reached a satisfactory, non-violent
resolution of the situation at the Ramallah compound.
The Government of Israel agreed to a proposal made
by President Bush that the incarceration of those
responsible for Cabinet Minister Ze’evi’s murder and
other terrorist operatives given refuge in the compound
take place in Palestinian territory, under United States
and British supervision, so as to avoid impunity and
prevent the application of what is by now the wellrecorded revolving-door policy adopted by the
Palestinian Authority.
Chairman Arafat is now able to move around at
will and to exercise his full authority as the leader of
the Palestinian people. The choice of whether to
prevent or to promote terrorism is entirely in Chairman
Arafat’s own hands. For the sake of peace in the
region, it is imperative that he not incite his people to
hatred and to violence, but rather that he act as a force
for peace.
I would also like to point out that Israel has taken
substantial steps towards the implementation of
resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002) and has
proceeded with its withdrawal from Palestinian cities.
The implementation of Palestinian responsibilities
under resolution 1402 (2002), however, has yet even to
begin. Failure by the Palestinian side to fulfil the
requirements set out by the Security Council will
impede our progress towards a resumption of political
dialogue. The Council should focus not only on Israel’s
actions, but also on the Palestinian side’s blatant and
continuing refusal to agree on a meaningful ceasefire,
to end terrorism and incitement and to cooperate with
General Zinni, as called for in resolution 1402 (2002).
Only action by both sides can move us towards an end
of violence and terrorism and towards a political
resolution.
Finally, certain members of the international
community are now working to determine how best to
restart a political dialogue. Prime Minister Sharon will
be arriving next week in Washington, where he will
discuss his ideas and his proposals on how to breathe
new life into the peace process. Israel fully understands
that the Palestinians are, and will always be, our
partners and our neighbours and that only through
dialogue and negotiations, conducted in a spirit of
nonviolence and mutual recognition, can we

S/PV.4525

reinvigorate the spirit of peace and reconciliation that
will yield a just and lasting solution to the conflict in
our region.
The President: I thank the representative of
Israel for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Sudan. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Manis (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): It is my
honour to make this statement on behalf of the Group
of Arab States. First of all, on behalf of the Group, I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for responding
quickly to its request to convene this urgent meeting to
reconsider the grave situation still prevailing in the
occupied Palestinian territories. I should also like to
take this opportunity to congratulate you on assuming
the presidency of the Council for this month. We are
confident that you will conduct the Council’s work
effectively by virtue of your well-known experience. In
addition, we should like to pay tribute to Ambassador
Lavrov and his team for their Herculean and
honourable efforts in presiding so ably over the
Council last month.
The Arab Group would like to express its
appreciation to Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his
great efforts to shed light on the events that took place
in the Jenin refugee camp by assembling a
distinguished team of eminent international figures
known for their honesty, credibility and high
professionalism. The Council welcomed the SecretaryGeneral’s initiative and requested that he keep it
informed of the results of the work, in accordance with
resolution 1405 (2002).

Group. Israel, the occupying Power, has consistently
flouted Security Council resolutions. It has committed
grave violations of international law and international
humanitarian law. The Secretary-General has said
before the Council that the Israeli forces are engaged in
wide-scale violations of international humanitarian
principles and human rights standards.
The Arab Group strongly condemns and
denounces the decision of Israel, the occupying Power,
to refuse to receive the fact-finding team assembled by
the Secretary-General, which the Security Council had
welcomed. The Arab Group calls upon the international
community, represented by the Council, to condemn
the occupying Power’s explicit rejection of Council
resolutions and its defiance and contempt of
international humanitarian law.
The question now arises: what does the Council
intend to do in the face of this grave challenge to its
credibility and to that of the United Nations? We
believe that the Council must require respect for its
authority. That could be accomplished, first, by
condemning the Israeli rejection, and secondly, by
uncovering the details of the occupying Power’s
heinous crimes against humanity in the Jenin camp and
of all the massacres it carried out against the
Palestinian people, which were seen on television
screens by the entire world. We believe the Council
could do that in a report to be submitted by the
Secretary-General in accordance with the provisions of
resolution 1405 (2002).

In addition, the Arab Group would like to pay
tribute to the Secretary-General and officials of the
Secretariat for their patience and their efforts to present
the necessary clarifications to the occupying Power.
However, that Power, though it initially agreed to
receive the fact-finding team, saying that it had nothing
to hide, ultimately reversed its position, explicitly
rejecting the team. That led the Secretary-General to
say, in a letter addressed to the Council, that the team
would not be able to remain in place because of the
Israeli Government’s position.

Israel, the occupying Power, has consistently
acted as if it were above the law. It flouted the
Council’s resolutions and was encouraged by the
Council’s failure to implement those resolutions. It
proceeded to carry out further war crimes, State terror
and mass murder of innocent Palestinian civilians. Now
the Council must rise to its Charter responsibility to
maintain international peace and security. Its failure to
shoulder that responsibility will prompt the Arab
Group to resort to the General Assembly. This will
express the positions of the countries of the world
concerning Israel’s crimes against humanity in the
Jenin refugee camp and other crimes of State terror
throughout the occupied Palestinian territories,
including holy Jerusalem.

Israel’s decision to reject the Secretary-General’s
initiative and not to comply with Security Council
resolution 1405 (2002) came as no surprise to the Arab

In conclusion, the Arab Group clearly stresses
that its call for the Security Council to meet in plenary
is not intended to provide an opportunity for speakers

7

S/PV.4525

to repeat their statements over and over again. Its aim
is to call, in the light of the grave threat to international
peace and security in the occupied Palestinian
territories, for international justice and equity and to
prevent the Council from shirking its responsibilities.
The Council should seek to ensure respect for and
enforcement of its resolutions and meet the challenges
being made to the principles and purposes of the
Charter on the basis of justice and equality among
nations and States. The Council should not allow Israel
to impose its will upon it.

remain nameless, since a vindictive campaign has
already been launched against him. Israel did not allow
him to participate in the fact-finding team because he
knows too much. We continue to see images of
Palestinian children, women and the elderly helplessly
wandering around the ruins, bewailing their dead and
their property, and of starving Palestinians awaiting
international relief efforts. We have seen the sick and
the injured bleed slowly to death as the Israeli army has
prevented ambulances from doing their job by blocking
or shooting at them.

The President: I thank the representative of the
Sudan for his kind words addressed to me.

I am not trying to conduct a propaganda
campaign and I am inclined to say even less than I
might. If the Israelis, Mr. Sharon and Mr. Peres, have
nothing to hide, why have they prevented the dispatch
of a fact-finding team that would have established the
truth? Why would they reject the impartial testimony
of such a team? Does Mr. Sharon himself have to lead
an Israeli delegation before the entire world can learn
the truth? No. It is guilt, the fear that Israel would be
condemned by world opinion and the dread of standing
before the court of international opinion that have
made them renege on their promises. Israel has rebelled
yet again against the will of the Security Council, the
Secretary-General and the entire United Nations
system. There is nothing new in that.

The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Tunisia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset, before I plunge into the debate, to
offer you, Sir, my congratulations and my best wishes
for success in your presidency of the Security Council.
This tribute is not circumstantial, because the Tunisian
delegation and a great many intellectuals in our country
hold you in high esteem. Our tribute extends to your
country, Singapore, which has succeeded in its
magnificent and spectacular political and socioeconomic experiment.
My thanks also go out to your predecessor,
Ambassador Sergey Lavrov, Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation.
We are confronting today a three-fold crisis that
history will not forgive us for neglecting.
First, there is a humanitarian crisis. We have
allowed an army to occupy a refugee camp in Jenin for
days on end and then to carry out a massacre of
proportions that will remain unknown until we receive
the results of an investigation that Israel has refused to
carry out while the Council has stood by. The Council
has failed to act in the face of Palestinian misery. The
silent images on American television networks,
showing the consequences of an apparent earthquake,
have shocked the conscience of the world community.
We have seen men and women using their hands to dig
out the corpses of non-combatants from under the
rubble. Eyewitnesses have begun to describe the scene
to representatives of international organizations. One
honourable and exemplary international civil servant
has described it as “horrific beyond belief.” He shall

8

Assistance is needed. The international
community must realize the scope of the tragedy and
act to ensure the delivery of food and medicine. Relief
supplies are trickling in slowly, but how can we
expedite their delivery when the Israeli army continues
to lay siege to Palestinian towns, to carry out
incursions into others and to destroy the administrative
and social infrastructure in the land it treacherously
occupies?
We also face a multifaceted moral crisis. How
could a country with a claim to intelligence get so
mired in an operation led by a man with a well-known
past? How could the Israeli peace camp allow such
dirty work to be done? How could Israel’s allies accept
this policy and threaten the use of the veto at the mere
mention of the Middle East? How could Sharon be
portrayed as a man of peace while, only two days ago
and for a month before that, his tanks were besieging
President Arafat, a Nobel Peace Prize laureate? How
can one demand the surrender of those responsible for
an assassination that took place last December and was
fully condemned by the Palestinian Authority, while
dozens of leading Palestinian officials have been

S/PV.4525

liquidated? Who is going to prosecute those who
practice state murder? How could siege be imposed on
one of the world’s holiest shrines, the Church of the
Nativity? This is an outrage that not even the war
criminals of World War II dared commit. How could
Israel, a young and fragile nation, pursue
transgressions that incur the wrath of the entire world?
Who bears responsibility for awakening old demons
and for fanning the flames of hatred between nations?
We are not surprised that, with a few rare
exceptions, the whole world is squarely pointing an
accusing finger at Sharon’s Israel. Israeli nationalism,
which pragmatic Arabs had ultimately come to accept,
has been severely tested. A cursory glance at the New
York Times reveals the magnitude of the collateral
damage. What a terrible waste, even for Israel!
Then there is the most serious crisis, which is the
crisis of authority. It is the most serious because it
concerns the Council, which is the highest international
body and which is ignored by Tel Aviv. I will not
elaborate on this, because to do so would be
disrespectful of this body.
Within a few weeks the Security Council adopted
three resolutions, and a presidential statement that for
our delegation carries the same authority as the
resolutions. Because of the dignity of the Council we
need not recall the hopeless words heard two days ago
in the Council’s consultations. This is terrible for the
United Nations system.
Let us imagine that an Arab State has committed
an act ten times, or even one hundred times, less grave
than those that have been perpetrated. Immediately a
strong coalition would have been formed; it would
have been noted that the law is the law and that a
Security Council resolution must be implemented;
sanctions would have been imposed, and the provisions
of Chapter VII would have been applied in full.
However, the policy of double standards has become a
permanent feature of our work. I must state clearly and
unequivocally that public opinion in our countries is
increasingly opposed to such policies.
We are fully aware that pressure groups are an
integral part of Western democracies, that is, all
minorities have the right to be heard and to use all
means at their disposal for this purpose. I do not claim
to be an expert on all societies, but I firmly believe
that, rather than groups being demonized, settling a
dispute through peaceful means is the best electoral

guarantee. Success is the ultimate test of politics, and
everyone loves a winner. Not all has been lost.
Previous efforts and missions have brought about a
limited measure of success. We are grateful to all those
who have carried out such efforts. However, the
occupation persists, with neither a political nor a
security solution. Major powers must adopt a firm
position vis-à-vis Israel; they should heed the call of
former President Carter, a man of wise counsel and the
man who achieved the first peace agreement between
Israel and an Arab State.
Having completed the diagnosis of the problem,
we must now consider the remedy.
First, it must be impressed upon Israel authorities
that they must comply — today, and not tomorrow —
with Security Council resolutions. The fact that there
are ongoing negotiations changes nothing. It is
incumbent upon us to support the efforts of the
international community to persuade Israel not to
persist in its behaviour vis-à-vis President Arafat and
to realize that he is the one with whom it must
negotiate. Never in colonial history, either as we have
lived it or as we have read about it, has a colonial
power behaved with such arrogance and cruelty as has
Israel in its treatment of President Arafat. We demand
the immediate cessation of Israel military operations —
all Israeli military operations.
We demand a solution for the matter of the
Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem, which Israel has
desecrated by committing murders and now by setting
fires in it. It is shameful that Israel has accused the
Palestinians of setting fire to a place in which they
have sought refuge, and where they will even be
accused of collective suicide. That is untrue. This fire
will remain a stain on the history of Israel.
What is even more tragic is the situation in which
the Security Council finds itself today. That is the
disbanding, indeed, the dissolution, of the fact-finding
team. We refuse to accept the failure of the Council.
Israel cannot continue to deny the team access to Jenin
on either political or legal grounds. Acting on the basis
that “might makes right”, Israel rode roughshod over
four Security Council resolutions. The most recent is
1405 (2002), a United States initiative that we accepted
in good faith and that Israel accepted unequivocally.
Nevertheless, it will remain a dead letter.
In such cases, the United Nations Charter, under
chapters VI and VII, provides for the adoption of

9

S/PV.4525

coercive and non-coercive measures to bring
recalcitrant States to comply with the law. It is
inadmissible for the Council to renounce its
prerogatives and accept the defeat inflicted on it by Tel
Aviv.
The Secretary-General has discharged his task
with impartiality and in a most constructive spirit.
Now, should the Council lack the energy and the unity
necessary for political action in the Middle East, we
will have to resort to other forums such as the General
Assembly, which will henceforth be a recourse for
condemning injustice and dealing with the weaknesses
and shortcomings that we have, sadly, seen in the last
three days. When the Security Council has proven its
efficiency and effectiveness in other instances, how can
we accept its inability to do the same in this situation,
which constitutes a grave threat to international peace
and security?
I repeat, the essence of the question is the need
for the Council to shoulder its responsibilities and do
its utmost to expose to the light of day the tragedy, the
nightmare that occurred in Jenin. We live in an open
and democratic society, in which information flows
freely, where fact-finding represents the essence of
democracy. Let us reject double standards, if we truly
wish to establish a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.
The President: I thank the representative of
Tunisia for the kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Cuba. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, may I say how very pleased my
delegation is to see you, Mr. President, presiding over
the work of the Security Council. We wish you every
success. Likewise, I wish to congratulate Ambassador
Lavrov and his entire team for the excellent manner in
which he guided the work of this body during April.
Once again the Security Council is not fulfilling
its responsibilities and is showing its inability to act in
the face of the extremely grave situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories. It is beyond question
that the situation in Jenin and Israel’s refusal to
cooperate with the fact-finding team demanded a
resolution such as that initially presented by Syria and
Tunisia in document S/2002/478, of 30 April. That

10

draft resolution correctly invoked Chapter VII of the
Charter. It described the situation as a grave threat to
international peace and security, demanded that Israel
cooperate without further delay with the fact-finding
team, and expressed the Council’s intention to adopt
adequate measures if the resolution was not
implemented. Following long hours of consultations
behind closed doors, yesterday, in the early hours in the
morning, many of us came to this Chamber in order to
witness the formal adoption of a draft resolution that
was more moderate than the original draft, but which,
in the final analysis, represented the least that the
Council could do in the face of such grave
circumstances.
In the end, the draft resolution was not put to the
vote for reasons that are well known. We all knew in
advance, however, what would have happened if such a
vote had taken place. Even if a majority had voted in
favour of the text, the draft resolution could not have
been adopted because the United States had explicitly
indicated to Council members that it would once again
exercise its power of veto — for the twenty-fifth time
on the question of Palestine since 1973.
The position of the United States is absurd. It was
that country that introduced resolution 1405 (2002) to
the Council — which supported the sending of a factfinding team to Jenin — yet that same country was
prepared to veto and obstruct a text aimed precisely at
demanding the full implementation of that resolution.
What happened did not surprise us, however. The
United States was never truly interested in sending a
fact-finding team to Jenin. It presented resolution 1405
(2002) solely in order to prevent the Council from
taking the measures that were really necessary in the
face of the killing and destruction caused by the Sharon
Government’s troops in Jenin. That is why that
resolution was limited to support for an initiative of the
Secretary-General, thereby covering up the Council’s
inaction. Other motives behind the introduction of that
resolution were the desires to obstruct the draft that had
been prepared on that occasion by the Arab Group and
to divert attention from the proposal of the SecretaryGeneral then under consideration to send a
multinational force to the occupied territories.
With or without an investigation, the truth cannot
be concealed. The actions committed in Jenin will go
down in history as another dark chapter in the terrible
saga of the illegal occupation of the Palestinian

S/PV.4525

territories. The events surrounding the fact-finding
team and the continuing siege of the Church of the
Nativity in Bethlehem — among many other
reprehensible actions — are the results of the fact that
the Government of Israel has for so long been allowed
to act with impunity, while the Council has been unable
to do anything to stop it. That is the result of the inertia
with which the Security Council has responded to the
flagrant violations of its own resolutions. It is the result
of Israel’s certainty that nothing can happen here as
long as it has — as it does now — the full support of a
permanent member, which, with its threat or use of the
veto, prevents the Council from acting.
We reiterate our view that the United States must
immediately suspend its financial support for military
purposes — support that clearly demonstrates its
complicity — and its military supplies to Israel,
including aircraft, helicopters and missiles, that are
used against civilians. Furthermore, it must condemn
Israeli State terrorism if it truly wants a global war to
be waged on terrorism, wherever and however it
manifests itself.
The Security Council must seriously consider the
proposal to establish a multinational force in the
occupied territories, as proposed by the SecretaryGeneral, who, throughout this process, has displayed
great flexibility and perseverance. It is simply
unacceptable that this body should continue to turn its
back on the suffering of the Palestinian people, trying
to make us believe that nothing can be done and
resigning itself to the current situation or adopting
timid resolutions that say little and are complied with
even less.
Cuba also believes that, in the face of the
inaction, ineffectiveness and discredit of the Security
Council, the General Assembly must take action by
resuming its tenth emergency special session in order
to help the heroic Palestinian people, to stop the
criminal actions and to save the credibility of the
United Nations.
The President: I thank the representative of
Cuba for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Chile. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Valdés (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): While
congratulating you, Sir, and wishing you every success

during your presidency of the Security Council this
month, I would like to take this opportunity to praise
the commendable work accomplished by your
predecessor, Ambassador Sergey Lavrov of the Russian
Federation.
My country is grateful for the opportunity to
speak in this public debate, which enables us to support
the efforts of the international community, in particular
those of the Secretary-General and the Security
Council, aimed at achieving a just and lasting peace in
the Middle East and the occupied Palestinian
territories.
This is the third time in recent weeks that my
country has expressed its position in the Security
Council on a conflict whose global implications can
leave no one indifferent. Four resolutions have been
adopted on this issue during that time — resolutions
1397 (2002) of 12 March, 1402 (2002) of 30 March,
1403 (2002) of 4 April and, lastly, 1405 (2002) of 19
April. All of those resolutions contain clear provisions
and specific deadlines. All of them have subsequently
been ignored by one or both parties.
Our unreserved support for the norms of
international law prompt us to affirm today that we are
concerned and disturbed by the lack of cooperation
from one of the parties in clarifying facts that require
an urgent response, in accordance with the obligation
of the international community to ensure respect for
human rights and to protect the civilian population
from the disproportionate use of force, regardless of
the objective sought.
We have forcefully condemned the terrorist
attacks on the civilian population in Israel, but we
consider equally condemnable the grave humanitarian
situation that the Israeli invasion has created in
Palestinian towns and camps. We consider particularly
serious the events in the Jenin camp, which cannot fail
to awaken universal feelings of pain and powerlessness
and which require a detailed and complete
investigation, as indicated in resolution 1405 (2002).
We profoundly regret the Israeli Government’s decision
to prevent it.
Chile believes that contempt for or liberal
interpretation of resolutions adopted by the Security
Council require united and resolute action on the part
of the Council, as such attitudes endanger the
credibility and effectiveness of the Council’s work,
thereby weakening the role conferred upon it by the

11

S/PV.4525

Charter as the guarantor of international peace and
security. It also affects the national dignity of all
Members of this Organization.
My country calls, clearly and explicitly, for the
abandonment of rigid positions and the adoption of
constructive attitudes capable of helping to replace
with dialogue unilateral decisions that could
irremediably affect the efforts being made by various
international players to resolve the conflict.
The President: I thank the representative of
Chile for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): On
19 April, the Security Council adopted a resolution
welcoming the Secretary-General’s initiative to send a
fact-finding team to the Jenin refugee camp. The
Security Council supported that initiative. At the time,
we were delighted that, after difficult negotiations,
such action could be taken to shed light on events in
Jenin and in the Jenin refugee camp during the 13 days
in which we witnessed Israeli aggression against the
camp and saw the Israeli military forces defiantly use
aggression as they destroyed homes and the
infrastructure of an entire city. The Israeli occupation
forces committed atrocities and violated international
humanitarian law. The resulting acts can be described
as war crimes.
Since 19 April, the Secretary-General has
ceaselessly made intense efforts to implement the
mandate entrusted to him by the Council. On 25 April,
he quickly established a fact-finding team including
personalities with internationally recognized skills. It
caused the first episode in a long series of delaying
tactics on the part of Israel, which continues to this
very day. It showed the extent to which Israel defies
the Council, its resolutions, the provisions of
international legitimacy and the international
community, and holds them in contempt.
During the past two weeks, the Secretary-General
has kept the Council informed of the Israeli
Government’s repeated delays in allowing the dispatch
of the fact-finding team. The Council’s credibility was
thus jeopardized. Despite all this, the SecretaryGeneral attempted to satisfy the Israeli requests
through negotiation. The fact-finding team was to

12

include military and legal experts. The SecretaryGeneral responded to requests for clarification.
However, there were further delaying tactics and
further attempts to gain or to waste time.
On every occasion, at the request of the
Secretary-General, the Council agreed to delay the
dispatch of the fact-finding team for 24 hours in order
to meet the requests of the Israeli Government, because
the Council and the Secretary-General believed that
Israel would promptly give its approval. Regrettably,
Israel continues to defy the Council, to show its
contempt for Council resolutions and to hide behind
certain powerful States members of the Council,
convinced that those States will protect it and will
disregard its actions, which are in violation of
international law.
We have no doubt that the Security Council has
failed in the responsibility entrusted to it by the
Charter: to maintain international peace and security. In
fact, the Council has completely failed to preserve its
credibility and that of its resolutions. The SecretaryGeneral had to face those delaying tactics and tricks
alone. Anyone who reads the Secretary-General’s most
recent letter to the Council will reach the same
conclusion. In our view, the letter represents an
indictment of all those manoeuvres.
We deeply regret that today the Security Council
is sending a clearly disturbing message to the
Palestinians and to other peoples around the world that
might some day come before the Council to plea for
protection and justice. The Council’s message is one of
powerlessness and silence, revealing the Council’s
inability to maintain international peace and security; it
demonstrates that the Council is often strong and
united in the face of the innocent and the weak but not
in the face of aggression.
At this stage in the Council’s discussions, my
delegation has decided not to refer to all the events that
have occurred in the West Bank and its cities. We have
decided not to refer to the acts of aggression and the
attacks that have occurred over a period of weeks. We
prefer to make this particular statement before the
Council in order to point out once again the
unprecedented policy of double standards — this moral
dysfunctioning — which is extremely dangerous and
which jeopardizes the world order that emerged after
the Second World War and its accompanying tragedies.
Images of that war are now repeated before our eyes.

S/PV.4525

The most recent such image was that of a heavy Israeli
tank that just yesterday stopped in a street of Nablus
and shelled the surrounding buildings. The Security
Council looks on in silence.
The Security Council has lost not only its
credibility before the international community in the
context of this conflict, but also its authority in the face
of a State that violates and derides international law
and legitimacy and all the noble principles of that law.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Canada. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, and the Council
for giving me the opportunity to express the viewpoint
of the Government of Canada on this important issue.
Over the past few days, we have witnessed a
positive turn of events in the Middle East. We
particularly welcome the announcement made in
Washington by the “quartet” of the intention to
organize a peace conference this summer, and we hope
that such a conference will be based on work already
carried out, including the draft agreement reached at
Taba. Only a broad diplomatic effort will bring about
the long-term political solution that we seek and need.
The situation is urgent and we must begin to work
seriously, without delay.
(spoke in English)
We are also encouraged by the lifting of the siege
of the President of the Palestinian Authority and the
withdrawal of Israeli troops from Ramallah. Canada
calls on Chairman Arafat to use his authority to prevent
further violence; attacks against innocent civilians are
never justifiable. We call on both parties to ensure that
the stand-off at the Church of the Nativity ends without
further violence or destruction.
Regrettably, in the past week there have also been
some very negative developments. Israel has not yet
fully withdrawn from cities in the West Bank, as it is
called upon to do in resolution 1402 (2002). Under
Article 25 of the United Nations Charter, United
Nations Members bind themselves to accept the
decisions of the Security Council. Canada believes that
Israel must accordingly complete its withdrawal
immediately.

Further, Canada viewed resolution 1405 (2002),
in particular, as an important expression of the will of
the international community. With the prior
concurrence of Israeli leaders, the Secretary-General
adopted the fact-finding team concept and the Council
gave its endorsement of the initiative unanimously. The
team that the Secretary-General has assembled is
distinguished and has wide-ranging experience. We
commend him for his efforts. We also express our
sincere gratitude to the members of the team for their
willingness to participate, and at such short notice.
Canada has supported the fact-finding team
initiative because we believe it is vitally important that
the facts surrounding the events in Jenin be brought to
light. We have registered our views directly with the
Government of Israel. It is in the interests of both
parties, as well as of the entire international
community, that a credible and transparent finding of
the facts take place. Canada believes that such an
exercise must include an examination of all alleged
wrongs, whether Israeli or Palestinian.
The Israeli position has implications beyond the
tragedy of the conflict in the Middle East. The Security
Council is at the heart of the international architecture
for the preservation of international peace and security.
Some countries may feel that an effective Security
Council is optional to the maintenance of international
peace and security. Canada is not one such country.
The Government of Canada therefore profoundly
regrets the continuing Israeli position not to receive the
fact-finding team, which is compromising the authority
of the Council.
As always, we stand ready to support this Council
in bringing genuine and lasting peace to the region.
The President: There are a number of speakers
remaining on my list. With the concurrence of the
members of the Council, I intend to suspend the
meeting now in order to hear a briefing by the
Secretary-General in informal consultations. The
Security Council will continue its consideration of the
item on its agenda this afternoon following the
adjournment of the consultations of the whole.
The meeting was suspended at 4.40 p.m.

13
