V.
(d)

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committt·e
Dornmentation

Protectwn against products harmful to health and the enr,ronmenr
Documentation Report of the Secretary-General on protection
against products harmful to health and the environment
Item 2.

Repon ,,f the Secretary-General presenting summary reports on countries with no separate
mdi~idual reports in that 'year

Development and international Cl'orwmic rn-uperal/011 168

Trade and development
Documentation Report of the Trade and Development Board

/111plnnen1atwn ,!( the ,11ed1um-term and long-term recovery and
reh11/•1/ita11on pmgramm1• in the Sudano-Sahc/1an region
Documentation

Report of the Secretary-General on special meas-ures in favour of island developing countnes

(b)

Industrialization
Documentation Report of the Industrial Development Board
Report of the Secretary-General on the Industrial
Development Decade for Africa
Food problems

(c)

Documentation

Report of the World Food Council
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation of
food and agriculture in Africa

(d)

New and renewable sources of energy
Documentation Report of the Committee on the Development and
Utilization of New and Renewable Sources of
Energy

(e)

Development of the energy resources of del'elopmg countnes
Documentation

(a)

(b)

(c)

Report of the Secretar~-General on the development of the energy resources of developing
countries

Item 3. Operational activ1t1es for develop mm I
Operational activities o(the United Natwns system
Documentation Report of the Director-General for Development
and International Economic Co-operation on a
comprehensive policy review of the operational
activities of the United Nations system
United Nations Development Programme
Documentation Relevant chapters of the report of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Fund for Populatwn Act1l'ities
Documentation

Relevant chapters of the report of the Governing
Council of the U mted Nations Development Programme
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the
report of the Executive Director of the United
Nations Fund for Populat10n Activities on the
United Nations Population Award and Trust Fund

(d)

United Nations Children's Fund
Documentation

Relevant chapter of the report of the Economic and
Social Council

(a)

World Food Programme
Item 4. Training and research
United Nations Institute_fi,r Training and Research
Documentation Report of the Executive Director of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research

(b)

United Nations University

(e)

Documentation
(c)

(a)

(b)

Report of the Council of the United Nations University

Unified approach to development 11na/_vs1.1· and planmng
Documentation Report of the Secretary-General on a unified
approach to development analysis and planning

Item 5. Special economic and disaster relief assistance
Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordrnator
Documentation Report of the Secretary-General on the Office of
the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator
Special programmes of economic assistance

168 Under this item the Second Committee will also have before it the

reports of the Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for
Development and the Commission on Human Settlements. The Second
Committee may wish to decide not to consider draft proposals on these

Report~ of the Secretary-General on individual
rountnr,;;

(cl

(a)

167

39/218.

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the medium-term and long-term recovery
and rehabilitation programme in the SudanoSahelia11 region

Development and international economic cooperation

I he <;enera/ Assembl;.
Emphasizing the vital importance of issues related to
money, finance, debt, resource flows and trade for development, prosperity and good relations among peoples and
the urgency of measures to promote wider co-operation
among nations on these issues,
t:mphasizing also the need for consistency between the
international trade, mQnetary and financing systems and
policies,
I. Requests the Secretary-General to consult Governments of States Members of the United Nations and members of the specialized agencies and to ascertain their specific views on expanding international co-operation in the
fields of money, finance, debt and resource flows, including
development assistance and trade, with special attention
to the interests of the developing countries, taking into
account the effects of the economic crisis on their economic and social development;
2. Also requests the Secretary-General to seek the
views of the relevant organs, organizations and bodies of
the United Nations system, in particular the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, as well as
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, on enhancing their effectiveness to support in every respect the
actions taken by States to strengthen international cooperation in these areas,
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
report based on the outcome of the consultations in relation to the issues referred to in paragraphs l and 2 above
to be circulated to Governments not later than the first
quarter of 1985 and to be updated subsequently, as appropriate. for submission to the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
104th plenary meeting
18 December /984

39/219.

Role of qualified national personnel in the
social and economic development of developing countries 169

The Ceneral Assembly.
Referring to its resolutions 33/135 of 19 December
1978. 35/80 of 5 December 1980 and 371228 of 20
December 1982 on the role of qualified national personnel
in the social and economic development of developing
countries,
Referring also to its resolutions 320 I (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
reports, except specific recommendations requiring action by the General
Assembly contained in the repNts of these bodies or in the report of the Economic and Social Council.
16 Q Sec also ,ect. X B4. dec1,1on 391439, para. (h).
