United Nations

S/PV.5832

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5832nd meeting
Friday, 8 February 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Arias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Panama)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Verbeke
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Wang Guangya
Mr. Weisleder
Mrs. Mladineo
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Kumalo
Sir John Sawers
Mr. Khalilzad
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-23190 (E)

*0823190*

S/PV.5832

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Expression of farewell to Mrs. Mirjana Mladineo,
Permanent Representative of Croatia to the
United Nations
The President (spoke in Spanish): We understand
that this is the last occasion on which Ambassador
Mirjana Mladineo, Permanent Representative of
Croatia, will participate in the meetings of the Council.
Ambassador Mladineo, with her distinguished career in
the diplomatic service of her country, has represented
Croatia at United Nations Headquarters since 2005. I
wish to take this opportunity, on behalf of the members
of the Council and on my own account, to express to
our colleague and friend every success in her future
endeavours.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jan Eliasson,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Darfur.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Eliasson to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Guéhenno to take a seat at the
Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Her
Excellency Mrs. Lila H. Ratsifandrihamanana,
Permanent Observer of the African Union.

2

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mrs. Ratsifandrihamanana to take a seat
at the Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Jan Eliasson, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Darfur, and Mr. Jean-Marie
Guéhenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations.
I now give the floor to Mr. Eliasson.
Mr. Eliasson: Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for inviting me to make this briefing to
the Security Council.
As members are aware, it has been over one year
since my African Union (AU) counterpart, Mr. Salim
Ahmed Salim, and I embarked on our work to
re-energize the political process for Darfur. In that
pursuit, we have received active, persistent and
committed support from the Secretary-General and
from the AU Chairperson. We have met and consulted
widely with the parties, with civil society, with
regional partners, with the international community
and, of course, with the Security Council. We convened
a productive meeting with the movements last August
in Arusha. We launched the first phase of the peace
talks through the opening session in Sirte on
27 October.
Since then, we have been working intensely with
the parties in preparation for substantive talks. Some
progress has been made in bringing the parties closer to
the negotiating table. But we have also been faced with
a deteriorating security situation, as well as other
constraints largely beyond our control.
When I briefed the Council in November, I
highlighted the key role of the political process in
bringing about normalization and peace in Darfur. At
the same time, I stressed that progress will be
impossible without the creation of an environment
conducive to substantive negotiations.
Over the past few months, the security and
humanitarian situation in Darfur and in the region has
dramatically deteriorated, most recently through events
related to Chad. During this time, the parties have not

08-23190

S/PV.5832

been able to finalize their preparations for substantive
talks or engage in confidence-building measures to
improve prospects for negotiations. Those problems
have been compounded by the slow deployment of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), undermining the chances to
demonstrate to the people of Darfur that the
international community is bringing security to them.

As a result, as of now, the movements have
coalesced around five groupings: SLA-Unity, the
United Resistance Front (URF), SLA-Abdul Shafi,
SLA-Abdul Wahid and JEM-Khalil Ibrahim. This is an
improvement compared to the situation in which we
found ourselves last year at this time, when many
movements were fragmenting, unconvinced that a
political solution was the best way forward.

As Council members are aware, for some time
there have been serious clashes between the
Government of Sudan and Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM)-Khalil Ibrahim forces in West
Darfur. Earlier this week, Sudan Liberation Army
(SLA) Unity movement units clashed with forces of the
Government of Sudan in North Darfur, and there have
been reports of continued aerial bombardments. In
recent months, there have also been several crossborder incursions between Chad and Darfur, as we all
know. After the attacks on N’Djamena by rebel groups
last weekend, the situation is now calmer, but it
remains fluid and fragile. All these developments, and
the subsequent continued tensions between Chad and
Sudan, have detrimental consequences for the Darfur
political process.

We must, however, be aware that the movements
are continuously repositioning themselves. Unification
and coordination efforts continue but remain fraught
with difficulties, not least related to unresolved
leadership issues. The movements have still to prepare
for discussions on substantive matters for the talks.
Thus, prospects for quick agreements on common
positions and a negotiation team appear dim.

It should be added that humanitarian actors
remain deeply concerned about the safety of their staff
and about their ability to provide assistance to the
civilian population. This comes at a time when
malnutrition continues to rise and crop failures are
occurring or foreseen in parts of Darfur. Coupled with
the slow deployment of UNAMID, not seeing positive
change on the ground will continue to frustrate a
population with rising expectations regarding security,
protection and early recovery programmes. That is
particularly the case not only in the camps for
internally displaced persons, but also in rural
communities where the population is in dire need of
support. I saw that with my own eyes during visits in
December and January.
The launching of the peace process in Sirte in
October served as a catalyst for accelerating the
movements’ preparations for the talks. Mr. Salim and I
were encouraged by recent steps forward by the
movements to reorganize and unite. In Juba, the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM) was able to
successfully assist a number of them in coming
together during the autumn. Further consultations have
also continued within and between them on the ground
in Darfur.

08-23190

To facilitate the movements’ preparations for the
negotiations, the idea has been proposed of hosting
what we call an Arusha-style preparatory meeting with
the movements, in close coordination with our regional
partners, in order for them to coordinate their
positions. Such a meeting could be followed by
workshops to finalize preparations for the talks.
However, holding such a meeting would not meet
its objective without the presence of what I would call
a critical mass of movement representatives. To
determine the movements’ readiness, Mr. Salim, I and
our team have been out in the field and have consulted
extensively with the leaders of the movements during
December and January through missions to Darfur,
Juba and locations outside the Sudan.
Out of the five main groupings, two groups — the
SLA-Unity and the URF — have expressed their
willingness to join the political process and participate
in a preparatory meeting, in workshops and, of course,
in the substantive talks. They should be commended
for their commitment to the search for a political
solution. Furthermore, both groups continue to be
engaged in coordination discussions with each other
and with other movements. A third grouping,
SLA-Abdul Shafi, now based in Juba, has requested to
go to Darfur to consult with its constituency and has
also expressed reservations on the format and venue of
the talks.
SLA-Abdul
Wahid
and
Abdul
Wahid’s
representatives in the field have recently engaged in
dialogue with the mediation and the UNAMID Force
Commander, General Agwai. I personally had a lengthy

3

S/PV.5832

and constructive discussion with Abdul Wahid in Paris
last week. However, he and his movement are still not
ready to engage in negotiations until certain
preconditions are met, primarily related to security for
the people of Darfur.
The fifth grouping, JEM-Khalil Ibrahim, has
stated that it is committed to the political process,
provided that, inter alia, there be only two movements
at the talks, the JEM and the Sudan Liberation
Movement (SLM). However, it is also clear that this
movement is engaged in military activities.
Some of the movements have requested
additional time to achieve unification. Mr. Salim and I
have long cautioned against the more ambitious
objective of full unification as a condition for talks to
begin. This may take a long time. Instead, we have
encouraged the movements to speed up the unfinished
work of preparing common positions and a common
negotiation team.
In short, Mr. Salim and I believe that the
convening of a preparatory meeting during the coming
weeks would be premature, due to the movements’
internal preparations and efforts to reach a critical mass
of participation. To this must be added the fragile
security situation and the tense Chad-Sudan
relationship and its effects on the region and on the
political process in Darfur.
Against this background, the mediation is
strengthening its efforts to assist the movements’
preparations. Our team will have consultations with the
movements on various substantive issues during the
next few weeks. Of course, it will also engage the
Government on these matters. In addition, together
with UNAMID and the Darfur-Darfur dialogue, we are
increasing our work to incorporate into the peace
process the views and concerns of civil society,
internally displaced persons (IDPs) and traditional
leaders through the establishment of what we call
advisory forums. These forums will serve as
mechanisms for the selection of observers from civil
society for the talks and as information channels to and
from the people of Darfur.
Too often in history, efforts to resolve conflicts
and build peace have been limited to those who have
taken up arms. In Darfur, ordinary citizens and the
IDPs have carried the burden and paid a huge price for
the conflict. It is essential that we establish effective
communications with the people of Darfur about

4

expectations, progress and, in due time, results of the
talks. Many of them will be responsible for the
implementation of a future agreement, and they will
hold the parties accountable for their commitments.
After one year of engagement with the parties, I
would like to attempt to give the Council a realistic
assessment of where we find ourselves in the search for
peace in Darfur. The parties have no doubt made
progress in their preparations. But they are still, to a
great degree, not ready to engage in substantive talks.
As stated, the movements still lack consolidated
positions and have not yet formed a joint team. We
commend the governing parties, the National Congress
Party (NCP) and the SPLM, for resolving their
differences and resuming cooperation within the
Government of National Unity of the Sudan. But there
is still need for a common strategy incorporating the
positions of the NCP, SPLM and Minni Minawi — a
signatory of the Darfur Peace Agreement, as members
know — on how to resolve the crisis in Darfur. Much
more also needs to be done by all parties to improve
safety and humanitarian conditions on the ground. Of
course, the Government has the primary responsibility
for upholding security, justice and respect for
international law.
The experience of the last months demonstrates
more than ever that resolution of the Darfur crisis
requires an environment conducive to peace. While the
people of Darfur cannot wait forever, we will have to
accept that the steps towards an eventual peace
agreement will be incremental and will take longer
than we had initially hoped.
While continuing our efforts on the political
track, we should thus also concentrate on the issues of
immediate concern to the population. The most
pressing matter at the moment is security. We have
been repeatedly urging the parties to exercise restraint,
refrain from military activities on the ground and
accept that a political solution is the only path to
resolution of the conflict.
As Council members will recall, establishing a
strengthened ceasefire was the third component of the
Addis Ababa conclusions of November 2006, together
with the peacekeeping and political tracks. An
agreement on a cessation of hostilities and a credible
monitoring mechanism for such an agreement are a
necessary step on the path towards peace. As a
demonstration of their commitment to the political

08-23190

S/PV.5832

process, the parties should now unilaterally declare and
respect a cessation of hostilities, as well as cooperate
in the efforts to reform the existing ceasefire
mechanisms. We will continue our discussions with
UNAMID on how best to bring this issue forward.
Jean-Marie Guéhenno and I are working closely
together on this matter.
At the same time, Mr. Salim and I are
re-evaluating the staffing needs for the mediation.
Following a year of preparations for the talks, we
believe it is necessary to have a full-time joint African
Union-United Nations chief mediator in the Sudan
engaging with the parties on a continuous basis and
leading the daily work of the Joint Mediation Support
Team (JMST). We are restructuring the mediation
support team to also reflect the new realities of the
joint African Union-United Nations presence in Darfur
since the beginning of the year.
To conclude, allow me to reiterate that we must
remain steadily engaged and build on the progress
made so far with a view to initiating substantive talks.
However, the deterioration of the situation on the
ground in Darfur and in the region most recently now
also warrants intensified efforts by the international
community to reduce prevailing tensions. Without a
relationship of trust and cooperation between Chad and
the Sudan, peace will be elusive for the people of
Darfur. The absence of such a relationship is also
damaging the cohesion and cooperation among our
regional partners in the search for peace.
A sense of security and calm must finally take
root in Darfur through a combination of the
deployment of an effective peacekeeping force and
credible commitments by all parties to a cessation of
hostilities. In such a way, a climate conducive to
productive peace talks could be created. Mr. Salim and
I are committed to facilitating that process. To that end,
we will work closely with UNAMID and all concerned
to ensure greater synergy between the political,
peacekeeping and humanitarian components. In that
endeavour, we will continue to need the support of the
international community and, in particular, this
Council.
Ultimately, however, we must remember that
progress will be made only when the parties
themselves demonstrate the necessary political will and
their commitment to peace. It is now time for them to

08-23190

get on with the serious work of achieving peace and a
life of dignity for the people of Darfur.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Eliasson. I now give the floor to Mr. Guéhenno.
Mr. Guéhenno: Thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Council on Darfur. As the
Council may be aware, I travelled to the region from
21 to 31 January in order to visit, among other
missions, the African Union/United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in the weeks
following the transfer of authority and to hold
consultations with officials from the Government of
the Sudan on the outstanding issues related to the
deployment of the Hybrid Operation. My visit to the
region was sobering, yet extremely informative, and I
would like to provide the Council with some
observations from my trip. Before doing so, allow me
to provide a brief update on the current security and
humanitarian situation in Darfur.
The recent hostilities between the Government of
the Sudan and the Justice and Equality Movement
(JEM) and its leader, Khalil Ibrahim, in West Darfur
and the continued build-up of their forces in the area
remains one of our principal security concerns in
Darfur. As a result of that situation, the majority of the
state of West Darfur remains inaccessible to
humanitarian organizations. The situation has been
exacerbated by the violence in Chad over the past
several days. The potentially destabilizing regional
implications of the crisis have been highlighted by
numerous media reports of Chadian rebel movements
receiving support in the Sudan, on the one hand, and
Sudanese rebel movements that have acted in support
of the Chadian Government, on the other. Continuing
accusations by both Governments of their support for
rebel movements on each side of the border increase
the climate of mistrust, fuel tensions between the two
countries and once again demonstrate the potential for
a conflict of international dimensions in the area.
Meanwhile, other disturbing trends are emerging,
including the large-scale mobilization and shifting
alliances of Arab militia in South Darfur, which has
coincided with an increase in direct conflict between
rebel movements and pro-Government militia. In
addition, the appointment of Musa Hilal to the position
of Advisor to the Ministry of Federal Affairs is being
viewed by many as an extremely disappointing
development, particularly since the Security Council

5

S/PV.5832

itself has recognized his past involvement in violence
in Darfur.
The ongoing violence in Darfur and the border
area also poses a significant threat to civilians as the
humanitarian community endeavours to provide them
with the assistance they require. Continuing
displacement, compounded by decreasing humanitarian
access and impending crop failures in many areas of
Darfur due to late rains, pests and neglect of farms,
threatens to create a humanitarian situation that the
international community simply does not have the
capacity to address. The humanitarian situation will
improve only if we see a decrease in hostilities and
cooperation on behalf of the armed groups in the area.
(spoke in French)
I would like to now share with the Council some
observations from my trip to Darfur. During my visit to
the three states that make up Darfur, it became clear
that UNAMID is severely under-resourced for the tasks
that it was mandated to perform. The number of troops
and police and their enabling capabilities currently in
the mission area are clearly not sufficient to provide
protection for the civilian population in Darfur in the
current hostile environment.
Nevertheless, UNAMID is exploring ways in
which to bring about tangible improvement in the
situation with the limited human and material resources
at its disposal. For example, the Mission is doing its
utmost to adopt a more proactive posture through
increased presence, especially in internally displaced
persons camps. To that end, the UNAMID Police
Commissioner has dramatically increased the number
of police patrols, which now take place from 8 a.m. to
6 p.m., and is constructing a number of police posts in
those areas with a view to maintaining a 24-hour
presence. The Force Commander is also exploring
options for increasing the presence of forces in key
areas.
It is important to stress that despite those efforts,
the Mission will not be able to meet the high
expectations of Darfur’s civilians. That is particularly
worrying since we risk losing their confidence if we
are not able to meet those expectations. Experience in
United Nations peacekeeping has shown that the loss
of the local population’s confidence can deal a severe
blow to our efforts.

6

The Assistant Secretary-General in charge of the
Department of Field Support, Ms. Lute, also visited the
Mission in the days prior to my trip. Ms. Lute noted a
number of significant challenges with respect to
bringing UNAMID up to United Nations standards.
Among the priorities in that respect is the improvement
of UNAMID camps, particularly camp services, and
security and force protection measures in order to
avoid a repetition of the events of Haskanita. That will
be essential for improving troop morale and security, in
addition to the Mission’s operational effectiveness.
At the time of Ms. Lute’s visit, a total of 1,256
staff, or 23 per cent of the authorized UNAMID posts,
had been deployed to Darfur. The challenges faced by
UNAMID staff are many and range from poor living
conditions to high staff turn-over due to security
concerns.
(spoke in English)
Following my visit to Darfur, I travelled to Addis
Ababa on 27 January, where African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, Mr. Said
Djinnit, and I met with Mr. Mutrif Siddiq, the
Chairman of the Government of the Sudan’s technical
committee for the implementation of UNAMID. We
had the opportunity to discuss a number of outstanding
matters related to the deployment of the operation,
including the issues of UNAMID accoutrements, force
composition and the finalization of the status-of-forces
agreement. The meeting was constructive, with all
sides emphasizing the need to build on recent progress,
especially with respect to status-of-forces agreement
negotiations. Mr. Siddiq, however, noted that he would
be required to further consult with his Government,
and we were not able to reach any definitive
conclusions on the issues that we discussed.
As the Council is aware, the Secretary-General
had the opportunity to meet with President Bashir on
the margins of the African Union summit in Addis
Ababa some days later. There they further discussed a
number of outstanding issues, on which the SecretaryGeneral briefed the Council this Tuesday. One of the
principal issues that they discussed was force
composition, which, as the Secretary-General noted,
resulted in some progress with regard to the
deployment of key units. In that regard, the SecretaryGeneral indicated to the President that the United
Nations would prioritize the rapid deployment of
Ethiopian troops to UNAMID on the understanding

08-23190

S/PV.5832

that the Thai and Nepalese units would be deployed
simultaneously. I should recall that the Thai and
Nepalese contingents were ready to deploy on short
notice, and the early addition of new contingents
remains a desperate need for UNAMID.
The issue of force composition is one of the
lynchpins to UNAMID’s success, and we urgently
require a definitive decision from the Government on
the inclusion of the Thai and Nepalese units. If we are
to deploy those units alongside the Ethiopian troops,
we must inform Thailand and Nepal immediately so
that urgent pre-deployment preparations can be
finalized. Ethiopia has indicated that it would be ready
to initiate the deployment of its battalion to Darfur
within the month of February, and we anticipate that
the deployment of the advance party of the Egyptian
battalion will begin within the month of March.
In light of the continuing discussions that we
have had with the Government on the issue of force
composition, it is worth recalling that Security Council
resolution 1769 (2007) indicates that the force should
be “predominantly African in character”. To have a
force that is exclusively African in character is another
matter. There are a number of important reasons why a
broader mix of troops is necessary. To obtain the
required capabilities will necessitate seeking troop and
police contributors from non-African countries for
certain capabilities.
If we are to reconfigure UNAMID into a robust,
credible and proactive peacekeeping presence, there
are a number of issues which must be confronted as a
matter of the utmost priority. We are now at a critical
moment in the life of the Hybrid Operation, and
additional delay in resolving those issues would have a
severely negative impact on the mission. As already
mentioned, it is essential that we expeditiously
conclude all necessary arrangements to allow for the
early deployment of the Thai and Nepalese units. We
have already expressed our willingness to prioritize
deployment of Ethiopian and Egyptian troops with the
understanding that those Asian units would deploy in a
timely fashion. It is important also that UNAMID’s
force composition should draw upon a broad range of
countries, since due consideration must be given to the
geographical balance of the force in order to have an
operation that is perceived as impartial by the parties.
On a more positive note, we very much welcome
the progress that we have made with the Government

08-23190

in our consultations on the status-of-forces agreement,
which we hope to sign soon. The spirit in which those
negotiations have taken place should set the tone for
the resolution of all outstanding issues regarding the
deployment of UNAMID. In that regard, we must still
resolve a number of matters, including full freedom of
movement for UNAMID. As we have said previously,
peacekeeping is a round-the-clock job, and the force
must have the ability to patrol both on the ground and
in the air at all hours. We also require the
Government’s cooperation in extending visas to the
contractors currently providing services to UNAMID
troops in Darfur until a new contractor is in place. The
bidding process is under way, and we expect to finalize
that issue within the shortest possible time frame.
In the meantime, UNAMID troop and police
contributors must do everything possible to expedite
their pre-deployment preparations and arrive at the
mission with the required capabilities as swiftly as
possible. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
stands ready to provide whatever additional assistance
UNAMID troop and police contributors may require in
that regard.
However, as the Council is aware, UNAMID still
lacks critical military aviation and ground
transportation assets, which must be urgently
generated. We appreciate the United Kingdom’s efforts
in that regard; however, we still lack the majority of
military helicopter units which are required, and some
ground transportation units. The Council must be
aware that, should offers for those critical capabilities
not be forthcoming, additional troops will not be a
sufficient substitute. Darfur is a vast area, and we must
have the ability to quickly move troops to strategic
points. The Secretariat will continue to pursue all
avenues to generate those assets, and will consider all
credible possibilities.
The continued hostilities in Darfur serve as a stark
reminder that some parties to the conflict are still not
prepared to lay down their weapons and commit to the
path of dialogue. In addition to prolonging the suffering
of millions of civilians in the region and complicating
the peace process, continued hostilities will have very
negative consequences for the deployment of UNAMID
and will distract the mission from implementing its
mandate. In that regard, the Council must be prepared
for the eventuality that UNAMID may be forced to
operate in an environment of continued hostilities,
which could significantly complicate our collective

7

S/PV.5832

efforts to support the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1769 (2007) and a future peace
agreement in Darfur.

with the African Union and the United Nations with a
view to facilitating the implementation of UNAMID’s
mandate.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mrs. Lila Ratsifandrihamanana.

We take this opportunity to praise and encourage
the troops that make up UNAMID and to thank the
troop-contributing countries and the donor countries
for their generosity.

Mrs. Ratsifandrihamanana (spoke in French): I
wish to thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting on a
subject that looms large among our shared concerns. I
commend Mr. Jan Eliasson and Mr. Guéhenno on their
exhaustive briefings, which the African Union fully
endorses, being one of the pillars of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).
Our participation in this meeting transcends the
symbolic act of being present here. We are here above
all to reaffirm the African Union’s firm commitment to
discharging its duties and responsibilities to work
alongside the United Nations for the success of the
effective deployment of UNAMID and the Hybrid
Operation as a whole. We are also here to reiterate our
resolve to establish close cooperation with all the
partners involved in that unique enterprise, aware as
we are of the challenge we face. We cannot allow that
unprecedented operation to fail. Today more than ever
before, we must demonstrate solidarity and mutual
confidence.
We are also here to recall the long and difficult
road travelled, the many obstacles and the reoccurring
difficulties that emerged before the decisive turning
point of 31 December 2007 — the transfer of authority
from the African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) to
UNAMID, which represented a significant milestone in
the quest for peace in Darfur and the region. We take
this opportunity once again to hail the personnel and
troops of AMIS for their selflessness and the heroic
work which they undertook in extremely difficult
circumstances.
We are also here to share the decisions adopted at
the latest Assembly of Heads of State and Government
of the African Union. The Assembly emphasized the
relaunching of the peace negotiations on 27 October
2007 in Sirte. In that connection, the Assembly
reaffirmed its support for the joint efforts of the two
Special Envoys, Mr. Jan Eliasson and Mr. Salim
Ahmed Salim, and called upon the various parties
involved to cooperate further, since the use of arms is
no longer an alternative. The Sudanese Government
has been strongly encouraged to continue to cooperate

8

As we see it, there has been no lack of will but
rather a lack of resources. Today, we would like to call
upon the Council to take a close look at the problems
of resources and logistics, which were referred to a
moment ago by Mr. Guéhenno.
We realize, however, that a great deal has to be
done before we achieve our shared objective of peace
and the effective return to normalcy in Darfur, in the
Sudan and throughout the region. We must be more
careful, since instability in Darfur has spread
throughout the region and new concerns beset us with
the recent events in Chad, as well as in Kenya.
(spoke in English)
The UNAMID operation represents a concrete
testimony of the new and emerging partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations
such as the African Union in the continued quest for
international peace and security. We encourage the
Council to continue to strengthen the support for the
efforts deployed by regional organizations on behalf of
the Council, which remains the primary custodian of
international peace and security under the Charter of
the United Nations.
We therefore appeal to all to continue to support
the process and to take all necessary measures towards
addressing the outstanding gaps in the critical
capabilities required to ensure the effectiveness of
UNAMID. We thank the Government of the Sudan for
the cooperation it has extended thus far and urge it to
continue in this spirit, so as to resolve the remaining
outstanding issues of land, air transportation and the
freedom of movement of UNAMID. We believe this
will greatly assist in facilitating the speedy and smooth
deployment of various components of UNAMID.
With regard to the relation between Chad and the
Sudan, the African Union continues to engage both
member States constantly, with the facilitation of His
Excellency Colonel Muammar Al-Qadhafi, the leader
of the great Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

08-23190

S/PV.5832

We believe that the success of this Hybrid
Operation depends largely on the early achievement of
a comprehensive political agreement. In this respect,
we reaffirm the commitment of the African Union to
continue to work closely with the United Nations
towards the advancement of the political process. We
recognize the obvious challenges involved in the
process, but we are confident that the parties and
stakeholders will continue to play constructive roles
towards moving the peace process forward. We are
encouraged by the attendance of some of the
movements in the talks on Juba and their willingness to
unify their positions on a common negotiating
platform.
(spoke in French)
I cannot conclude without failing to note, once
again, our sincere appreciation to both Mr. Guéhenno
and Mr. Eliasson for their tireless efforts in this
process. Finally, I would like to echo all of those
Africans who are devoted to peace in expressing once
again our thanks to and our confidence in all of the
members of this Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We thank
Mrs. Lila Ratsifandrihamanana for her statement. I
now open the floor to members of the Council.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
The briefings we have just heard from Mr. Jan Eliasson,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations — both of whom we would
like to thank earnestly — provide a glimpse of
developments that are not completely pessimistic on the
subject of the deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). Some
indicators, which had been unclear until now, are
becoming more visible, according to the information
given to us by the Secretary-General after his talks with
the highest authorities in the Sudan. The Sudanese
authorities agreed to the expansion of the UNAMID
contingent with the participation of some non-African
countries, and the Sudanese President made a
commitment to authorize the signing of a status-offorces agreement. It is true that, according to most
recent information, that agreement has not yet been
signed, but let us not lose hope.
Furthermore, the improvement of the situation in
Chad, while still precarious after the latest conflict,
allows us to think that there is a strong possibility that

08-23190

the European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR)
and the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) might be deployed
in the meantime, thereby providing substantial support
to the Hybrid Operation. At any rate, we wish to praise
this desire for openness that has been expressed by the
Khartoum Government.
Nevertheless, in spite of some encouraging signs
we must remain vigilant, since the humanitarian and
security situation continues to worsen, as was so
rightly stated in the briefings by Mr. Eliasson and
Mr. Guéhenno. Indeed, there is no need to emphasize
that the civilian population, who are the primary
victims of these events, are basing their hopes on a
rapid and effective deployment of UNAMID.
As I had recalled during a previous meeting, my
country, Burkina Faso, has already shown its readiness
to take part in this operation by making available an
800-person battalion. Here my delegation would like to
commend the commitment of the contributing
countries, in particular those who have been so
generous in providing logistical support without which,
we agree, UNAMID could not become operational.
The briefings we have just heard seem to
foretell — and no one has challenged this — that the
situation as a whole remains dangerous. This is shown
by the recent attacks of armed groups against Chad, the
resurgence of tension between Chad and the Sudan, and
the atrocities committed by armed rebel groups. All of
those events compromise the effective deployment of
UNAMID in the region. In order to achieve stability in
the region, the various Sudanese parties — the
Government and the armed groups — should chose
dialogue as the best option for settling their political
differences and with the sole goal of respecting the
common interest.
In that connection, my delegation would like to
welcome the efforts made by the mediators with a view
to bringing together the armed movements and the
holding of a conference on substantive issues that can
lead to a fair, negotiated settlement of the dispute.
Forty days since the official date for the
deployment of UNAMID, it has to be said that we have
fallen significantly behind — not just with regard to
the programme itself but, above all, as concerns the
worrying and painful tragedies taking place daily on
the ground. We therefore have but one wish, namely,
that things at last begin to move along. To that end, we

9

S/PV.5832

wish much luck to Mr. Eliasson and Mr. Guéhenno,
who, we know, are working tirelessly for the success of
this enormous Operation, regardless of the difficulties
and the current impasse. I should also like to thank
Mrs. Ratsifandrihamanana, Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations, for her
enlightening and interesting briefing regarding the
situation on the ground from the point of view of the
African Union, with which we are fully in agreement.
In conclusion, I would like to associate myself
with the words of the President in congratulating our
colleague Mirjana Mladineo of Croatia, who
unfortunately is leaving us. I wish her good luck in her
new endeavour.
Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Guéhenno and Special Envoy Eliasson for their
briefings on the deployment of the peacekeeping
Operation in Darfur and the latest developments in the
political process.
Last July, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 1769 (2007), which crystallized the
achievements of the international community to date in
its efforts to promote the settlement of the question of
Darfur. The Chinese Government pays great attention
to the issue of Darfur. We firmly support the
appropriate track strategy that promotes the political
process and the deployment of the peacekeeping
Operation in a balanced manner and seeks a resolution
of the issue through dialogue and cooperation in a
progressive and prudent manner.
Thanks to the enormous efforts of all parties,
some progress has been made in the deployment of the
peacekeeping Operation. This year, the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) formally took over responsibility for
peacekeeping in Darfur from the African Union (AU)
Mission. Recently, the Secretariat, the African Union
and the Government of the Sudan also held fruitful
talks on some technical issues. China would like to
express its appreciation to the Secretariat, the African
Union and the Government of the Sudan for those
efforts.
Facts prove that, so long as the parties can sit
down to negotiate patiently and in good faith and a
spirit of equal consultation, all issues can be settled. Of
course, the Hybrid Operation has not proceeded as we
expected. The number of troops deployed on the

10

ground is far short of the target. The security
environment is worsening. Equipment is yet to be fully
delivered. Conditions are harsh. China hopes that all
the parties concerned will demonstrate goodwill, build
up mutual trust and pay particular attention to
improving communications and coordination.
The problems that have occurred should be
addressed through consultations. Recrimination should
be avoided. The tripartite mechanism should be used as
the main channel and should play an effective role in
order to consolidate the progress made and facilitate a
solution to the problems that have arisen.
It has to be pointed out that the implementation
of resolution 1769 (2007) is not the exclusive
responsibility of the Secretariat, the African Union or
the Government of the Sudan. The international
community must share that responsibility by providing
the necessary resources, equipment and personnel, in
particular the badly needed air and transportation
assets. Only the joint efforts of the international
community as a whole can enable the deployment of
the Hybrid force on the ground without hindrance and
its ability to play an effective role.
There is consensus among the entire international
community as regards the need for the prompt
deployment of the hybrid force. Its deployment is also
eagerly awaited by the people of Darfur. All the parties
concerned in Darfur, including the rebel groups, have
an obligation to ensure the safety and security of all the
peacekeepers. Threats of any kind are unacceptable.
The hybrid force should also effectively strengthen
security measures in order to ease the concerns of troop
contributors.
The final outcome of the situation in Darfur will
depend upon the success of the political process. The
political process and the deployment of the
peacekeeping Operation feed into one another. In the
absence of a political peace agreement as a basis, there
will be no peace to keep in Darfur. The peacekeeping
Operation would lose all relevance.
China would like to express its gratitude to
Special Envoys Eliasson and Salim for their efforts to
promote the political process in Darfur. China supports
the talks launched last October in Sirte.
Regrettably, however, the political process in
Darfur lags far behind the deployment of the
peacekeeping Operation. Major rebel groups continue

08-23190

S/PV.5832

to be intransigent and are boycotting the negotiating
process. China is deeply worried. We solemnly call
upon those groups to put the overall interests of
national stability and the well-being of the people of
Darfur above everything else, to respond positively to
the just cause of the international community and to
make the right choice at an early date. The Security
Council should also invest more energy in its efforts to
facilitate the political process in Darfur. China also
hopes that the country concerned will be able to exert
greater influence to call upon the rebel groups to
change their positions and take part in the negotiations.
Poverty and backwardness are the root causes of
the issue of Darfur. By its very nature, this is a
question of development. As Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon pointed out just a few days ago when
addressing the General Assembly, disputes over water
resources are a major cause of the conflict in Darfur. In
its efforts to facilitate the resolution of the issue of
Darfur, the international community should address
both symptoms and root causes. It should attach
importance to social and economic development and
provide humanitarian and development assistance. At
the same time, however, only improving people’s lives
on the ground will fundamentally remove the cause of
the conflict and improve the security environment.
As a responsible member of the international
community, China has made a series of determined
efforts to find a proper resolution of the question of
Darfur. China will continue to work with the parties
concerned through various channels in order to build
up trust among them and narrow their differences.
In response to the appeal by the Secretariat,
China sent troops to Darfur, and they were among the
earliest to arrive on the ground. Most of the
humanitarian assistance that China has provided to
Darfur, totalling 80 million yuan renminbi, has been
delivered and distributed. The Government of China
has also provided support to the Chinese companies
engaged in building schools, drilling wells and
delivering water projects.
China will continue to join the international
community in contributing to an early settlement of the
Darfur issue and to the achievement of peace, stability
and development in Darfur.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Let me begin by
joining previous speakers in welcoming and expressing
appreciation to the Special Envoy, Mr. Jan Eliasson, for

08-23190

his briefing on the political process in Darfur and to
the
Under-Secretary-General,
Mr.
Jean-Marie
Guéhenno, for his update on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
My delegation would like to reiterate once again
its continued support for Mr. Eliasson’s untiring
efforts, together with those of his counterpart from the
African Union, Mr. Salim Salim, in the political
process to find a durable negotiated political settlement
to the Darfur issue. We believe it is essential that the
Security Council reaffirm its continued support for that
process as an irreversible one and to strongly signal to
all parties our full backing for the Special Envoy’s
efforts.
We note in the report that the rebels have
coalesced into five main factions. That has offered
them the potential to come up with a common platform
for negotiations. We underline the importance of their
full participation in the negotiation process being
facilitated by the Special Envoys of the African Union
(AU) and the United Nations. Special Envoy Eliasson
used the term “critical mass” in his briefing. It is
absolutely essential that all sides support and
contribute to the peace process, so that the suffering of
the people in Darfur and in the Sudan as a whole can
be alleviated without further delay.
It is also essential that all sides cease hostilities
and desist from resorting to force, in order to permit
progress on the political front. In addition to the
political and peacekeeping phases, the cessation of
hostilities and the ceasefire are one phase of the Addis
Ababa conclusions of 2006 that has not yet been
implemented. We need to more closely examine and
explore ways to establish a sustainable cessation of
hostilities, and we need to revitalize and go beyond
previous ceasefire mechanisms. Creating conditions
conducive to the political process is key.
The political process is the cornerstone of the
international community’s efforts to assist the Sudan in
dealing with the Darfur issue. The deployment of
UNAMID and the political process should be mutually
reinforcing. We share the Secretary-General’s view that
the deployment of UNAMID will be only as effective
as the political process that it is mandated to support.
At the same time, it is our hope that UNAMID will be
able to provide greater security on the ground for the
civilian population and to provide greater impetus and
confidence for the political process.

11

S/PV.5832

We therefore draw some encouragement from the
important development with regard to the status-offorces agreement and troop composition. Those are
pertinent steps in UNAMID’s deployment and should
be recognized as such. We continue to believe in the
efficacy of the Tripartite Mechanism — Secretariat/
African Union/Government of the Sudan — in
addressing issues relating to UNAMID’s deployment.
We would like to echo the Secretary-General’s
statement earlier this week that UNAMID troop
contributors must speed up their preparations so that
they can be in theatre as soon as possible. Moreover,
we recognize that it is important that those in the
international community who are in a position to
contribute critical aviation and ground transportation
units do so.
The recent rebel incursions in Chad and the
potential ramifications for our efforts in Darfur are
reminders of the risks of delays in the Darfur political
process. Indeed, the relations between the Sudan and
Chad are essential for the stability of both countries. In
that regard, we call on them to respect and secure their
common border in accordance with their bilateral
agreements, in particular the Tripoli and Riyadh
agreements.
More than 4.2 million people in Darfur depend on
humanitarian assistance. We commend the efforts of
international humanitarian organizations to deliver
assistance to those in need. It is deeply troubling that
humanitarian workers have continued to be targets of
violence and armed robberies. The Joint Communiqué
on the facilitation of humanitarian activities should be
supported and fully implemented. The Security Council
should be ready to look at further measures against
those attacking humanitarian workers operating in the
service of those in need.
My delegation is convinced that progress on all
fronts in Darfur — including the political,
peacekeeping, ceasefire and humanitarian tracks — is
essential in order to achieve a comprehensive peace.
That requires a constructive approach and
contributions by all parties, including the international
community, the Government of the Sudan and the
rebels. The centre of all these efforts, however, is
obviously the political process. We wish Mr. Eliasson
and Mr. Salim all the best in that endeavour.

12

Finally, I should like to wish our colleague the
Permanent Representative of Croatia every success in
her future endeavours.
Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Like preceding speakers, I thank Mr. Jean-Marie
Guéhenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Mr. Jan Eliasson, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Darfur, for their briefings to the
Council.
The situation in Darfur is a source of profound
concern for Costa Rica. We are facing a humanitarian
crisis that is deepening daily, despite the enormous
efforts and resources deployed by the international
community. Nevertheless, the Council must bear in
mind that the humanitarian crisis is a manifestation and
a consequence of a previous crisis — a political crisis,
taken to extremes, that culminated in the irresponsible
sacrifice of hundreds of thousands of persons,
including a great number of women and children.
Therefore, in analysing the situation in Darfur
and the deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), we
cannot lose sight of the fact that a solution to the
humanitarian crisis will depend on a solution to the
political crisis, which can be overcome only through a
political process of consultation involving all the
parties.
My Government calls on the parties to commit
themselves to peace and to seek areas for dialogue and
mechanisms for negotiation in order to resolve their
differences. We applaud the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Envoys to that end.
This is an Organization of sovereign States —
States with equal rights, but also equal responsibilities.
Costa Rica is convinced that sovereignty is not so
much a right as an obligation, and that the principal
obligation of every State is to protect those who live
within its territory. Therefore, we call respectfully but
forcefully on the Government of the Sudan to exercise
its sovereignty by protecting the hundreds of thousands
of persons who are suffering daily the consequences of
a fratricidal war.
We regret the increasing reports of crimes
committed against civilian populations, including
children, as well as the increase in the number of cases
of sexual violence. We energetically condemn the use
of those practices as tools of political pressure. Thus,

08-23190

S/PV.5832

we reiterate the importance and validity of Council
resolutions 1325 (2000), 1612 (2005) and 1674 (2006).
The replacement of the African Union Mission in
the Sudan (AMIS) by the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
constituted an important step towards facilitating an
effective solution to the conflict in Darfur. However,
the implementation of the mandate entrusted to the new
mission has been seriously compromised. The
postponement yet again of the signature of the statusof-forces agreement by the Government of the Sudan,
the absence of the team necessary to carry out the
assigned functions and the precarious regional stability,
particularly in regard to the relationship between Chad
and Sudan, cast a dark shadow over the hopes of the
thousands who are affected by this conflict.
Positive results in peacekeeping operations
largely depend on the existence of conditions
facilitating rapid and effective deployment offering
maximum possible security guarantees to those who
carry out these operations. Unfortunately, this remains
a challenge to be overcome for UNAMID. Therefore,
we vehemently echo the repeated appeals by the
Secretary-General to the Government of Sudan to
facilitate the full deployment of the mission as
promptly as possible, and to Member States to provide
the equipment and helicopters necessary to fulfil the
mandate.
Justice is an essential component in the
achievement of lasting peace. Perpetrators of war
crimes, crimes against humanity or the crime of
genocide are attacking human dignity and the
conscience of the international community, and should
therefore be answerable to justice without delay.
Costa Rica restates its commitment to the
International Criminal Court and would like to
emphasize the obligation of the Government of Sudan
to cooperate with that high Court, pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005). The international community’s
commitment to peace requires the Security Council to
go beyond rhetoric and thus guarantee the
implementation of its resolutions and of the mandates
emanating from them.
We believe that the crisis in Darfur will not end
merely through the adoption of resolutions by this
collegial body; nor will the humanitarian needs of the
affected populations be met by 15 votes. It is through
constant and detailed monitoring of all aspects of the

08-23190

conflict, the effective requirement that the provisions
adopted by this body be enforced, the timely
assignment of responsibility and support for the sincere
desire of the parties to overcome obstacles and the
underlying conflicts that the maintenance of
international peace and security in the region will
ultimately be guaranteed.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Mr. President, we
thank you for conducting this meeting today. Let me
welcome Mr. Jan Eliasson, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Darfur, whom some of us prefer
to remember fondly as President of the General
Assembly. I also welcome Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and thank him for his briefing. I also welcome my
boss, Her Excellency Mrs. Lila Ratsifandrihamanana,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations, and thank her for her statement.
My delegation supports the efforts of the United
Nations Special Envoy, Mr. Jan Eliasson, and his
African Union colleague, Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, in
continuing to intensify consultations, engagements and
mediation with the Government of Sudan and the nonsignatory movements. For us, the political process is
also a key pillar of the peace process in the Sudan.
Therefore, its success is just as important to us as
everything else that is being done there.
For this reason, we welcome the reported
progress in terms of the unification efforts of the
movements during the course of November and
December, but we remain concerned that such
coalitions are rather fragile. In fact, having listened
closely to Mr. Eliasson, one gets the impression that
the political process is going very, very slowly, to say
the least. I wonder if, at the end of our meeting,
Mr. Eliasson could perhaps suggest ways in which the
Council could assist him and Mr. Salim in moving this
process forward.
We note with concern that the earlier
fragmentation of various rebel factions has persisted,
that not much commitment has been shown by some of
them and that some are still putting preconditions on
their participation. In this regard, my delegation calls
upon the leaders of these rebel movements to join the
political process by moving swiftly on their common
positions. Clearly, the Security Council should be able
to take firm action against those who wilfully delay
their participation in these negotiations, choosing

13

S/PV.5832

instead to engage in violent action against the innocent
people of Darfur, who have already suffered more than
enough.
We call upon the international community to also
do everything it can to ensure that everybody joins the
peace process without conditions, because the peace
talks are a critical element in the solution of the Darfur
conflict.
We appreciate the progress that has been made so
far with regard to the implementation of resolution
1769 (2007), especially the re-hatting of the African
Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) to the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), which has been referred to earlier. We
urge the United Nations, the African Union and the
Government of the Sudan to further accelerate this
process and ensure that UNAMID is fully deployed.
We commend the progress achieved in the finalization
of the status-of-forces agreement. Clearly, the success
of UNAMID depends on the cooperation of all the
parties involved. In this regard, we want to stress the
need for ongoing dialogue among the United Nations,
the African Union and the Government of Sudan.
My delegation remains concerned that the process
of generating aviation and ground transportation units
has not been successful so far. As has been repeatedly
pointed out, these capabilities are indispensable not
only for the timely deployment of UNAMID, but also
for the implementation of its mandate. We believe that
a robust and effective UNAMID will contribute to
long-term stability in Darfur.
Another major issue of concern is the threat
against the civilian population along the border with
Chad, along with recent attempts to destabilize the
Government of Chad by force. All necessary steps
should be taken to ensure the security of the civilian
population, the displaced people and women and
children in Darfur. Conditions should be created to
enable humanitarian assistance to reach the sections of
the population in need.
The situation in Darfur has occupied the attention
of the international community for a long time, and we
appreciate the efforts of the Secretary-General, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and others in
making the issue a priority.
My delegation remains concerned that the
deterioration in the security situation on the ground and

14

the renewed tensions in the relationship between the
Sudan and Chad are complicating the search for a
political settlement in Darfur. We continue to stress
that a solution in Darfur lies in a political settlement.
Nonetheless, there is a window of opportunity for
peace through a political dialogue and negotiations
and, to support that, through the deployment of a
peacekeeping force that can help make a difference.
We would like to reiterate the poignant point that
peace in the Sudan is indivisible. In that regard, my
delegation is pleased that there is a close coordination
between the United Nations Mission in Sudan,
UNAMID and the work of the Special Envoys.
Finally, allow me to bid farewell to Ambassador
Mladineo, who I have always called my sister in the
Council. Now the rest of my term in the Council will
be sisterless, and I think that will be very boring.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me, in turn, to thank Mr. Eliasson and Mr. Guéhenno
for their briefings. They have both emphasized the
tireless efforts of the Secretariat and the African Union,
which my delegation would like to welcome, but they
have also shown that there is still a long way to go to
achieve peace in Darfur and particularly to re-establish
security conditions that will make it possible for the
people to return to their villages and to their lands.
That is our ultimate objective.
Our first concern is the security of the population.
Now more than ever, we are concerned by the
continued violence against civilians and attacks against
the humanitarian workers who are endeavouring to
assist them. While the humanitarian situation has
continued to deteriorate, deliberate restrictions on
humanitarian access on the ground have remained in
place since last year. To date, those restrictions have
seriously affected hundreds of thousands of individuals
deprived of all assistance. France condemns in the
strongest possible terms the attacks against
humanitarian personnel, which increased by 150 per
cent in 2007, and appeals to all parties to genuinely
cease hostilities and ensure humanitarian access to
those who need assistance.
In that connection, we note with satisfaction the
extension by the Government of the Sudan of the
moratorium on humanitarian access restrictions, and
we urge the authorities in Khartoum to ensure its full
implementation to facilitate the effective delivery of
humanitarian assistance.

08-23190

S/PV.5832

The situation’s overall insecurity should
encourage us to redouble our efforts to ensure the rapid
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). We are aware
that the Secretary-General and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations are doing all they can, in
conjunction with the African Union, rapidly to
assemble a credible — that is, robust — force that truly
is in a position to protect the population and thus to
renew the population’s confidence in it, which is so
essential, as Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno stated earlier.
We call on the Sudanese authorities to support the
United Nations and the African Union, as they have
committed to doing on several occasions, and to keep
their word, rather than increasing the number of
conditions — sometimes contrary to United Nations
principles and rules — that delay the Operation’s
deployment and compromise its effectiveness. The
proposals made by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations seem to be realistic, and we feel that the
Council should support them clearly.
That same concern for the security of the
population leads us to call for the rapid deployment of
the European Union force and of the United Nations
Mission in eastern Chad and north-eastern Central
African Republic. UNAMID, on the one hand, and the
European Union force and the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT), on the other, are designed to meet the
same humanitarian crisis, which has not stopped at the
border of the Sudan. Sudanese refugees in Chad and
the displaced persons and other vulnerable populations
on both sides of the border and in the Central African
Republic all deserve to be protected and to receive
assistance.
The recent crisis in Chad, caused by an attempt
by rebel groups to take power by force and condemned
by the African Union and the Security Council, has
delayed the deployment. That was, indeed, probably
one of the objectives of the rebels and of their
protectors. It remains an urgent situation, and we
therefore welcome the intention of the European Union
to resume its operations in the coming days, as soon as
the security conditions allow. We also welcome the
appeal recently launched by President Idriss Deby Itno
for the continuation of the humanitarian operation in
eastern Chad.

08-23190

Clearly, Darfur will not achieve lasting stability
without the conclusion of the political process being
conducted by Mr. Eliasson and Mr. Salim Ahmed
Salim. We call on all parties to face up to their
responsibilities. Each side states that it is acting in
Darfur’s interest; they must now prove it. Those who
continue to engage in violence must lay down their
weapons immediately, in keeping with their successive
public commitments. Those who have stayed away
from the negotiating table should join it while there is
still time. France, for its part, is working to that end, as
requested by Mr. Eliasson and Mr. Salim.
My delegation would like to reiterate its support
for the approach taken by the two mediators to bring
civil society into the discussion. We strongly support
the idea that the political process involves not only the
warring parties, but also representatives of the victims
of the violence and who are the very reason for our
commitment to resolving the crisis. In particular, the
voices of those hundreds of thousands who have been
displaced must be heard.
Lastly, my delegation ardently hopes that the
crimes committed in Darfur will not go unpunished.
The International Criminal Court should pursue its
activities with regard to the most serious crimes, some
of the perpetrators of which are unfortunately still
being protected by the Sudanese authorities.
Before concluding, and on a happier note, allow
me to join others in wishing our colleague and friend,
the Ambassador of Croatia, every success in her future
work at the United Nations in defending our principles
and the values of human rights and human dignity.
Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, allow me to echo the thanks that
have been offered to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his efforts to resolve the situation in Darfur and to
promote peace and security both in the province and in
Africa as a whole. We should also like to welcome
Mr. Jan Eliasson and thank him for his very useful
briefing to the Security Council. We commend his
endeavours carried out together with Mr. Salim Ahmed
Salim, the African Union envoy. We reiterate our
support for the Secretariat’s decision to extend
Mr. Eliasson’s mandate. We would also like to thank
Mr. Guéhenno for his briefing. I welcome the
Permanent Observer of the African Union and thank
her for her statement.

15

S/PV.5832

Mr. Eliasson’s briefing reflects the efforts he has
made in recent months, together with his colleague, to
persuade all parties to sit down at the negotiating table,
to unify the movements and coordinate their positions,
and to relaunch the negotiations that began in Sirte,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, in October 2007. We believe
that that mission should be commended, as it clearly
reflects the difficulties that remain to be overcome,
chief among which is the absence of some factions
from the peace process.
Regarding the crisis in Darfur, we must
emphasize the fact that peace cannot be achieved
unless a comprehensive peace process is launched and
the conditions are established to make the process a
reality. My delegation would stress certain aspects of
the issue.
First, we welcome the approach adopted by the
two Special Envoys with respect to consulting with the
various parties to unify the movements and coordinate
their positions with a view to preparing objective
consultations in Sirt. We are aware of the mission’s
complexity, as Mr. Eliasson emphasized, but our efforts
must be maintained and contacts pursued in that
regard.
Secondly, if the political process is to be
successful, all participants must cease hostilities
forthwith and take part in the peace negotiations
without prior conditions, thereby preventing their
positions from being linked to the speed of deployment
and the size of the force in Darfur. That is a most
important consideration.
Thirdly, we are deeply concerned by the stance of
certain groups that continue to refuse to participate in
the political process and to snub their noses at the
negotiation efforts. We reiterate the importance to
some parties, including this Council, for appropriate
pressure to be brought to bear on those groups to
reconsider their position and decide to join the political
process, thereby demonstrating their good intentions
without preconditions. The Council must adopt the
necessary measures regarding those groups.
Fourthly, Libya is closely following current
developments in Darfur, with which it shares a border,
and hopes to provide every possibly assistance to
achieving peace and security in the province. Libya has
a great interest in accelerating the political process and
will continue to lend its support to the two mediators
and to play an effective role, particularly in extending

16

its good offices. We appeal once again to the rebels to
join the political process and commit to meeting
objective criteria, including a ceasefire, and to
facilitating humanitarian work.
With respect to the deployment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), I commend the efforts of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Government of the
Sudan to address the technical aspects of deployment.
We also welcome the positive consensual attitude that
prevailed at the meeting between President Bashir and
the Secretary-General on the margins of the recent
African Union summit in Addis Ababa, as well as the
ensuing progress, which reflects other advances
achieved, in particular the negotiation of the status-offorces agreement. We hope that the agreement will be
signed tomorrow. Indeed, the Secretary-General raised
that issue in his most recent statement, in which he
expressed his satisfaction with the cooperation
extended by the Sudanese authorities in facilitating the
deployment of the Hybrid Operation. We hope that this
course can be pursued in order to strengthen
confidence and alleviate tensions with the Government
of the Sudan. We are convinced that the Sudanese
Government is doing its utmost to facilitate the
deployment of the Hybrid Operation and to promote
the political process.
For our part, we remain concerned by the
international community’s inability to establish the
conditions in which UNAMID can be deployed,
particularly with respect to land and air assets. In that
regard, we thank those States that are in a position to
respond to that matter and that have contributed to the
Hybrid Operation. It is indeed extremely important to
emphasize the African contribution to control and
command within the Operation, pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1769 (2007) and other consequent
relevant decisions.
We are concerned by the violence that has
erupted in Chad, claiming many innocent lives. We
express our apprehension concerning the current
tensions and reciprocal accusations between Chad and
the Sudan. Relations between those two brotherly
neighbours have an impact on the security and
humanitarian situation on both sides of the border, with
negative repercussions for the peace efforts in Darfur
and the region as a whole. We therefore appeal to the
two parties to relaunch dialogue towards the
implementation of the Tripoli Agreement of 8 February

08-23190

S/PV.5832

2006 to guarantee security along their common border.
That would surely alleviate the suffering of refugees
and internally displaced persons, help to achieve a
peaceful settlement, and create the objective conditions
for ending the conflicts in Darfur and Chad.
Lastly, we extend our best wishes to the
Ambassador of Croatia and thank her for all her hard
work in the Organization. As she will be leaving us
shortly, we wish her every success in her new
endeavours.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Darfur, Mr. Eliasson, and to the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Guéhenno, for their comprehensive briefing on
progress on the political track of a settlement in Darfur
and the deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
We are convinced that a settlement in Darfur lies
exclusively in the political sphere through negotiations
between the Government of the Sudan and Darfur
rebels. New peace agreements between Khartoum and
the Darfur opposition must become the future support
structure for the restoration of peace and security in the
Sudanese region.
We believe that resuming the negotiating process
launched in Sirt is a priority. Without success in the
Darfur-Darfur dialogue, it will be impossible to
improve the humanitarian situation and successfully to
ensure UNAMID’s fulfilment of its mandate. We fully
subscribe to the calls regarding the need for a
comprehensive solution. We express our clear
commitment to work towards that in the Council.
In conclusion, Mr. President, allow me to say just
a few words on a personal level. I would like to thank
you and all my colleagues around the table for the nice
words extended to me, including the words of
encouragement in connection with my future position.
Mr. Mantovani (Italy): I wish to thank Special
Envoy
Eliasson
and
Under-Secretary-General
Guéhenno for their briefings and their tireless efforts to
advance the agreed agenda for Darfur. I also wish to
thank Mrs. Ratsifandrihamanana, Permanent Observer
of the African Union (AU), for her contribution to our
debate.
Italy supports the early and swift deployment of a
robust peacekeeping force in Darfur to protect civilians

08-23190

and assist in the implementation of the agreements
between the Government and the rebels. We hope that
the status-of-forces agreement can be signed without
further delay, as agreed by the Secretary-General and
the President of the Sudan at the margins of the African
Union Summit.
We welcome the progress reported by UnderSecretary-General Guéhenno, particularly on the issue
of the participation of non-African countries —
although it is regrettable that the Nordic countries will
eventually not be part of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
Italy shares the assessment of the SecretaryGeneral that UNAMID will be only as effective as the
political process it is mandated to support. For us,
consistent with the Addis Ababa conclusions of
November 2006, the political and peacekeeping tracks
are equally important and mutually reinforcing. Urgent
progress is therefore needed in the political process as
well.
I wish to reiterate Italy’s full support for a joint
United Nations-AU mediation. It is fundamental that
we all rally behind the efforts of the two Envoys aimed
at consolidating a critical mass among the rebel
movements that could allow the process to move
forward. We invite all rebel movements to seize the
current opportunity for full direct negotiations with the
Government. Continuing the fighting can no longer be
an option once that opportunity is in hand.
Italy is pleased to have contributed $511,000 to
the trust fund in support of the joint mediation. We will
soon provide additional funds, both for that and for the
United Nations-Darfur Community Peace and Stability
Fund.
Italy was impressed by the attendance of a
number of representatives from Darfur civil society at
the Sirte opening ceremony. We believe that civil
society has a lot to say about how the conflict should
be settled and how the agreement should be
implemented. We hope that its participation in the talks
can continue. We also look forward to further progress
in the Darfur-Darfur dialogue and reconciliation
process.
We remain concerned at the lack of progress in
the humanitarian situation. The extension of the
moratorium
on
restrictions
to
humanitarian
organizations by the Government is a welcome step

17

S/PV.5832

that needs to be accompanied by renewed commitment
by all parties in Darfur to allow unhindered access to
humanitarian aid.
Italy is also concerned about the human rights
situation in the region, in particular for women and
children. The latest report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict in Darfur provides a
sobering account of that reality. Italy looks forward to
discussing that report in the Working Group soon.
The importance of regional actors in settling the
Darfur conflict cannot be underestimated. It is vital
that Chad and the Sudan recommit themselves to the
Sirte process, resolve their differences through
dialogue and re-establish cooperative relations, which
are necessary for peace and stability in the region.
Let me also recall that there can be no impunity
for the crimes committed in Darfur. Italy supports the
opinion and conclusions of the Council of the
European Union on 28 January and its call on the
Government of the Sudan to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court.
The Security Council adopted a very important
presidential statement (S/PRST/2007/41) on the eve of
the opening of the Sirte meeting. The Council
underlined its willingness to take action against any
party that sought to undermine the peace process,
including by failing to respect the cessation of
hostilities or by impeding the talks, peacekeeping or
humanitarian aid. We think that that statement very
well reflects the sense of frustration of the international
community over the slow progress and the prevailing
impunity for what has happened in Darfur. I fully
concur with Special Envoy Eliasson when he said that
there must be a price for the lack of cooperation. Our
question is about the timing for such a price and
whether there is anything that the Council can do now
in that respect.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Allow me to
begin by joining my colleagues in saying how much we
will miss Ambassador Mladineo at the Council. We
very much enjoyed her presence and wish her the very
best of luck in her next position.
I would also like to join others in thanking
Mr. Eliasson, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
and Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno for their
briefings this morning.

18

The Council was closely engaged on Darfur
throughout 2007. The scale of the crisis and the impact
it has on the lives of millions of people and the
stability of the region fully justified that engagement. I
wish I could say that our efforts in 2007 have made the
task in 2008 less formidable. But as both briefings we
heard this morning indicate, that is not the case. In
particular, what has come through is the
interdependence of progress on the security track and
progress on the political track. We have to persist with
both in parallel.
I am just receiving some worrying reports of a
further downturn in security in western Darfur. There
are reports of attacks on villages by Sudanese
Government forces, including aerial bombings, and
extensive loss of life. That is further destruction to the
process in the region. It is of great regret that that is
happening. We call on all parties to bring an immediate
end to this fighting. It will be helpful if, at the end of
this discussion, Mr. Guéhenno could give us any
further information that he may have on events today.
I think this continued fighting only serves to
underline the need to make progress on all four tracks
facing us in the Sudan, in Darfur.
First, on the peacekeeping side, as others have
said, the transfer of authority from the African Union
Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) to the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) is a welcome step. We in the British
Government are committed to doing all we can to make
UNAMID and effective mission. But it still faces
significant challenges. Those include, first, the
sourcing of enough troops and equipment, including
helicopters. In that connection, my delegation will
continue our efforts in support of the Secretariat. The
second challenge pertains to enhancing the support
infrastructure required to maintain a large mission in a
difficult environment. And the third challenge has to do
with inconsistent cooperation from the Sudanese
Government and bureaucratic obstacles to making
things happen on the ground.
The steps reported by Mr. Guéhenno, and by the
Secretary-General earlier this week, on the status-offorces agreement and the deployment of non-African
contingents are welcome. I am sure that I am not alone
among Council members in expecting those
commitments to be translated into facts on the ground
without further delay.

08-23190

S/PV.5832

Other issues critical to the effectiveness of the
mission remain outstanding, notably movement at
night. The protection of civilians cannot cease when
the sun sets. We look to the Government of the Sudan
to resolve those issues promptly. I would welcome
confirmation from Mr. Guéhenno that the revised
status-of-forces agreement will provide an adequate
basis for UNAMID’s effective operation.
The second track is the political process, which in
the long term is the only reliable path to peace. We are
very grateful to Jan Eliasson and his fellow Envoy
Salim Salim for their efforts. We see some signs of
movement in Mr. Eliasson’s report on the positions of
the respective rebel organizations. Despite the
difficulties and frustrations, we need to keep up the
momentum. But it is clear that — as some of us have
said for some time — a longer-term perspective is
needed and must be pursued on multiple tracks in
parallel. We welcome Mr. Eliasson’s intention to do
precisely that. The deployment of peacekeeping forces
will no doubt help to strengthen security, but cannot
guarantee the comprehensive settlement of the
situation. The key role in the political process, under
the aegis of the United Nations and the African Union,
rests of course with the parties involved, acting with
the active support of the regional players.
We highly appreciate the effective efforts of
Special Envoys Eliasson and Salim Ahmed Salim in
holding consultations with the Government of the
Sudan and the Darfur opposition with a view to
preparing the parties for negotiations on items of
substance. We are pleased to hear that there has been
significant progress in uniting the various Darfur rebel
groups but there is a great deal of arduous work to be
done to persuade the opposition to agree to their
negotiation platform and the membership of their
delegation.
In that connection, we welcome the extension by
the Secretary-General of the mandate of the mediator,
Mr. Jan Eliasson. Of note is the idea to enhance the
activities of the negotiation team of the Special Envoys
through the appointment of a single negotiator. We
believe that would lead not to weakening the Joint
Mediation Support Team, but to strengthened
coordination and effectiveness of its activities.
We are seriously concerned by the intransigent
stand taken by the Justice and Equality Movement. The
question arises of the possible use of restrictive

08-23190

measures with regard to those rebel leaders who not
only openly obstruct progress in the Darfur political
process, but are also threatening the security of
peacekeeping and humanitarian personnel. In any case,
the Security Council must send them a very clear and
firm signal on the immediate need to reconsider their
destructive position.
The transfer of authority from the African Union
Mission in Sudan to UNAMID was an important
milestone in the peacekeeping process in Darfur. The
Secretariat and the African Union have done an
impressive amount of work to ensure that UNAMID
can undertake its mandate in the time frame established
by Security Council resolution 1769 (2007). We must
work
consistently
to
strengthen
UNAMID’s
effectiveness,
as
was
mentioned
today
by
Mr. Guéhenno.
The problem remains of how to integrate the
necessary helicopters into UNAMID. Russia is
prepared to cooperate with its partners and the
Secretariat to develop new potential options to solve
that urgent problem. Of continued relevance is the
Secretary-General’s
thesis
that
the
effective
functioning of UNAMID will depend to a great extent
on the ability of the United Nations and the African
Union to solve, in cooperation with the Government of
the Sudan, comprehensive technical questions
pertaining to the deployment of the Operation. That
will require cooperation on the part of both parties.
As experience has shown, and in particular the
visit of Mr. Guéhenno to Addis Ababa, the current
problems require constructive dialogue with the
Sudanese leadership. We are pleased that, during the
course of the meeting of the Secretary-General and the
President of the Sudan at the margins of the African
Union summit in Addis Ababa, the need to hasten the
deployment of the Operation and to immediately
conclude the status-of-forces agreement for UNAMID
was reaffirmed. Of course, a comprehensive settlement
in Darfur is impossible without a normalization of the
regional security situation and relations between Chad
and the Sudan on the basis of unconditional
compliance by the States of the region with the existing
agreements, in particular the agreement ensuring
security in the border area.
For its part, Russia is determined in future to
constructively promote progress in the Darfur peace

19

S/PV.5832

process on the basis of respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Sudan.
Mrs. Mladineo (Croatia): I wish to thank Mr. Jan
Eliasson, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Darfur, and Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for the
detailed, precise and frank reports that they presented
to the Council today.
In principle, we believe that true progress on the
political track represents the essence of a sustainable
solution. The volatility of the security and
humanitarian situation in Darfur, where a simple spark
could ignite a full-size inferno, makes the need for a
tangible result on the political track even more obvious
to all. In that sense, we commend and fully support the
work of the United Nations and African Union Special
Envoys.
We have been listening carefully to the
assessment and comments made by Mr. Eliasson and
cannot but be concerned by what can be described as
the modest developments achieved so far. Despite his
and Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim’s praiseworthy efforts and
the progress achieved so far, we see that much more
time is needed in order to launch meaningful and
substantial negotiations.
Having said that, we recognize that there are
somewhat encouraging steps on the technical level. In
that sense we reiterate our full support for the path
taken by the Special Envoys. We hope that their lowkey approach, including workshops intended to create a
positive atmosphere and their preference for Arushastyle meetings, will result in a favourable outcome.
However, we feel that at this point we need a
clear demonstration of political will from all parties in
order to put the process on track. In that sense we
highly value the assistance of the regional and other
partners in encouraging the parties to the conflict to sit
and negotiate around the table.
We echo Mr. Eliasson’s words that there cannot
be real progress on the political track in the midst of a
hostile environment. We join his calls for an immediate
ceasefire and for all parties, in particular the
Government, to take responsibility for improving the
security and humanitarian situation in Darfur. We share
the urgency expressed, not only around this table or
exclusively among Security Council members, when it
comes to the full deployment and operability of the

20

African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). Mr. Guéhenno’s forthright
briefing, however, leaves little room for optimism.
Nevertheless, we find the engagement of the
Sudanese Government in recent talks with UNAMID
encouraging. We hope they will deliver on the
promises, in particular those related to the signing of
the status-of-forces agreement. Furthermore, we are
entitled to expect the speedy solution of all outstanding
issues relating to the development and effective
exercise of the UNAMID mandate, namely accepting
the proposed list of troop-contributing countries,
granting flight clearances and facilitating the access of
UNAMID to land and water and its freedom of
movement. Finally, we hope that the Sudanese
Government will fully embrace the view that the
mission’s mandate is solely to the benefit of the
Sudanese people.
My delegation continues to believe in the threetrack approach covering political, humanitarian and
security matters. However, the rule of law should not
be forgotten. Thus, we see the judicial dimension as
not only complementary but also mutually reinforcing
and intrinsic to the above-mentioned three-track
approach. In that respect, we express our grave concern
about the possibility of the culture of impunity taking
firm root in the Sudan.
We also express our deep concern about the high
level of grave violence and abuse committed against
women and children in the Sudan, including rape and
other forms of sexual violence, mostly committed
against girls. These outrageous practices must be
stopped.
Finally, allow me to conclude with a remark on
the indivisibility of peace in the Sudan. Darfur, in our
view should not be addressed in isolation from the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
Those that are standing outside the peace
process — and there are several — need to see that
there is a cost to them in doing so. We agree that all
sides must commit themselves to and honour a
cessation of hostilities agreement that can be
effectively monitored by UNAMID. We believe that
the Envoy’s proposal for the appointment of a single
joint United Nations-African Union mediator is a good
one and that it should be taken forward promptly.

08-23190

S/PV.5832

The third track is the ongoing humanitarian
emergency in Darfur. We share the concerns expressed
by others. It is deeply worrying that, after all the
efforts over so many years, the humanitarian situation
continues to worsen and attacks on aid workers
continue to rise. The result is less protection for the
most vulnerable people. Access for humanitarian
assistance is again under threat. It is essential that we
see full implementation of the agreements reached
under the joint humanitarian communiqué between the
Government of the Sudan and the United Nations.
The fourth track is impunity. I share the concerns
of several colleagues and their dismay at the total lack
of progress in holding to account those indicted by the
International Criminal Court for war crimes and crimes
against humanity in Darfur. Those indictments will not
go away. Justice will be an integral part of lasting
peace in Darfur. The appointment of Musa Hilal, who
was sanctioned by the Security Council under its
resolution 1672 (2006), to a Sudanese Government
position is a further concern. It will not advance the
peace process.
Allow me to conclude with two points about the
situation beyond Darfur, which are nonetheless critical
to resolving the crisis in that region. First, in Chad, the
Council made clear on Monday the urgency of all sides
ending the fighting (see S/PRST/2008/3). I would like
to underline that Council members also called on States
to end any support to armed groups in the Sudan and
Chad; that appeal is directed primarily at the
Governments of those two countries.
Finally, Council members will return to the issue
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement later this
month, when we hear from Mr. Qazi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan.
But in any consideration of the Sudan, we have to bear
in mind that implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement is fundamental to future peace across
the country, including in Darfur. That is a goal to
which my Government is totally committed.
Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
thank Mr. Jan Eliasson, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General,
and
Under-Secretary-General
Guéhenno for their briefings at the outset of our
debate. Also, we listened carefully to the statement of
our colleague, the Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations.

08-23190

Let me begin by stating Belgium’s grave concern
at recent events in Chad. There is no chance that peace
will return to Darfur unless the Sudan and Chad, with
the support of all countries of the region, work urgently
to normalize their relations. Internal developments in
the Sudan and Chad are a reflection of their bilateral
relations, and vice versa. The constant movement of
rebel movements back and forth across the border can
only exacerbate tension between the two countries.
Normalization of relations between the Sudan and
Chad is thus in their common interest, and we earnestly
hope that we can count on the active commitment of
Khartoum and N’Djamena towards emerging from the
current negative situation.
In that context, Belgium reaffirms its firm
commitment to the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) and
to the European Union operation in Chad and the
Central African Republic (EUFOR Tchad/RCA). We
hope that they will be deployed, as planned, as soon as
circumstances on the ground allow, which we hope will
be in the coming days.
The full and effective deployment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) remains a considerable challenge to the
international community. Belgium welcomes the
forthcoming deployment of the Egyptian and Ethiopian
contingents, along with that of Thai and Nepalese
units, which will finally enable us to move from the
re-hatted African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS)
to a new hybrid mission, as mandated by the Council.
We regret, however, that the deployment of nonAfrican units has been so difficult; we cannot accept
the authority that the Sudanese Government claims
over the admissibility of the contributions of countries
to the Council-mandated force.
The UNAMID hybrid mission is unprecedented
and thus an innovation; we are organizing it jointly
with the African Union. Belgium congratulates the new
leaders elected by the African Union, in particular
President Jakaya Mrisho Kikwete as African Union
Chairman and Mr. Jean Ping as Chairman of the
African Union Commission, and urges them to do their
utmost to ensure the success of UNAMID, including by
bringing their full influence to bear on the Sudanese
Government to make the smooth deployment of the
mission possible. We welcome the statement made
earlier by Mrs. Ratsifandrihamanana, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,

21

S/PV.5832

in which she recalled the Union’s firm commitment to
discharging its responsibilities.
Belgium notes that the tripartite negotiating
mechanism with the Khartoum Government has borne
some fruit, including in negotiations on the terms of a
status-of-forces agreement. But it is imperative that the
Sudanese Government commit itself further to keeping
President Al-Bashir’s promise to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon to accelerate the deployment of the
mission and to resolve all outstanding issues related to
that deployment. We are told that the tension in the
refugee camps is increasing; it is time for UNAMID to
be set on a solid footing and to be able at last to do its
work.
There is hardly any need to recall that UNAMID
must restore a minimum level of security to Darfur,
which would facilitate humanitarian assistance. But it
should also permit progress in the ongoing political
process; Mr. Eliasson has briefed us on the latest
developments in that process, which are unfortunately
not particularly encouraging. For the process to have a
real chance at getting under way, it is imperative that
hostilities on the ground end immediately. As a matter
of urgency, all parties to the conflict must commit
themselves to a lasting ceasefire. It is unacceptable that
the parties should hold the civilian population hostage
by pursuing agendas that have no room for genuine
peace.
I listened very carefully to Mr. Eliasson’s briefing
on the most recent developments in the political
process, which we hope will be inclusive and credible.
Like Mr. Eliasson, I deplore the fact that several rebel
movements are not prepared to engage in this process,
and I encourage him and his African Union
counterpart, Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, to persevere in
their efforts to convince the movements that the
Government would find them a credible interlocutor if
they pursued common objectives. Belgium regrets in
particular that the Justice and Equality Movement of
Mr. Khalil Ibrahim continues to favour a military
solution over a political process.
Peace in the Sudan is indivisible, and the
question of Darfur is intimately linked to the overall
peace process in the Sudan. Let me only say how much
Belgium welcomes the outcome of last autumn’s
governmental crisis; we once again encourage the
parties to continue and hasten the concrete
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace

22

Agreement. The implementation of the Agreement
could serve as an example for Darfur. Credible and
rapid implementation could convince the movements
that are still hesitating to commit themselves to the
political process towards a peace agreement that would
be to the benefit of all parties.
I cannot conclude without emphasizing once
again a major priority of my delegation: the fight
against impunity. Here, the Sudan has a twofold
obligation: to cooperate with the International Criminal
Court pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005); and to
implement the restrictive measures imposed by the
Security Council. Without wishing to confuse the two
issues, Belgium deplores the recent appointment of
Mr. Musa Hilal — who appears on the sanctions
Committee’s list of individuals and entities — as a
Government adviser. That is in addition to the
unfortunate fact that two individuals indicted by the
International Criminal Court, including Mr. Ahmed
Haroun, have yet to be transferred to The Hague.
Before concluding, I wish to join my colleagues
in bidding farewell to our much-respected colleague
from Croatia. We have greatly appreciated not only her
friendship and collegiality here at the United Nations,
but also her personal commitment to the cause of world
peace and the well-being of humanity.
Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): We
greatly appreciate the briefings provided today by
Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno and Special Envoy
Eliasson. We thank them for their efforts to bring a
sustainable peace to the region. We also thank
Permanent Observer Ratsifandrihamanana of the
African Union (AU) for her statement. In addition, we
are grateful to the Secretary-General for his personal
engagement on Darfur issues, including his recent trip
to Africa, about which he briefed the Council on
Tuesday.
The rapid deployment of an effective
peacekeeping force for Darfur and finding a lasting
political settlement to the conflict are both of critical
importance to my country. This morning, I would like
to cover those two issues and also address the impact
of the Chad conflict on the future of the region.
We were pleased by the Secretary-General’s
briefing to the Security Council on 5 February, in
which he reported — as Mr. Guéhenno did today —
progress in discussions with the Sudanese on the
deployment of the African Union-United Nations

08-23190

S/PV.5832

Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). We hope that
a breakthrough has indeed been achieved.

contributing countries arrive in Darfur trained and
equipped to carry out their mission.

As always with the Government of the Sudan, the
proof of its commitment is in its actions. If the
Sudanese are truly committed to UNAMID’s
deployment, we expect the following to happen in the
coming weeks.

With regard to the peace process, it is clear that
we have not made enough progress. Success in the
Darfur peace process, led by the United Nations and
the African Union, is essential to ending the suffering
of the people of Darfur and to the long-term prospects
for success of the United Nations/AU peacekeeping
operation in Darfur — UNAMID.

First, we expect the status-of-forces agreement to
be signed on 10 February. The United States urges the
Sudanese Government to cooperate fully with
UNAMID to finalize that agreement without further
delay, including the outstanding issues of aviation and
ground movements. The agreement must incorporate
the same principles that apply to United Nations
peacekeeping missions anywhere in the world.
Secondly, the United States expects that the
Government of the Sudan will cooperate fully with the
upcoming deployments of UNAMID forces. The
Egyptian engineer, signal and heavy transport unit
should deploy by 10 March, followed by Egyptian and
Ethiopian infantry battalions in March and April. The
Thai infantry battalion should deploy within an April
time frame. If the Sudanese Government does not
deliver on those steps in a timely manner, then the
Security Council will need to consider appropriate
action to ensure compliance. The credibility of the
Security Council is on the line.
I now turn to the role of the international
community. Like other delegations, we urge redoubled
efforts to ensure that UNAMID can fill its force
generation gaps, including by filling the critical need
for air, logistical and transport assets. We were
encouraged to hear that the Government of Ethiopia
has offered helicopters that appear to meet some of
UNAMID’s requirements, and we look forward to
hearing formally from the United Nations about the
prospects for the deployment of those assets.
The United States, for its part, is committed to
assisting UNAMID deployment through the training
and equipping of certain African troop-contributing
countries that have made pledges to UNAMID. We
have provided the United Nations with more than
$40-million worth of equipment to be used by
UNAMID. We have allocated an additional
$100 million to train and equip troop-contributing
countries. We urge other members to join us in a
coordinated effort to ensure that UNAMID troop-

08-23190

We continue to urge rebel factions to come
together in order to reach a peaceful settlement of the
conflict, and we support the Special Envoy’s effort to
unify the rebel movements. We think that that effort
needs more consistent attention from the international
community. We strongly urge the United Nations and
the AU to quickly agree upon the immediate
appointment of a single joint mediator to lead the
negotiations and to assist all parties in reaching a
negotiated settlement of the conflict.
The recent conflict in Chad underscores the
regional dimension of the conflict in the area. With
regard to Darfur, in addition to the humanitarian,
political and UNAMID tracks, the United Nations
effort also needs to be focused on developing an
effective regional approach. To that end, we need to
fully deploy the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad as soon as possible.
We are very disturbed by reports that the
Government of the Sudan played a significant role in
supporting the rebel attack on the legitimate
Government of Chad. We call on the Sudan, Chad and
rebel groups to cease all cross-border incursions. We
urge the Sudan and Chad not to interfere in each
other’s internal affairs. Those are necessary steps for a
lasting and sustainable peace in the region.
Like other speakers, I wish my Croatian
colleague all the best in her next endeavour; we will
miss her. I also wish my Chinese colleagues a happy
new year.
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): At the outset,
I would like to thank Special Envoy Eliasson and
Under-Secretary-General
Guéhenno
for
their
informative briefings to the Council. Our thanks go
also to Mrs. Ratsifandrihamanana for her presence and
for her briefing to the Council this morning. I am sure
that those briefings have been of much help to the

23

S/PV.5832

Council in considering this very important matter in
today’s debate.

United Nations and the African Union that are under
way.

Against the backdrop of the recent disturbing
violence that has taken place in various parts of the
subregion, the Vietnamese delegation welcomes the
recent positive developments with regard to Darfur and
the Sudan. We commend the active and good-faith
efforts made by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
President Al-Bashir of the Sudan on the sidelines of the
African Union Summit in Addis Ababa on 31 January
2008 to facilitate the deployment of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).

My delegation would like to reiterate Viet Nam’s
strong support for the full and rapid deployment of
UNAMID in conformity with the mandate set forth in
resolution 1769 (2007). It is our conviction that a full
and effective deployment of UNAMID in Darfur will
help to restore peace and stability not only in Darfur
and the Sudan but also in other countries in this
subregion, namely, Chad and the Central African
Republic.

In that connection, Viet Nam also welcomes the
agreement reached between the Government of the
Sudan and the United Nations on the initial draft of the
status-of-forces agreement and the announcement of
the Sudanese Government regarding its readiness to
sign that agreement as soon as tomorrow. My country
believes that the agreement will expedite the full
deployment of UNAMID. That fruitful outcome of the
talks has once again underlined the importance of
dialogue, consultations and cooperation between the
United Nations, the African Union and the Government
of the Sudan.
At the same time, we cannot afford to ignore the
fact that, given the current lack of troops and support
equipment, UNAMID can hardly ensure the effective
discharge of its mandate. We therefore call on the
international community and all countries in a position
to do so to make substantial contributions to UNAMID,
as requested by the United Nations and the African
Union and as proposed by the Sudanese Government.
We hope that all the parties concerned will
cooperate and work together to resolve the outstanding
technical bottlenecks in the way of UNAMID’s full
deployment. In particular, we urge the rebel
movements in Darfur to renounce violence, join the
peace and political process and cooperate with the
United Nations and the African Union in facilitating
the deployment of UNAMID.
We wish to stress here that the parties concerned
must build on the momentum created by the August
2007 Arusha peace talks under the auspices of the
United Nations and the African Union as well as the
Sirte process launched by Libya in October last year,
and actively respond to the good offices efforts by the

24

In parallel with the peacekeeping track and
UNAMID deployment, the international community
and regional countries must devote equal attention and
contributions to pushing forward the political process
in Darfur and the Sudan with a view to finding a just
and lasting solution to the Darfur conflict.
We would also like to emphasize that the peace
and political process in Darfur cannot be divorced from
the North-South peace and political process in the
Sudan, especially the implementation of the 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). Peace,
stability and prosperity will be achieved in Darfur and
the Sudan only if all parties concerned jointly address
the root causes of the conflict by taking a
comprehensive approach to security and political and
socio-economic development so as not to give biased
priority to one issue at the expense of the others.
The Vietnamese delegation fully shares the
observation made by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
on 5 February of this year that “the deployment of
UNAMID will only be as effective as the political
process it is mandated to support”. With this idea in
mind, we feel encouraged by such positive
developments as the return of the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement (SPLM) to the Government of
National Unity last December, the signing by President
Bashir of the national strategic plan for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and the return of over
2 million refugees and internally displaced persons to
south Sudan since the conclusion of the 2005 CPA.
Once fully realized, these efforts will make a huge
contribution to the overall peace and political process
in Darfur and in the Sudan at large.
My delegation also hails the ongoing efforts
made by the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy,
Mr. Jan Eliasson, as well as the African Union Special
Envoy for Darfur, Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, especially

08-23190

S/PV.5832

during their visit to the Sudan last January to help
organize the talks between the Sudanese Government
and the rebel movements. We fully agree that their
efforts should enjoy strong support from the Security
Council and the United Nations.
Furthermore, I would like to join all of my
colleagues in extending our best wishes to the
Permanent Representative of Croatia as she takes on
her future responsibilities.
Finally, I would like to conclude by reaffirming
the Vietnamese Government’s unwavering support for
the efforts made by the United Nations and African
countries for the full and effective deployment of
UNAMID in particular and in bringing about peaceful
resolutions to conflicts in Africa in general.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now will
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Panama.
I would like to begin by thanking Ambassador
Jan Eliasson and Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guéhenno, for their detailed briefings on advances in
the political process and the deployment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). We draw attention to the endeavours of
Ambassador Eliasson and his counterpart in the
African Union, Ambassador Salim Salim, in
establishing dialogue between the parties to the
conflict and the individuals affected. We welcome the
decision by the Secretary-General to extend the
mandate of Special Envoy Eliasson. We take this
opportunity to assure him of Panama’s fullest support
in his discharge of this mandate.
On 31 July 2007, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1769 (2007) through
which it authorized the deployment of UNAMID. This
historic decision emphasizes the political determination
of two organizations to share responsibilities in
achieving a common objective. In addition to
confirming our unswerving commitment to Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations regarding
cooperation with regional organizations in the pacific
settlement of conflicts, it underpins Panama’s stated
position to deal with different conflicts with different
measures, in keeping with the characteristics and
particularities of the conflict. This innovative spirit
could be employed in resolving other conflicts.

08-23190

We emphasize that the deployment of the Hybrid
Operation and political negotiations are parallel
processes. The political process, as the lynchpin of
peace, security and stability in Darfur, calls for an
unswerving commitment to a cessation of hostilities
that can only be achieved in a secure environment for
dialogue, which should be obtained through the Hybrid
Operation.
Since this operation was authorized, we have
encountered numerous difficulties. However, we
welcome the information provided by the SecretaryGeneral regarding the imminent signature of the statusof-forces agreement and that the Sudanese Government
has shown new flexibility in its position regarding the
origin of contingents that make up the Hybrid
Operation.
Still, many matters remain pending, particularly
the generation of aviation and transport units. In this
regard, we welcome the efforts of the Government of
the United Kingdom in obtaining offers for these units.
We note that the most recent trip by the Special
Envoys to the region has produced significant advances
in the political process. The greater consistency in the
positions of a number of rebel groups and signs of
flexibility constitute progress. We share the concern of
many delegations regarding the slow pace of the
process. However, we do acknowledge that this
conflict is the product of decades of discontent affected
by the creation of borders that do not reflect the social
reality on the ground and that we cannot erase with our
desires to adhere to pre-established timelines. We
repeat our urgent pleas to the countries able to
influence the leaders of some of the rebel groups to
step up their efforts to encourage them to join this
process.
Moreover, Panama echoes the sentiments
expressed by States regarding their serious concerns
regarding the lack of protection by the Government of
Sudan of the human rights of its citizens and its lack of
respect for the authorities of the International Criminal
Court.
Lastly, we cannot ignore the critical situation that
exists in Chad and the potential impact of this situation
on refugees from Darfur and on internally displaced
persons. This crisis may compound tensions between
the Sudan and Chad and therefore may have an impact
on the political process in Darfur. Similarly, it
undermines regional endeavours to settle the conflict in

25

S/PV.5832

Darfur where Chad’s participation is fundamental. We
therefore appeal to both countries to adhere to the
commitments entered into under the various
agreements with a view to normalizing their relations.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
I call on Mr. Jan Eliasson, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Darfur, to respond to comments
or questions.
Mr. Eliasson: I thank the members of the
Security Council for their support of the political
process and the joint approach of the United Nations
and African Union to find peace in Darfur.
Mr. Kumalo asked me a direct question about
how the Member States could assist those efforts, so
allow me to list a few steps that we would welcome
very warmly. I must also say that these aspects were
also covered by Mr. Guéhenno. But as some have
stated here today, there is a clear interdependence
between the peacekeeping and political tracks.
My first appeal to Council members is that they
do everything they can to influence regional stability in
that dangerous area. Chad/Sudan relations need to be
normalized so that we can diminish the very negative
consequences that could follow, in Darfur, from that
relationship and the tragic events of last week.
Secondly, more than ever there is a need to
urgently demand a cessation of hostilities by the
parties. I have just received, this minute, reports from
the field about attacks on villages by Sudanese army
entities and militia groups. Those reports are not yet
detailed or confirmed, but it seems that hundreds of
people may have been killed in those attacks, and they
continue at this moment. So that is a dramatic
reminder, at this meeting, that there is a clear need to
urgently demand of the parties an immediate cessation
of hostilities.
Also, whatever members can do to influence the
quick deployment of troops — and Jean-Marie
Guéhenno will expand upon this — will be of direct
significance for the work that Salim Salim and I are
carrying out, since we must instil a sense of security in
the people of Darfur. If they do not see increased
security and improved conditions, they will lose their
hope and their belief in the political process and in the
peacekeeping operation.

26

More specifically in my realm of responsibility,
we welcome the fact that we are now dealing with five
movements instead of the much greater earlier number.
That is a step forward. The Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement (SPLM) is also doing its part to help in that
process. But we also need the encouragement of all
Member States and for them to send messages, through
the various channels that they are able to utilize, that
the movements must choose the political track.
We are now seeing an enormously dangerous
development, which is tragically evident today. We must
step back from the escalation of hostilities; the situation
is dangerous enough. I see growing frustration, anger
and disillusionment in the camps. One can imagine a
13-year-old boy who came to the camps four years ago;
he is now 17, he sees his father unemployed and his
mother running the risk of being raped when she goes to
gather firewood. There is also the fact that different
villages are now taken over by people who do not own
those villages. But if we have an escalation now, the
entire humanitarian operation will be in danger. The
escalation must be stopped, or we will be faced with
another huge tragedy in Darfur and Sudan as a whole.
The mass killings are behind us — and still must be
addressed via other channels — but we have new
problems that could erupt into huge tragedies.
Members should do everything they can to send
that message to all concerned parties — the
Government of Sudan, the movements — but also to
the regional actors. Several speakers highlighted that;
we cannot have peace in Darfur without the
cooperation of the neighbouring countries in the
region. We had some very productive meetings with
Libya, Chad, Eritrea and Egypt. We had three very
productive meetings, but now, as members understand,
with the recent events in Chad, that regional
cooperation is going to face difficulties. We need their
cooperation. The borders there were drawn in 1895 in
Berlin, and between Chad and Sudan they certainly do
not reflect tribal and ethnic realities. We pay a price for
that today, or rather the people of Darfur and of Chad
pay a price for that today.
My last point is on an economic issue. It does not
only concern humanitarian assistance, that is, the
extremely great need to continue the humanitarian
assistance. I would also state that Member States,
particularly the donor community but also perhaps all
of us, should think about the need to start planning now
for recovery efforts. There is a long road between

08-23190

S/PV.5832

humanitarian assistance and development programmes.
We need to become more active in post-conflict
recovery efforts.
I was at a village less than a month ago, in an
area patrolled by a movement, and I strayed into the
village after the talks with the movement leaders. It
was a very depressing sight; it was even worse than the
situation in the camps. The market had nothing but
onions, as I recall, and the school had 12 or 14 books
for about 300 children. The children had gray faces and
women had to walk for two or three hours to get water,
as the well was dry. If a woman was pregnant and was
to give birth to a child, she would have to ride a mule
for four to five days to a village called Qutum.
Those are the realities, and we need to understand
that Darfur is a neglected part of Sudan. There is a
great need for the economic dimensions to also be
taken into account. That could help us in the
negotiations, since we would then have a ray of hope to
give to the people of Darfur, if we were coming from
negotiations that would lead to a fair distribution of the
wealth of Sudan — which is still there.
Those are my comments, and I would also like to
thank the Council members on behalf of my friend and
colleague, Salim Ahmed Salim, for the solid support
they give us in the work we try to conduct under very
difficult circumstances. We are grateful for their
understanding of the complicated nature of our work.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Eliasson for his important comments. I now give
the floor to Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
Mr. Guéhenno: Allow me to thank the Council
for the support it provides to a very challenging
mission. Our partnership with the African Union is key,
and I am very grateful for the very close relationship
that we have with the African Union in moving forward
together in that endeavour.
I was asked three specific questions. I will start
with the last question, from the representative of the
United States of America, regarding the helicopters and
the Ethiopian offer. We are indeed very grateful to the
Government of Ethiopia for making that offer and we
welcome that pledge. I am not in a position today to
give the exact timeline. We will quickly conduct a
review of that offer to see whether it meets the
requirements. But it is indeed a very welcome pledge.

08-23190

The representative of the United Kingdom asked
about the conclusion of the status-of-forces agreement
and protecting the freedom of movement in that
agreement. We have had very constructive discussions
with the Government of the Sudan on the agreement,
so I do hope that we will not find any obstacles in our
path, on this critical issue of freedom of movement. I
look forward to the conclusion of the agreement in the
same spirit in which we have conducted the discussions
thus far.
Let me now come to the other question raised by
the Ambassador of the United Kingdom with respect to
the events presently unfolding in Darfur. It was in the
course of this briefing that we received what are still
preliminary reports. They will need to be confirmed
and verified, but it seems that an attack was launched
this morning by a joint Sudanese Armed Forces-Arab
militia convoy on two localities north of El Geneina —
Abu Suruj and Sirba. That attack, apparently, was
supported by helicopters and possibly fixed-wing
aircraft. Moreover, just north of those two localities,
the attack would have been pursued on Sileia, which is
a bit to the north-east of Sirba, I am told, with two
bombs dropped on that particular locality. A compound
of Médecins sans Frontières was looted a week or so
ago. There has been a lot of upheaval in those
localities, but these are still very preliminary reports.
What I would want to say on this very disturbing
new spike in violence in Darfur is that, unfortunately,
for those who have been following the situation it does
not come as a surprise. We have seen in recent weeks
and days — actually, even yesterday — more
reinforcement in El Geneina. Vehicles are coming from
Nyala to reinforce Government forces. Also, we can
recall the events in December. As this Council will
recall, in December there were attacks conducted by
the movements in those same areas where the Justice
and Equality Movement (JEM) is trying to consolidate
its positions north of El Geneina, with bombings and
attacks against the Sudanese armed forces by JEM in
response.
What we are witnessing is actually a war, with
offensive and counter-offensive fighting, which will
put the peacekeeping operation in a very difficult
situation, because we will be there in the midst of a
shooting war between parties that want to consolidate
their positions. Neither side can accept a defeat, and
that is a very worrying trend, as Special Envoy

27

S/PV.5832

Eliasson said, if we want to gradually lower the level
of violence.

destroyed, and peace becomes a more remote prospect
as violence develops.

We do hope that those attacks will not be pursued
further into Jebel Mun, because the reality of that war
is that civilians are the victims of such combat.
Whether attacks are launched by movements or by the
Government of the Sudan, the civilians are the main
victims. Their houses are burned, their villages are

The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

28

The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

08-23190
