VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

respective countries, and calls upon those agencies and
organizations that have not yet done so to follow this
example and to make the necessary arrangements without

delay;
18. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations and institutions of the United Nations system to
assist in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national
life of colonial Territories, particularly in the development
of their economies;
19. Requests the specialized agencies to abide by Security Council resolution 566 (l 985) of 19 June 1985, in
which the Council condemned the racist regime of South
Africa for its installation of a so-called interim Government in Namibia and declared that action to be illegal and
null and void;
20. Recommends that all Governments should intensify their efforts in the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system of which they
are members to ensure the full and effective implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and other
relevant resolutions of the United Nations and, in that
connection, should accord priority to the question of providing assistance on an emergency basis to the peoples of
the colonial Territories and their national liberation movements;
21. Reiterates its proposal, under article III of the
Agreement between the United Nations and the International Monetary Fund, 48 for the urgent inclusion in the
agenda of the Board of Governors of the Fund of an item
dealing with the relationship between the Fund and South
Africa, and further reiterates its proposal that, in pursuance of article II of the Agreement, the relevant organs of
the United Nations should participate in any meeting of
the Board of Governors called by the Fund for the purpose
of discussing the item, and urges the Fund to discuss its
relationship with South Africa at its annual meeting, in
compliance with the above-mentionf"<i .\i,.i.:ement, and to
report to the Secretary-General r:!' the United Nations on
the ~ction taken;
22. Draws the attention of the specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system to the
Plan of Action for the Full Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, contained in the annex to General
Assembly resolution 35/ l l 8, in particular to those provisions calling upon the agencies and organizations to render
all possible moral and material assistance to the peoples of
the colonial Territories and to their national liberation
movements;
23. Urges the executive heads of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system,
having regard to the provisions of paragraphs 13 and 22
above, to formulate, with the active co-operation of the
Organization of African Unity where appropriate, and to
submit, as a matter of priority, to their governing and legislative organs concrete proposals for the full implementation of the relevant United Nations decisions, in particular
specific programmes of assistance to the peoples of the
colonial Territories and their national liberation movements;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
assist the specialized agencies and other organizations of
the United Nations system in working out appropriate
measures for implementing the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations and to prepare for submission to the relevant bodies, with the assistance of those agencies and
48 See Agreements between the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies
and the lnlernationa/ Atomic Energy Agency (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E/F.61.X. I), p. 61.

275

organizations, a report on the action taken in implementation of the relevant resolutions, including the present resolution, since the circulation of his previous report;
25. Requests the Economic and Social Council to continue to consider, in consultation with the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, appropriate measures for
co-ordination of the policies and activities of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system in implementing the relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly;
26. Requests the specialized agencies to report periodically to the Secretary-General of the United Nations on
their implementation of the present resolution;
27. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine this question and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its forty-first session.
99th plenary meeting
2 December 1985

40/54. United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its earlier resolutions on the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa,
in particular resolution 39/44 of 5 December 1984,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General49
containing an account of the work of the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa and the administration of
the Programme for the period from I October 1984 to 15
October 1985,
Recognizing the valuable assistance rendered by the
Programme to the peoples of South Africa and Namibia,
Noting with satisfaction that educational and technical
assistance for southern Africa has become a growing concern of the international community,
Fully recognizing the need at this critical juncture in
southern Africa to provide educational opportunities and
counselling to a greater number of student refugees in a
wide variety of professional, cultural and linguistic disciplines, as well as opportunities for vocational and technical training and for advanced studies at graduate and postgraduate levels in the priority fields of study,
Strongly convinced that the continuation and expansion
of the Programme is essential in order to meet the increasing demand for educational and training assistance to students from South Africa and Namibia,
I. Endorses the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Educat10nal and Training Programme for
Southern Africa;
2. Commends the Secretary-General and the Advisory
Committee on the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa for their continued
efforts to promote generous contributions to the Programme and to enhance co-operation with governmental,
intergovernmental and non-governmental agencies
involved in educational and technical assistance for southern Africa;
3. Expresses its appreciation to all those that have supported the Programme by providing contributions, scholarships or places in their educational institutions;
4 " A/401781.

276

General Assembly-Fortieth Session

4. Appeals to all States, institutions, organizations and
individuals to offer greater financial and other support to
the Programme in order to secure its continuation and
steady expansion.
99th plenary meeting
2 December 1985

40/55. Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembl_v,
Recalling its resolution 39/45 of 5 December 1984,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training facilities
for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, 50 prepared pursuant to General Assembly resolution 845 (IX)
of 22 November 1954,
Considering that more scholarships should be made
available to the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories in all parts of the world and that steps should be
taken to encourage applications from students in those
Territories,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
50 A/40/718.

2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
that have made scholarships available to the inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Invites all States to make or continue to make generous offers of study and training facilities to the inhabitants
of those Territories that have not yet attained self-government or independence and, "'herever possible. to provide
travel funds to prospective students;
4. Urges the administering Powers to take effective
measures to ensure the widespread and continuous dissemination in the Territories under their administration of
information relating to offers of study and training facilities made by States and to provide all the necessary facilities to enable students to avail themselves of such offers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution;
6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
99th plenary meeting
2 Decemher 1985
