UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/794
14 October 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 14 OCTOBER 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated
9 October 1997, which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members
of the Security Council.

(Signed)

97-27251 (E)

151097

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1997/794
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 9 October 1997 from the Secretary-General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to
the Secretary-General

In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the
ninth monthly report on Stabilization Force operations. I would appreciate your
making this report available to the Security Council.

(Signed)

Javier SOLANA

/...

S/1997/794
English
Page 3

Appendix
Ninth monthly report to the United Nations
Security Council on SFOR operations
SFOR operations
1.
Approximately 39,000 SFOR troops are currently deployed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia, with contributions from all members of NATO and from 20
non-NATO nations. Over the reporting period (21 August-20 September), the
number of troops in theatre increased because of the support provided to the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) during the
preparations for, and conduct of, the municipal elections, which took place on
13 and 14 September.
2.
SFOR continued to conduct surveillance and reconnaissance by means of
ground and air patrols. Over the reporting period 2,950 sorties were flown by
combat aircraft, with the SFOR helicopter fleet flying a total of 102 hours.
3.
Support continues to be provided to the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES), with
SFOR maintaining its regular, coordinated training missions over Eastern
Slavonia in order to exercise plans to provide close air support if necessary.
4.
Over the reporting period, there have been continuing signs of tension
within the Republika Srpska and a number of clashes, reported in more detail
below, between Republika Srpska crowds and SFOR troops. In addition, in late
August, the pro-Pale Serb media launched a propaganda campaign against SFOR in
Brcko which threatened to jeopardize stability within Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In response to a request from the High Representative, SFOR was authorized to
assist in curtailing or suspending media programming if required.
5.
On 28 August, near Brcko, a group of approximately 70 Bosnian Serb
civilians attacked SFOR personnel manning a traffic control point. The SFOR
personnel were moved by armoured vehicles towards the Brcko Bridge. A group of
around 400 Bosnian Serb civilians started following the troops towards the
bridge, where Bosnian Serb police and the International Police Task Force (IPTF)
attempted to contain the situation. Over the next few hours, the crowd at the
bridge grew to approximately 1,400 people. Sticks, stones and Molotov cocktails
were thrown at the SFOR troops, who responded by using riot control gas. By
mid-afternoon of 29 August, the situation had calmed down and the crowd around
the bridge dispersed.
6.
In the afternoon of 1 September, approximately 170 Bosnian Serbs gathered
near the Udrigovo radio television tower near Uglejvik complaining about the
lack of broadcasts into the Brcko area. Later, two civilian buses with some 100
people headed towards Uglejvik, with another group of 100 people heading towards
the television tower. Stones were thrown at the SFOR soldiers, who had deployed
to the area as a result of the disturbances throughout the Republika Srpska. By
mid-afternoon, approximately 200 people had gathered near the tower, and a wire
barrier was constructed by the SFOR troops between themselves and the crowd.
Following low-level flights by SFOR above the area and instructions to leave
/...

S/1997/794
English
Page 4

relayed by aerial loud speakers, the crowd calmed down and subsequently
dispersed. SFOR units remained in the close vicinity of the television tower
until 5 September. Since then, SFOR has been conducting patrols nearby, in
accordance with an agreement with the Republika Srpska authorities in Pale on
2 September.
7.
On 6 September, the Banja Luka Public Security Centre announced that all
public gatherings in the town would be banned from 7 to 11 September, thereby
prohibiting a Serbian Democratic Party (SDS) rally which had been scheduled for
8 September. The Banja Luka chapter of SDS announced plans to go ahead in any
event and on 8 September buses from the east and south-eastern parts of the
Republika Srpska left for the rally. SFOR monitored the buses' movements and
checked them for weapons by setting up traffic control points along the main
routes to Banja Luka. A total of 54 buses were monitored en route to Banja Luka
by the evening of 8 September. They were stopped at SFOR and civil police
roadblocks outside Banja Luka and all eventually turned around and left by the
early hours of 9 September. The following morning, however, it became apparent
that three senior Republika Srpska politicians (Messrs. Kijac, Krajisnik and
Klikovic) were trapped in a hotel in Banja Luka surrounded by a hostile crowd of
between 300 and 1,000 people. IPTF and local police, with SFOR support,
escorted some of the party from the hotel to be questioned by representatives of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. They were all then
released. The three politicians remained at the hotel during this time.
President Krajisnik eventually left in the early evening of 9 September, heckled
by crowds and escorted by two Republika Srpska cars.
8.
On 17 September, a Ukrainian MI-8 helicopter flying for the United Nations
crashed near Fojnica. SFOR dispatched four medical evacuation helicopters and
one tactical command post helicopter to the scene. Twelve passengers were
killed, among them Deputy High Representative Gerd Wagner and Deputy IPTF
Commissioner David Kriskovich. The four crew members survived and were
transported to the SFOR hospital at Rajlovak. Following the crash, SFOR forces
provided security at the location. The United Nations is leading the crash
investigation.
9.
On 18 September a car bomb exploded outside a police station in West
Mostar. Twenty-six people were injured and cars and buildings in the
surrounding area were damaged. An investigation into the explosion is currently
being conducted by Mostar Cantonal authorities, assisted by Federation
authorities and under the supervision of IPTF.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
10. The Parties remain generally compliant with most military aspects of the
Peace Agreement across the whole area of operations. Despite the political
tension in the Republika Srpska, the overall situation in theatre remains calm.
SFOR continues to ensure a secure environment in accordance with the Peace
Agreement. The programme for the reduction of cantonment sites is on schedule,
freedom of movement has improved and compliance with countermine operations is
generally good.

/...

S/1997/794
English
Page 5

11. In line with the policy communicated to the Entity Presidents by the SFOR
Commander on 7 August (see S/1997/718, annex, appendix, para. 4), SFOR has
continued to enforce the compliance of the Specialist Police Units with annex 1A
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace and has begun to limit their
capabilities. Federation Specialist Police forces are generally compliant. As
regards the Republika Srpska Specialist Police, the SFOR Deputy Commander for
Operations met the Commander of the Republika Srpska police Anti-Terrorist
Brigade, General Saric and the new Republika Srpska Minister of the Interior,
Mr. Paleksic, on 3 September to discuss the lack of compliance with the
supplementary instructions for the Specialist Police (chapter 12 of instructions
of the SFOR Deputy Commander for Operations to the parties). Both indicated
that they were willing to comply and would provide the necessary information by
8 September. Following the meeting, the Deputy Commander for Operations
ordered a training and movement ban on all Republika Srpska Specialist Police
units not in compliance with the supplementary instructions. Since the
Anti-Terrorist Brigade remained non-compliant. The Deputy Commander for
Operations, on 11 September, sent letters to General Saric and Mr. Paleksic
summarizing the outstanding non-compliance issues and highlighting that
Specialist Police had been deployed in Banja Luka on 9 September. The letters
also provided the necessary direction for corrective action. Full compliance
has not yet been achieved, but there has been progress.
12. During the reporting period, SFOR inspected 479 military weapons storage
sites: 178 Bosniac; 146 Bosnian Croat; 2 Federation; and 153 Bosnian Serb. In
addition, SFOR supported the weapon inspection campaign conducted by IPTF at
local police facilities of both entities. This operation lasted 18 days, from
24 August to 10 September and 125 civil police stations were inspected: 52 from
the Federation and 73 from the Republika Srpska. Forty-two civil police units
showed discrepancies. Of these, 23 were Federation and 19 were Republika
Srpska. The following weapons in excess of the quantity and type specified were
confiscated by SFOR: from the Federation: 93 grenades; 17 anti-personnel
mines; 14 anti-tank mines; 241 long-barrelled weapons; 4 rifles; 4 M-80s; 5
pistols; 1 rocket-propelled grenade; and 3 sub-machine guns; and from the
Republika Srpska: 170 grenades; 2 anti-personnel mines; 8 anti-tank mines;
104 long-barrelled weapons; 15 rifles; 2 M-80s; 15 pistols; and 6 rocketpropelled grenades.
13. A number of minor discrepancies were discovered during the SFOR inspection
of weapons storage sites over the reporting period, and the following weapons
confiscated: from the Bosnian Croats, six AK 47 rifles, one grenade launcher,
three small arms and 112 x 7.62 rounds of ammunition; from the Bosnian Serbs,
one AK 47 rifle and 3 x 60 mm mortars; and from the Bosniacs, none. In
accordance with SFOR policy, after a period of time to allow for appeals, all
these confiscated weapons will be destroyed.
14. Over the reporting period, two illegal check points were dismantled, both
in the Republika Srpska. On 30 August, Republika Srpska police were observed
demanding 50 DM each from two individuals to cross the Brcko bridge. IPTF
intervened and the Republika Srpska police complied with their demand to desist.
On the same day, the Deputy High Representative in Brcko, Ambassador Farrand,
issued a supervisory order instructing Republika Srpska police authorities
immediately to halt the practice of charging visa fees for vehicles crossing the
/...

S/1997/794
English
Page 6

Brcko Bridge from Croatia. Ambassador Farrand also demanded that all activities
by Republika Srpska police and customs authorities related to the collection of
road toll charges at the bridge be stopped without delay. On 13 September, a
SFOR patrol and IPTF dismantled an illegal check point at Trnovo police station,
set up by 5 Republika Srpska policemen. There was no resistance. Overall, the
SFOR/IPTF checkpoint policy continues to improve freedom of movement. IPTF,
with SFOR support, are pursuing their objective of reducing the number of human
rights violations by monitoring the daily activity of the local police,
accompanying regular police on patrol and reporting on the application of the
law.
15. In late August, Republika Srpska President Plavsic agreed to bring the
Republika Srpska police under the jurisdiction of the IPTF certification and
restructuring programme. Approximately 800 police, primarily in the Banja Luka
area, have entered the IPTF programme.
16. During the reporting period, SFOR monitored a total of 532 training and
movement activities: 269 by the Bosniacs; 131 by the Bosnian Croats; and 132 by
the Bosnian Serbs. During the period of the municipal elections, all movement
and training activities were banned for all Entity Armed Forces from 8 to
21 September. The ban also applied to air activities and the call up of
reserves. The only exceptions related to the countermine campaign, weapons
reductions being carried out under the auspices of OSCE and site reductions in
accordance with the 25 per cent reduction plan. On the election days (13 and
14 September), all Entity Armies were continued to barracks.
17. Over the reporting period, Entity personnel, under SFOR supervision,
removed 3,510 explosive devices from 292 mined areas: 349 anti-tank mines;
2,849 anti-personnel mines; and 312 items of unexploded ordnance. This marks
the best monthly performance ever reported. In general, compliance has improved
considerably over recent months, and no training and movement bans have been
imposed since 7 September. Bans were however in effect until 21 September for
non-compliance with the countermining guidance. These bans were placed on the
movement and training of the third and fifth VRS corps in Multi-National
Division (North) and on the fifth VRS corps in Multi-National Division (South
East).
18. On 19 August, a meeting of the Inter-Entity Boundary Line Sub-Commission
took place in Lukavica, when the parties agreed on the exchange of the village
of Dobocani (to the Federation) for the village of Koprivna (to the Republika
Srpska). The ratification of this Agreement is pending.
19. On 26 August, there was a meeting of the Joint Military Commission at SFOR
headquarters. The main issues discussed were the power struggle in the
Republika Srpska, the de-mining process, cantonment sites and the handing over
of prisoners of war. With respect to prisoners of war, the Entity Army
commanders were asked to ensure that there were no prisoner of war detainees in
any facility for which they were responsible. The Commanders' written
confirmation is still awaited.
20. Since the implementation of the Peace Agreement, approximately 1,100
prisoners of war have been released under the auspices of the International
/...

S/1997/794
English
Page 7

Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). ICRC is currently assessing the conditions
of detention and treatment of people belonging to minority ethnic groups
detained by another ethnic group (referred to as common-law detainees) and
persons accused or sentenced for war crimes. As of August, the persons
belonging to this latter category numbered less than 20.
Cooperation with international organizations
21. Within its capabilities, SFOR continues to offer assistance to the
international organizations in theatre. As noted above, SFOR continues to
provide security to IPTF in its inspections of specialist police units, with the
aim of bringing these latter into compliance with annex 1A of the Peace
Agreement.
22. Increased support has also been provided to the Office of the High
Representative, notably during the Banja Luka incident detailed in paragraph 7
above, when prompt action by SFOR and the Office of the High Representative
defused a potentially critical situation. In addition, SFOR and the Office of
the High Representative continued negotiations with the parties with a view to
reaching agreement on aviation matters. On 11 September, after considerable
pressure, the Council of Ministers signed the agreement on the Department of
Civil Aviation. The memorandum of understanding for the opening up of the
regional airports of Banja Luka, Mostar and Tuzla was subsequently signed on
12 September during the visit to Sarajevo by the NATO Secretary-General. Work
is now proceeding apace with a view to certifying the regional airports and to
opening them up to civilian traffic.
23. SFOR continues to support international agencies promoting the expansion of
alternative media, and assists both the Office of the High Representative and
OSCE in expanding the Open Broadcast Network and the Free Elections Radio
Network. Additionally, SFOR is a key participant in the various international
community media organizations.
24. SFOR provided significant security and logistical support to the OSCE
during the conduct of the municipal elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina on 13
and 14 September. In part because of the increased SFOR presence, the overall
situation in the theatre remained generally calm. Operations proceeded
smoothly, even although there were some cases of isolated violence. As planned,
SFOR supported the municipal elections with area security protection, while IPTF
and local police provided local security. SFOR maintained a visible presence in
key election areas throughout the polling to ensure a secure environment. SFOR
aviation and ground assets continually conducted route reconnaissance and
reported on the conditions of all voter routes. As anticipated, voter movement
across the Inter-Entity Boundary Line and within the Federation was moderate and
largely without incident. SFOR units closely controlled bus movements across
the Inter-Entity Boundary Line. SFOR continued to provide security at the two
OSCE counting locations during the tabulation process.
25. In terms of logistical support, SFOR's Beluga Group distributed polling
material to the Multi-National Division's storage distribution centres,
following which the Multi-National Division delivered the materials to the Local
Election Commissions who, in turn, delivered them to the approximately 2,300
/...

S/1997/794
English
Page 8

polling stations. SFOR aircraft also picked up the elections materials during
polling days and delivered them to Sarajevo for re-sorting by OSCE election
officials. Once sorted, SFOR aircraft delivered them to appropriate OSCE sites
in designated cities. After the polling days, SFOR also returned the completed
ballots to Sarajevo for counting and storage.
26. During the implementation phase, SFOR will continue to provide a secure
environment, providing area security and supporting the IPTF. SFOR is
participating fully in the OSCE Election Results Implementation Committees at
national and five regional levels. The Committees will monitor the installation
of elected candidates and coordinate responses to problems.
27. SFOR has continued to provide data on Entity weapons holdings to the
Personal Representative of the OSCE Chairman-in-Office under the terms of
article IV of the Peace Agreement. SFOR has also assisted in the movement of
weapons to reductions sites and has established a direct field level liaison
with OSCE weapons experts for the purpose of refining the SFOR cantonment data.
During the month of August, following agreement from the Supreme Allied
Commander, Europe arms control experts working for OSCE accompanied SFOR during
routine cantonment site inspections, with the aim of identifying equipment
falling under the terms of the Agreement on Subregional Arms Control and thus
obtaining further clarification of discrepancies between SFOR reports and
holdings reported by the parties. The Federation willingly accepted this
assistance, and SFOR consequently conducted its August Federation inspections
accompanied by these experts. Similar inspections in the Republika Srpska have
not yet taken place.
28. On 15 September, the Standing Committee on Military Matters met in Sarajevo
with President Zubak in the chair. This was the 1st meeting of the Committee
since agreement on procedures was reached at the end of August. SFOR was
represented by the SFOR Commander and by the Deputy Commander for Operations.
The atmosphere was constructive, and outstanding differences on the chairmanship
and location of meetings were resolved. The Office of the High Representative
agreed to assist the Military Advisors of the Presidents in preparation for the
next meeting on 15 October, and on a six-month strategic plan for the Committee.
In particular, following short statements from the three Presidents, it was
agreed that, at the next meeting, they would take a paper proposing a way ahead
on the appointment of defence attachés.
Outlook
29. With the municipal elections now over, SFOR has begun initial planning, in
close cooperation with OSCE, for the forthcoming elections in the Republika
Srpska.

-----
