S/2016/1130

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 December 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraphs 50 and 52 of Security
Council resolution 2277 (2016). It covers major developments that have occurred in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo since my report of 3 October 2016
(S/2016/833), progress in the implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and issues relating to the preparedness of MONUSCO to tackle
security risks and monitor and report on human rights violations and abuses in the
context of elections. It also provides an assessment of the transformation of the
MONUSCO force and progress towards an exit strategy for the Intervention
Brigade.

II. Major developments
A.

Political situation
2.
The reporting period was marked by political initiatives aimed at reaching an
inclusive agreement among national political actors, principally on the holding of
general elections, which were initially set for late November. The initiatives took
place amid rising tensions and apprehension ahead of the formal end of the second
and constitutionally mandated final term in office of the President, Joseph Kabila
Kabange, on 19 December.
3.
The national dialogue proposed by the President under the facilitation of Edem
Kodjo, appointed by the African Union, concluded on 18 October with the signing
of a political agreement between the Majorité présidentielle and part of the
opposition led by the leader of the Union pour la nation congolaise (UNC), Vital
Kamerhe. Under the terms of the agreement, presidential, legislative and provincial
elections should be held in one sequence by April 2018, along with, if technical and
financial resources so permit, local, municipal and urban elections. Alternatively,
local, municipal and urban elections would be held within six months following the
presidential, legislative and provincial elections. The agreement also provides that

16-22936 (E)

030117

*1622936*

S/2016/1130

the current President will remain in power until the elections and his successor
assumes office, in line with a ruling issued by the Constitutional Court on 11 May.
The same applies for parliamentarians, provincial governors and members of
provincial assemblies. In addition, a government of national unity, to be led by a
prime minister chosen from opposition members who took part in the national
dialogue, was to be formed within 21 days of the signing of the agreement to
oversee preparations towards elections.
4.
The agreement was denounced by opposition parties that did not participate in
the dialogue. On 19 October, the opposition coalition, Rassemblement des forces
politiques et sociales acquises au changement, called for a stay -at-home day in
Kinshasa and other cities in protest. On 20 October, the Union pour la démocratie et
le progrès social (UDPS), a member party of the Rassemblement, issued a statement
in which it rejected the agreement on the grounds that it violated the Constitution
and did not reflect a consensus among Congolese political actors. The Episcopal
Conference of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which had initially
participated in the dialogue before withdrawing from it after the violent incidents of
19 and 20 September, called for a more inclusive dialogue to reach consensus on the
electoral process.
5.
On 31 October, at the request of the President, the Episcopal Conference
initiated mediation aimed at promoting consensus on the transition and elections. To
that end, it held a series of meetings with the Majorité présidentielle and the
Rassemblement, among others.
6.
In Kinshasa, the Governor reiterated the ban on public political activities in
force since 22 September. On 5 November, a strong police presence prevented an
opposition rally from being held in the capital. The Rassemblement issued a press
release to postpone the rally to 19 November, with a view to ensuring calm in
anticipation of the visit by the Security Council from 11 to 13 November and to
allowing mediation efforts by the Episcopal Conference to proceed. On
19 November, opposition protests were again prevented fro m being held.
7.
On 15 November, the President delivered his annual state of the nation
address. He welcomed the agreement and called upon political actors who had not
participated in the national dialogue to sign it. He also denounced what he described
as “foreign interference” in the country’s internal affairs. On elections, he
commended the Independent National Electoral Commission for the continuing
voter registration process and called upon young people to enrol en masse. On
security, he asserted that “areas of lawlessness” had been reduced to “pockets of
insecurity” and condemned the “barbaric acts of terrorist and criminal forces in
Beni, Kasai Central, Kasai Oriental and in Kinshasa”.
8.
On 17 November, in line with the agreement, the President appointed Samy
Badibanga as Prime Minister following the resignation of Augustin Matata Ponyo
Mapon on 14 November. A parliamentarian, Mr. Badibanga is the leader of the
UDPS et Alliés parliamentary group, a coalition formed by those party members
who rejected the call by Etienne Tshisekedi for UDPS not to sit in Parliament after
the elections of 2011. In reaction, the Secretary-General of UDPS, Jean-Marc
Kabund wa Kabund, stated that the appointment of the new Prime Minister was a
“non-event”, recalling that Mr. Badibanga was a dissident and advocating an
agreement between the President and Mr. Tshisekedi on arrangements for a political

2/19

16-22936

S/2016/1130

transition after 19 December. In contrast, the signatories to the agreement welcomed
Mr. Badibanga’s appointment.
9.
By early December, the mediation led by the Episcopal Conference between
the signatories and non-signatories to the agreement, including the Rassemblement,
had reached an impasse. On 2 December, the Episcopal Conference issued a press
release and held a press conference in Kinshasa to call upon all sides to show
goodwill in order to reach a compromise. On 5 December, following a meeting
between representatives of the Episcopal Conference and the President, the Office
of the President issued a press release in which it expressed the President’s
continued support and encouragement for the Episcopal Conference mediation.
From 17 December, the Episcopal Conference led a new round of consultations
between the signatories and non-signatories in an attempt to reconcile differences on
the governance arrangements and the date and sequencing of the elections.
10. On 19 December, the President’s second and final term in office formally came
to an end amid persistent tensions and localized protests nationwide. At midnight, a
presidential decree announcing the formation of a new Government was read on
national television. The new Government has 68 members, 20 more than the
previous Government, including eight women. In line with the agreement of
18 October, it comprises representatives of political parties and coalitions that
participated in the national dialogue, including UDPS and UNC. In addition to the
position of Prime Minister held by Samy Badibanga of UDPS et Alliés, another
UDPS official is the Deputy Minister of Finance. The Majorité présidentielle retains
key portfolios, including security and the interior, defence, foreign affairs, economy,
finance, mines, hydrocarbons and justice. Representatives of UNC hold three
portfolios (budget, foreign trade and deputy minister of justice). Several outgoing
ministers, including the Minister of Communications and Media and Spokesperson
of the Government, were reappointed, while a handful were replaced, including
Raymond Tshibanda N’tungamulongo, who left the post of Minister for F oreign
Affairs, and Evariste Boshab, who left the post of Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of the Interior and Security.
11. The nomination of the new Government generated mixed reactions. The
spokesperson of the Rassemblement and UDPS Deputy Secretary-General, Bruno
Tshibala, said that the announcement was a “non-event” and that a solution to the
political impasse should emerge from the negotiations led by the Episcopal
Conference. The leader of UNC, Vital Kamerhe, welcomed the announcement,
while noting that it would have been best if it had been made after the conclusion of
the Episcopal Conference mediation process.
12. On 20 December, in reaction to a series of incidents involving protesters and
security forces, the Prime Minister held his first pre ss conference and called for
calm. The following day, the Government announced that at least 31 people had
been killed in recent clashes around the country over the preceding days. Other
sources announced higher tolls.
13. My Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Head of MONUSCO and my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region jointly
undertook good offices to bridge the gap between political stakeholders. From
31 October to 4 November, my Special Representative met the Rassembl ement, the
Episcopal Conference, the apostolic nuncio, a delegation of the All Africa

16-22936

3/19

S/2016/1130

Conference of Churches and the Vice-Minister for External Relations of Angola to
explore options to broaden support for a political solution with a view to preventing
violence relating to the electoral process. From 22 to 25 November, my Special
Representative and my Special Envoy held meetings in Kinshasa with key political
stakeholders, including the Prime Minister-designate and representatives of the
Majorité présidentielle and the Rassemblement, in support of the mediation led by
the Episcopal Conference.
14. At the regional level, ahead of the meeting on 26 October of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region in Luanda, my Special Envoy
travelled to the United Republic of Tanzania on 17 October and Uganda on
19 October, where he met the Minister for Foreign Affairs, East Africa, Regional
and International Cooperation, Augustine Phillip Mahiga, and the President, Yoweri
Kaguta Museveni, respectively, to discuss the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and encourage increased regional involvement to tackle the situation.
My Special Representative also visited the President of Uganda in Kampala on
15 November and the President of the Congo, Denis Sassou Nguesso, in Brazzaville
on 24 November to advocate enhanced regional support for the peaceful resolution
of the political impasse in the Democratic Republic of the Con go. A Security
Council delegation, jointly led by the Permanent Representatives of Angola and
France, visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo from 11 to 13 November and
Angola on 14 November to, among other things, urge Congolese actors to find a
consensual solution to the political impasse and to demonstrate its support for
regional initiatives aimed at preserving stability in the country.

B.

Electoral developments
15. The political agreement of 18 October provides for a complete overhaul of the
voter register by 31 July 2017 and the holding of elections by April 2018.
16. The pilot phase of the voter registration process launched in Gbadolite, North
Ubangi Province, on 31 July was completed on 29 November, a month later than
initially planned, with a total of 808,215 voters registered of the 850,000 originally
envisaged by the Independent National Electoral Commission, including 363,541
women. In mid-December, the Commission launched the subsequent phase, with
operations in 12 provinces covering one of two operational areas. Since 28 October,
MONUSCO has made four cargo planes and 16 helicopters available to the
Commission and has transported 1,000 tons of voter registration materials from
Kinshasa to other provinces. MONUSCO also supported the de ployment of 150
voter registration and police officials. On 31 October, a joint centre comprising
experts from the Commission and the United Nations was established in Kinshasa to
better coordinate voter registration operations.
17. By 15 December, the Government had disbursed to the Independent National
Electoral Commission $180 million of the $300 million pledged for 2016 for the
preparation of elections. At a press conference on 6 December, the Commission
reported that its updated budget for the electoral cycle was $1.8 billion, an increase
from the previously announced $1.2 billion. The multi-partner basket fund for the
project to support the electoral cycle, managed by the United Nations Development

4/19

16-22936

S/2016/1130

Programme, remained funded at only 6 per cent of the r equired amount of
$123.3 million, owing to donor concerns regarding the political context of the
elections.

C.

Security situation
18. Armed violence in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo continued to
place civilians at risk, resulting in further population displacements and
intercommunal tensions in some areas. Overall, the intensity of operations
conducted by the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo -FARDC) against armed groups
decreased, including those operations coordinated with MONUSCO, partly owing to
heavy losses against the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF ) in the “triangle area”.
19. In Beni territory, North Kivu, suspected ADF elements conducted a series of
attacks against civilians that resulted in dozens of casualties and contributed to
heightened tensions in the area. From 2 to 4 October, suspected AD F elements
attacked the villages of Kasinga, Malolu and Mamudioma, reportedly killing four
civilians and injuring three. On 9 October, suspected ADF elements attacked a
position of FARDC in Boikene, killing seven civilians and displacing many more
towards the centre of Beni. On 31 October, about 20 suspected ADF elements
attacked the village of Kitevya, in the Oicha area, killing seven civilians. Another
four civilians went missing. In response to the attacks, the Beni area has, since
October, seen the emergence of Mai-Mai groups, with a suspected strength of
several hundred elements. The groups have attacked police stations, presumably to
acquire weapons. On 19 December, Mai-Mai Mazembe elements attacked various
locations in Butembo, on the border of Beni and Lubero territories, killing a
peacekeeper, a police officer and at least one soldier, injuring two peacekeepers and
destroying a police station. At least five Mai-Mai elements were killed during the
attack. MONUSCO reinforced its presence in the area and conducted joint patrols
with FARDC.
20. Inter-ethnic tensions continued to cause instability and drive the activities of
many of the armed groups, especially in Lubero and Rutshuru territories. On
8 November, Hutu Nyatura elements reportedly killed the Hunde chief of
Mukeberwa, triggering tension between Hunde and Hutu communities in the area.
Similar tensions resurfaced in Bwalanda, where Mai-Mai Mazembe elements
clashed with a coalition of Nyatura/Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
(FDLR) elements on 16 October, prompting the local population to flee towards
Kikuku and Nyanzalé. MONUSCO and FARDC deployed troops to prevent a further
escalation of violence. The most significant incident took place on 27 November in
Luhanga, Lubero territory, when some 50 Mai-Mai Mazembe elements attacked a
camp of internally displaced persons, killing 30 and injuring 21. MONUSCO troops
exchanged fire with the Mai-Mai elements, killing one and injuring two.
MONUSCO attended to the wounded and evacuated at least 15 injured displaced
persons to local hospitals. After the attack, FARDC and MONUSCO reinforced their
positions around Luhanga. My Special Representative engaged with senior
government and provincial authorities with a view to easing intercommunal tensions
and finding lasting political solutions to the violence in the area. Following
intervention and action by MONUSCO and the Congolese authorities, the security

16-22936

5/19

S/2016/1130

situation in Buleusa, Walikale territory, has improved, with the majority of the
internally displaced persons there returning to their communities on 31 October.
21. In South Kivu, FARDC continued operations against Mai -Mai Raia
Mutomboki and other Mai-Mai groups in Fizi, Mwenga, Shabunda and Uvira
territories. While some progress was achieved in partially disrupting the activities of
the groups, they retained the capacity to attack civilians and showed little interest in
disarming. Between 31 October and 4 November, Mai-Mai Raia Mutomboki
elements carried out more than 20 attacks in the Penekusu area, raping at least 28
women and men and abducting 86 civilians. In Fizi territory, the combination of
FDLR activities and direct clashes between FARDC and armed elements crossing
over from Burundi continued to pose a threat to civilians. In Shabunda territor y, the
illegal exploitation of gold and other natural resources continued to fuel the
destabilizing activities of armed groups.
22. In Ituri Province, elements of the Force de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri
(FRPI) continued to pose a significant security risk to civilians, with 33 separate
attacks against civilians reported in October, compared with 17 in September.
Between 4 and 18 October, suspected FRPI elements looted more than a dozen
villages in the Aveba area, reportedly wounding three civilians and abducting two
others. From 19 to 23 October, suspected FRPI elements raided eight villages on the
Bunia-Beni axis, during which at least one civilian was wounded. MONUSCO
supported FARDC operations against the group, leading to the capture and surrende r
of 10 elements, including two senior members of the group. Six weapons with
ammunition were also recovered. In Mambasa, Mai-Mai groups continued to
impede stabilization efforts by conducting incursions along main routes.
23. In Haut-Uélé and Bas-Uélé Provinces, the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA)
remained active, amid an increasing influx of South Sudanese refugees and reports
of armed elements crossing into the Democratic Republic of the Congo from South
Sudan. On 1 October, suspected LRA elements reportedly attacked FARDC troops
in Nasumba, killing two soldiers and injuring four, while FARDC killed four
assailants. On 26 November, suspected LRA elements looted the villages of
Bakudangba and Katinga on the Doruma to Gangala-na-Bodio axis, whence they
also abducted 50 civilians. Elements from both South Sudanese government and
opposition forces crossed into the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
number of refugees significantly increased. FARDC apprehended the South
Sudanese elements who crossed into the country. MONUSCO deployed a forward
base to Doruma to better monitor the situation in the area.
24. In Tanganyika Province, the conflict between the Luba and Twa communities
continued to destabilize some areas. On 17 October, during clashes between milit ias
from both communities, at least 16 people, including 3 civilians, were killed in
Kabalo, more than 8,600 people displaced and some 40 villages burned down. In
response, MONUSCO supported initiatives by the local authorities aimed at
reducing tensions and initiating intercommunal dialogue. MONUSCO also deployed
two forward bases, to Nyunzu and Kabalo, on 19 October and 14 November,
respectively. On 26 October, Twa militia elements attacked Luba civilians in the
village of Kizika, looting and burning down more than 80 houses and causing the
displacement of civilians. On 6 and 7 November, Twa militiamen attacked and

6/19

16-22936

S/2016/1130

looted houses belonging to the Luba community in the villages of Kamblo,
Kangulu, Kyela and Kyalo.
25. In Haut-Katanga Province, the Mai-Mai Kata Katanga leader, Gédéon Kyungu
Mutanga, surrendered to the provincial authorities along with 129 of his combatants
on 11 October, handing over a significant number of weapons. Of this group, 11
were identified as children associated with the group and were separated; 58 agreed
to join the National Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Programme
and 60 opted for integration into FARDC. The group has been responsible for
numerous attacks against civilians over the past decade. Its leader was found guilty
of crimes against humanity and imprisoned before escaping in 2011.
26. Currently, 521 Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition
(SPLM/A in Opposition) elements remain on MONUSCO premises. On 1 October,
the Government officially requested the Mission to relocate them abroad.
MONUSCO is continuing its efforts to identify a sustainable solution, in
consultation with the Government. The Secretariat also established contacts with the
African Union Commission and the Intergovernmental Authorit y on Development in
this regard. In a letter dated 18 October to the President of the Security Council
(S/2016/875), I provided a full account of developments relating to the presence of
the elements on MONUSCO premises.

D.

Protection of civilians and neutralization of armed groups
27. MONUSCO continued to deepen its understanding of the current conflict
dynamics, improve early warning capacities and address the threats posed by armed
groups. It responded to emerging protection threats and increased its presence by
deploying temporary forward bases to areas of concern in Haut -Uélé, South Kivu
and Tanganyika Provinces. The Mission’s community alert network transmitted an
average of 245 early warning alerts per month, which represents an increase of 8 per
cent from the previous reporting period, with 94 per cent of alerts resulting in a
response by the Government and/or MONUSCO. Alerts that remained without
response were in areas with limited State security cap acity and difficult access.
28. In the Beni area, North Kivu, the Mission is reinforcing protection capabilities
through the deployment of forward bases in Ngadi, Muzambai and Kasinga. In
addition, following an attack on Rwangoma by suspected ADF elements in August,
MONUSCO and Congolese police officers jointly evaluated the security situation in
Beni territory, which led to the reinforcement of the police presence and resources.
29. MONUSCO continued to support the efforts of the provincial authorities t o
resolve intercommunal conflicts in North Kivu. On 2 and 3 November, it supported
awareness-raising activities on peaceful cohabitation in Buleusa to facilitate the
return of internally displaced persons and peaceful cohabitation between the Hutu,
Kobo and Nande communities. Following the violent clashes in Luhanga on
27 November, MONUSCO supported the provincial assessment mission led by the
Governor of North Kivu on 29 November. From 13 to 17 December, MONUSCO
facilitated the deployment of local authorities, community leaders and women
leaders to Luhanga and Luofu, as well as surrounding areas, to raise the awareness
of the population regarding peaceful cohabitation.

16-22936

7/19

S/2016/1130

30. In Kasai Central, serious outbreaks of violence in July and October across the
province, including in the provincial capital, Kananga, left at least 140 people dead,
with unconfirmed reports of much higher casualties. The risk of a further spread of
violence remains high, given the continued dispute over traditional chieftaincies, the
strongly politicized nature of the communities in the area and the linkages with
national political developments. Following high-level visits to the area and joint
assessment missions in October, MONUSCO reinforced its office in Kananga with a
view to strengthening cooperation with the national police, improving conflict resolution capacity and enhancing engagement with the local authorities.
31. In Tanganyika Province, in response to a recent outbreak of violence,
MONUSCO conducted a series of missions to assess the humanitarian situation,
monitor human rights violations and initiate reconciliation between the Luba and
Twa communities. Between 17 and 21 September, MONUSCO deployed 40
peacekeepers to Nyunzu and provided logistical support to national police ef forts to
protect civilians. On 21 November, two MONUSCO peacekeepers and five civilian
staff members were attacked with arrows by unknown elements near the village of
Nyemba, Kalemie territory, resulting in injuries.
32. In Ituri Province, as part of efforts to combat criminal networks, MONUSCO
supported national police operations, leading to the arrest of 27 armed perpetrators,
including a woman, and recovered 11 assault rifles. Those transferred to the judicial
authorities admitted having killed at least 10 civilians in September and October.
33. The Mine Action Service supported MONUSCO efforts to protect civilians,
responding to 62 Mission requests, resulting in the destruction of 3,767 explosive
remnants of war and 3,661 rounds of small arms ammunition.

E.

Disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration
34. The return of former combatants from the Kamina and Kitona camps to their
communities continued to be the focus of phase III of the National Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Programme. A total of 1,076 former combatants
of 4,575 demobilized persons returned to their communities in eight provinces. To
date, 1,592 former combatants remain in the Kamina camp and 1,712 in the Kitona
camp awaiting reintegration. The National Implementation Unit for the National
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Programme and MONUSCO
undertook awareness-raising and outreach activities in reintegration communities
for them. These developments represent the first steps of a new strategic and
programmatic shift from the traditional disarmament and demobilization phase in
those camps towards community-based reinsertion and reintegration programming
in the east of the country.
35. The number of surrenders by elements of foreign armed groups has fallen
since the previous reporting period. Since 1 October, 18 foreign combatants and
31 dependants have been repatriated.
36. MONUSCO continued to provide living assistance to 1,322 FDLR combatants
and their dependants in transit camps at Kanyobagonga (North Kivu) and Walungu
(South Kivu), as well as in the government-run camp at Kisangani (Tshopo).

8/19

16-22936

S/2016/1130

F.

Consolidation of State authority and stabilization
37. MONUSCO developed a stabilization strategy for the Beni area to address the
root causes of intercommunal tensions, while also empowering women to act as
enablers of peace. It continued to support both military and civilian justice
authorities in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo in investigating and
prosecuting perpetrators of serious crimes, including genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes, in particular through its prosecution support cells.
38. The Mission provided technical guidance to national counterparts to develop
training plans and curricula for 53 newly recruited prison directors, 120 prison
security guards and 50 female prison staff.
39. MONUSCO supported the national security forces in improving access to and
control of weapons and ammunition. The Mine Action Service built five a rmouries
in Ituri and South Kivu and provided technical advice and weapons and ammunition
management training for 60 national police officers in those provinces.

G.

Human rights situation
40. In October and November, MONUSCO documented 1,011 allegations of
human rights violations, of which 667 were in conflict -affected areas of the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and 344 in the western provinces. State agents
were alleged to be responsible for 612 incidents, resulting in 174 civilian deaths.
Armed groups were alleged to be responsible for 399 incidents, including 118
committed by FRPI, 64 by Nyatura and 53 by other Mai -Mai combatants, resulting
in 132 civilian deaths. These figures represent a significant increase in comparison
with the previous reporting period, especially in terms of extrajudicial killings
perpetrated by State agents.
41. From 1 January to 30 November, MONUSCO documented 4,599 human rights
violations, comprising 2,915 perpetrated by State agents, resulting in 398 civilian
deaths, and 1,684 committed by armed groups, resulting in 597 civilian deaths.
Overall, this represents a significant increase in comparison with the 3,877
violations documented in 2015.
42. The Mission observed a continued shrinking of political space, with increased
restrictions on civil and political rights, in addition to killings, harassment and
intimidation targeting mainly human rights defenders, members of opposition
parties and journalists. At least 10 journalists, 108 political opponents and 45
members of civil society were arbitrarily arrested and detained by the security
forces, mainly before and during political activities or demonstrations. The
Secretary-General of UDPS was arrested on 9 October and released on
29 November in connection with conspiracy charges relating to the violent
demonstrations of 19 and 20 September. On 1 December, the then Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister of the Interior and Security issued instructions banning
organizations without legal status, which includes the Lutte pour le changement and
Filimbi movements.
43. Since 5 November, the broadcast of Radio France internationale in Kinshasa
has been suspended and its signal disrupted. On 12 November, the Minister of

16-22936

9/19

S/2016/1130

Communications and Media and Spokesperson of the Government, Lambert Mende,
issued a decree stipulating that only those foreign media outlets where the majority
of the stakeholders were Congolese nationals could operate without interruption in
the country. From 5 to 8 November, the Radio Okapi transmission in Kin shasa was
disrupted.
44. On 11 October, the Government presented its report on the demonstrations of
19 and 20 September. It put the number of deaths at 32, including two police
officers and a child. Responsibility for most of the violence and deaths was
attributed to members of the opposition.
45. On 21 October, MONUSCO and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights published their preliminary investigation report on
human rights violations and violence perpetrated during the demonstrations in
Kinshasa between 19 and 21 September. They found that the security forces had
deliberately used excessive force, including live ammunition, resulting in at least 48
civilian deaths, 75 people being injured and at least 299 people being unlaw fully
arrested and detained. They also noted acts of violence by demonstrators, including
the killing of four police officers and the ransacking of several public buildings. In a
communiqué dated 25 October, the Majorité présidentielle contested the findin gs of
the report, stating that they contributed to further radicalizing the Rassemblement.
According to the Majorité présidentielle, no mention was made of the accountability
of the organizers of the demonstrators. The Government did not react to the
findings.
46. In Kasai Central, MONUSCO deployed a special investigation mission to
several villages in the territories of Demba, Dibaya and Dimbelenge to verify
allegations of serious human rights violations and violations of international
humanitarian law committed from 22 July to 30 October by members of a militia led
by a customary chief, Kamuina Nsapu, and by defence and security forces deployed
to eradicate the group. In 17 separate incidents, at least 117 people, including at
least 16 women and 22 children, of whom 7 were girls, were reportedly killed by
soldiers. Reports indicate that, during the military operations, the soldiers
indiscriminately opened fire against civilians, even though militiamen had already
left the area.
47. On 17 and 20 October, the Operational Military Court of North Kivu sentenced
eight ADF combatants to death and reparations for participation in an insurrectional
movement, crimes against humanity and terrorism.
48. From 21 to 26 November, my Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights
visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo to engage with national and local
stakeholders on the shrinking political space and deteriorating human rights
situation and to discuss with the authorities how to prevent a furth er escalation of
electoral violence and human rights violations. Following his visit, three civil
society activists and two political opponents were released. In addition, the Speaker
of the National Assembly pledged to accord priority to the adoption of t he bill
protecting human rights defenders, the law on demonstrations and the law on the
ratification of the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance, while
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of the Interior and Security agreed to carry
out a joint investigation of the events in Kinshasa of 19 and 20 September.

10/19

16-22936

S/2016/1130

H.

Sexual violence
49. A total of 37 women, including 17 girls, were reported to be victims of
conflict-related sexual violence in Ituri, Haut-Lomami, North Kivu and Tanganyika
Provinces. State agents reportedly accounted for 35 per cent of cases and armed
groups 65 per cent. FARDC soldiers reportedly committed 30 per cent of the
violations, whereas Mai-Mai Kifuafua combatants and FRPI combatants were
allegedly responsible for 27 per cent and 19 per cent, respectively.
50. MONUSCO and the Office of my Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict supported the Government in the organization of a high -level
conference, held in Kinshasa from 11 to 13 October, to evaluate pr ogress in the
implementation of the joint communiqué signed by the United Nations and the
Government in 2013. The participants in the conference adopted national priorities
for efforts to combat conflict-related sexual violence for the period 2017-2019. On
the margins of the conference, my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict met the President and other senior Congolese officials to discuss ways of
increasing collaboration between the Government and the United Nations on efforts
to combat sexual violence. She also visited Goma, North Kivu, and Bukavu, South
Kivu, to assess challenges and the specific needs of victims of sexual violence.

I.

Child protection
51. MONUSCO documented 120 grave violations of children’s rights, down from
155 documented cases during the previous reporting period. In total, 49 boys were
separated or escaped from armed groups, compared with 115 children documented
in the previous reporting period. Ten boys were documented as having been newly
recruited by armed groups. The main armed groups recruiting children were Forces
combattantes abacunguzi (12), Nyatura (10), FRPI (8), Nduma défense du Congo Rénové (7), UPDI (7), Mai-Mai Raia Mutomboki (3) and ADF (2). In addition,
following the voluntary surrender of the Mai-Mai Kata Katanga leader, nine
children were identified but have not yet been separated from the armed group. In
addition, 28 boys have been identified among the SPLM/A in Opposition elements
extracted by MONUSCO from the Garamba National Park. A total o f 20 boys
formerly associated with armed groups were released from FARDC custody and
handed over to MONUSCO, while 6 remain in detention.
52. The military prosecutor continued efforts towards the prosecution of
prominent armed group leaders for child recruitment and sexual violence. Three
FARDC soldiers and a national police officer were arrested on charges of child rape.

J.

Humanitarian situation
53. The humanitarian situation continued to deteriorate in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, underscoring the acute nature of the crisis owing in part to
armed group activity and increasing intercommunal violence, as evidenced by the
increase in the number of internally displaced persons from 1.7 million in
September to nearly 2 million. As at 30 November, there were some 439,000
refugees and asylum seekers in the country, including approximately 245,000 from

16-22936

11/19

S/2016/1130

Rwanda, 96,500 from the Central African Republic, 31,500 from Burundi and nearly
65,000 from South Sudan.
54. Insecurity remained a major obstacle to humanitarian access in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and continued to have an impact on the delivery
of assistance to people in need. As at 28 November, 4 humanitarian workers had
been killed, 10 wounded and 29 abducted but later released, significantly disrupting
operations in various areas.
55. As at mid-November, the Humanitarian Response Plan of $690 million
remained funded at 56 per cent, amounting to more than $385 million, a situation
that affects the humanitarian response.

K.

Economic situation
56. MONUSCO documented a continuing downward macroeconomic trend owing
to a fall in commodity prices, resulting in a scarcity of financial resources and
increasing demonstrations of discontent. On 25 October, the Government submitted
to the National Assembly the budget proposal for 2017, amounting to some
$5.7 billion, which represents a reduction of 15 per cent compared with the budget
for 2016. Budgetary execution rates were also lower, in connection with the
Government’s dwindling spending power. The continued depreciation of the
Congolese franc caused the prices of some basic commodities to rise, especially in
Kinshasa. Members of the Kinshasa provincial assembly have been refusing to
resume activity since the opening of the parliamentary session on 30 September,
while the Ministry of Foreign Affairs staff union and workers of the State company
that controls the quality of imports and exports went on strike on account of unpaid
salaries. Civil servants in South Kivu also publicly complained of salary arrears of
up to 10 months. On 9 and 10 November, clashes erupted between students at two
technical schools in Kinshasa and the national police during protests against an
increase in tuition fees.

L.

Regional developments
57. The Government pursued regional cooperation to tackle security challenges
and advance political processes. On 10 October, the President renewed the mandate
of the National Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework and appointed General Denis Kalume Numbi as its new coordinator. My
Special Representative and my Special Envoy met General Kalume on 18 and
22 November, respectively, to discuss ways of enhancing collaboration between
MONUSCO and the Mechanism to advance support for the implementation of the
Framework.
58. On 13 October, following an evaluation mission to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Southern African Development Community welcomed the progress
achieved in the context of the national dialogue, expressed satisfaction with the
preparations for the elections and called upon all political actors to respect the
impartiality of the Independent National Electoral Commission.

12/19

16-22936

S/2016/1130

59. Also on 13 October, defence ministers of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region met in Kinshasa to examine the concept of operations of the
Joint Oversight Mechanism in the framework of regional efforts to combat
terrorism.
60. On 20 October, the Minister of Trade of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Minister of Trade and Industry of Rwanda signed a bilateral agreement to
facilitate cross-border trade and launched a bilateral simplified trade regime.
61. The seventh high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism was
held on 26 October in Luanda, attended by Heads of State and Government of the
signatory countries to the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, together
with representatives of the African Union, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, the Southern African Development Co mmunity and the United
Nations. The Mechanism endorsed the political agreement of 18 October as a useful
step to avoid violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and urged all
Congolese stakeholders to seek a peaceful solution to the political crisis , in line with
the Constitution and resolution 2277 (2016).
62. On 10 November, the President met the Minister of Defence and Veterans’
Affairs of South Sudan, Kuol Manyang Juuk, to address the presence o f SPLM/A in
Opposition elements and South Sudanese refugees in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which resulted in the signing of a security cooperation agreement. On
14 November, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Raymond Tshibanda N’tungamulongo,
met his South Sudanese counterpart, Deng Alor Kwol, to explore the possibility of
establishing a committee to address cross-border defence and economic issues.

III. Implementation of key reporting obligations
A.

Strategic dialogue and development of an exit strategy for
the Mission
63. The strategic dialogue between the Government and MONUSCO stalled
following the adoption of resolution 2277 (2016). The Government has disengaged
from discussions on the joint development of an exit strategy for the Mission. On
23 September, in his address to the General Assembly, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs reiterated the Government’s request for a gradual reduction of MONUSCO
troops and a transformation of the Mission.

B.

Assessment of the implementation of the tasks of the
Intervention Brigade
64. After playing a critical role in the military defeat of the Mouvement du
23 mars armed group in November 2013, followed by a year of suspended military
cooperation between MONUSCO and FARDC, the Intervention Brigade has, since
May, focused its efforts on the neutralization of ADF in the Beni area, North Kivu,
in support of FARDC operations. MONUSCO supported those operations between
May and September, forcing ADF to adapt its defensive techniques to respond to
increased military pressure.

16-22936

13/19

S/2016/1130

C.

Review of progress on the transformation of the force
65. As requested by the Security Council in its resolution 2277 (2016),
MONUSCO assessed the progress made in transforming the force to make it more
effective in protecting civilians. Although the Mission took steps in this regard,
implementation has been slow. Nevertheless, the delays and challenges
notwithstanding, force transformation remains an important objective with a view to
better protecting civilians and MONUSCO will continue to work towards its full
implementation.
66. Progress was uneven across the four pillars on which the force transformation
relies. Mixed progress was recorded on the first pillar, “capability development”,
which encompasses the introduction of rapidly deployable battalions, improved
information-gathering capabilities and more mobility. In February, the first such
battalion arrived in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and, although it
received its full equipment only recently, it has already conducted operations,
including in response to inter-ethnic tensions in South Kivu. The deployment of a
second such battalion is scheduled for February 2017, with a third in 2018. Through
the use of enablers such as unmanned aerial vehicles, the Mission has been locating
and monitoring armed groups and their activities, tracking civil demonstrations and
improving its ability to protect civilians. Nevertheless, its consistent efforts
notwithstanding, MONUSCO has to date been unable to deploy a military threat
analysis unit, a potentially key enabler in efforts to neutralize armed groups and
protect civilians.
67. Progress was achieved on the second pillar, “force redeployment”, with
MONUSCO currently merging its military presences in South Kivu and the former
Katanga Province into a new southern sector. Once completed, early in 20 17, this
process will allow the Mission to align troops and assets to meet threats and
minimize inefficiencies. With regard to the third pillar, “FARDC capacity -building”,
which represents the force’s efforts, in accordance with the United Nations human
rights due diligence policy, to reinforce the capabilities of FARDC, there was
limited progress, owing to the suspension of cooperation between MONUSCO and
FARDC during most of 2015. Beyond the planning phase, no progress was made on
the fourth pillar, “military engineering development”, which is aimed at adapting
military engineering so that it contributes more effectively to the strategic and
operational objective of neutralizing armed groups.

D.

Preparations for the elections
68. MONUSCO enhanced its preparedness to mitigate and respond to electionrelated violence, while prioritizing support for political processes and promoting an
environment conducive to peaceful, credible and inclusive elections. My Special
Representative and my Special Envoy continued to use their good offices, including
in coordination with key regional actors and civil society organizations, to promote
inclusive dialogue and reduce the likelihood of violence and political instability.
69. MONUSCO continued to impress upon the national authorities and security
forces the need to manage public order in accordance with the Constitution and
international human rights standards. Consequently, on 3 November, the Kinshasa

14/19

16-22936

S/2016/1130

Provincial Police Commissioner, General Célestin Kanyama, issued instructions
restricting the deployment of crowd control units carrying lethal weapons. The
Mission built the capacity of the national police with regard to methods of managing
public order without resorting to excessive force and with respect for human ri ghts.
70. Following the events of 19 and 20 September in Kinshasa, MONUSCO
conducted robust patrolling in the city, within its existing capabilities. On
30 November, the force redeployed an additional company to Kinshasa, where
MONUSCO has established an integrated tactical operations centre to effectively
coordinate its civilian, military and police action.
71. The Mission pursued efforts to reinforce its capacity to monitor and report on
human rights violations and restrictions on political space. It e stablished mobile
civilian monitoring and reporting teams in Goma, Kinshasa, Kisangani, Lubumbashi
and Mbuji-Mayi, available to deploy on short notice to areas deemed at high risk of
electoral violence and without a MONUSCO presence. The MONUSCO force and
formed police units will support joint human rights monitoring teams to gather
evidence of human rights violations committed in the context of election -related
violence, including forensic, photographic and video evidence.
72. The Mission continued to revise, update and test contingency plans for the
military, police and civilian components to prevent and respond to widespread
election-related violence, ensuring that civilian and uniformed personnel and assets
could be redeployed to key locations in a timely manner. Nevertheless, the Mission
possesses limited uniformed and aviation capacity to respond to emerging risks in
areas in which it currently has no presence. It has limited capacity in Kinshasa and
no presence in other high-risk locations in the west of the country. Should a largescale redeployment of the force and other assets to high -risk locations in the west be
required, the implementation of the core tasks relating to the protection of civilians
and the neutralization of armed groups in the east would be greatly hampered.

IV. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
73. MONUSCO assessed that its support to FARDC-led operations against armed
groups had given rise to no significant increase in threats to United Nations
personnel and installations. In total, 44 significant security -related incidents
involving United Nations personnel, including 13 hazard and safety-related cases,
were reported.
74. On 8 November, an improvised explosive device detonated on MONUSCO
troops from the Indian contingent in Goma, North Kivu. That unprecedented attack
left 1 child dead and 2 civilians and 32 peacekeepers wounded. MONUSCO and the
Congolese authorities launched a joint investigation. The initial findings, based on
evidence gathered at the scene, indicate that the attackers targeted the peacekeepers,
knew their routine and were familiar with the use of explosives.

V. Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
75. MONUSCO continued to vigorously enforce my policy of zero tolerance of
sexual exploitation and abuse, resulting in a downward trend since my previous

16-22936

15/19

S/2016/1130

report. Three incidents were recorded during the reporting period, down from 12
over the previous semester of 2016.
76. The Mission pursued enhanced preventive action, including training and
awareness-raising activities, as well as community outreach and sensitization. The
measures are complemented by risk assessment missions, community -based
complaint networks, regular deterrent patrols by MONUSCO formed police units
and military police and the implementation of curfew regimes, among other things.
Enforcement action focused on the establishment of an immediate response team, a
sexual exploitation and abuse task force and complaint mechanisms. MONUSCO, in
close coordination with other United Nations entities, provided assistance to victims
of sexual exploitation and abuse.

VI. Observations
77. The political landscape of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
experiencing some of the most significant shifts witnessed in recent years, putting
the progress achieved over the past decade at risk. Political sp ace, which had
gradually opened up to a diversity of voices and perspectives, is shrinking rapidly.
Persistent challenges relating to the consolidation of democratic institutions,
promotion and protection of human rights and respect for the rule of law are swiftly
becoming even more acute as a result of the political uncertainties. With the formal
end of the President’s second and final term in office on 19 December, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has entered an uncertain transition period,
planned to end with the holding of the country’s third post-conflict elections. I am
concerned that the coming months are likely to be fraught with serious political
tensions and the reversal of hard-won gains. This could have negative implications
for the country’s security, stability and human rights situations and for regional
stability.
78. Already, the worrying trends seen in recent months indicate that much is at
stake. Increasing allegations of human rights violations, renewed violence in some
areas of North Kivu, heightened tensions between communities in other provinces
and growing popular discontent in urban centres suggest that the country is at risk
of serious instability. I urge all political actors, including the Majorité présidentielle
and the Rassemblement, to continue to pursue a constructive dialogue. I also urge
all parties to refrain from violence and to call upon their supporters to avoid
resorting to violent tactics.
79. In 2016, amid mounting political tensions, violent confrontations between
security forces and opposition protesters and the mounting risk of instability,
national, regional and international initiatives have resulted in some progress
towards a negotiated solution to the political crisis. Yet much more remains to be
done. In addition to reaching a negotiated consensus among all political actors,
additional specific steps must be taken to prepare the ground for the holding of
elections, strengthen the promotion and protection of human rights and enhance the
protection of civilians through improved security in the eastern part of the country
and other areas of concern.

16/19

16-22936

S/2016/1130

80. It behoves the Government and all political actors to ensure an environment
conducive to a free, fair, credible, inclusive, transparent, peaceful and timely
electoral process, in accordance with the Constitution. It is critical that the
continuing update of the voter register be completed as early as possible, and no
later than the current deadline of 31 July 2017. This effort must be part of the wider
political process leading to elections rather than an isolated technical task. As
mandated by the Security Council, MONUSCO is fully mobilized to support the
Independent National Electoral Commission in completing the voter registration
process.
81. I remain concerned by persistent reports of human rights violations. I am
particularly concerned by the significant increase in allegations relating to
restrictions of political space, which are more than threefold higher in 2016 than in
2015. Among these are violations of the freedoms of expression and assembly, all of
which are protected by the Constitution and international human rights treaties that
the country has signed and ratified. I am also deeply troubled by the wave of arrests
of those seeking to express their political views. I once again urge the Government
to actively promote and protect human rights, including by bringing perpetrators of
violations and abuses to justice and by ending politically motivated detentions.
82. The increasing security challenges in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the re-emergence of tensions among communities in Kasai Central and
Tanganyika Provinces point to a worrisome deterioration of the security landscape. I
am deeply concerned by this trend and strongly condemn attacks against civilians,
including that in Luhanga, North Kivu, perpetrated by Mai -Mai Mazembe on
27 November in a context of increasing inter-ethnic tensions. In Beni territory,
North Kivu, ADF continues to pose a serious threat to civilians. I am appalle d that it
continues to attack and kill civilians. In Tanganyika Province, the recent series of
targeted attacks between the Twa and the Luba are also of concern. I welcome the
efforts by the national authorities to tackle the threat posed by armed groups
through political action and military operations.
83. The continued support of MONUSCO for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in facing these and other security threats is critical. Having supported the
national authorities in the military defeat of the Mouvement du 23 mars in
November 2013, MONUSCO, and in particular its Intervention Brigade, has
focused on ADF in North Kivu, in support of FARDC. Joint operations between the
two forces have significantly disrupted the armed group’s activities and forced its
combatants to use new techniques to avoid confrontation. Continued efforts are
required to protect civilians and neutralize armed groups in the east, requiring a
more effective military posture for the Mission. The force transformation and the
Intervention Brigade are key tools in this regard. The effective protection of
civilians also requires the continued commitment of troop -contributing countries. I
also count on the continued support of the Security Council on issues relating to the
performance of MONUSCO uniformed personnel.
84. As the political and security landscape of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo undergoes significant developments, I intend to deploy a strategic
assessment mission to the country in the coming months to assess the United
Nations engagement there.

16-22936

17/19

S/2016/1130

85. I conclude by expressing my sincere gratitude to my Special Representative,
Maman Sambo Sidikou, for his tireless efforts in advancing the peace process. I pay
tribute to all MONUSCO personnel for their dedication in working for a more
peaceful and stable Democratic Republic of the Congo. I extend my appreciation to
the troop- and police-contributing countries and to those men and women who put
their lives at risk in the performance of their duties on a daily basis. I express my
gratitude to the African Union, regional partners, the European Union, bilateral and
multilateral donors, United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and
humanitarian, multilateral and non-governmental organizations for their important
contributions and steadfast commitment. Lastly, I again reiterate my appreciation to
regional partners and the international community in general for maintaining their
firm and principled position in support of efforts to preserve peace and stability in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

18/19

16-22936

S/2016/1130

16-22936

19/19
