20

General Assembly-Thirty-eighth Session

2. Deplores the death of innocent civilians resulting
from the armed intervention;
3. Calls upon all States to show the strictest respect for
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Grenada;
4. Calls for an immediate cessation of the armed inter­
vention and the immediate withdrawal of the foreign
troops from Grenada;
5. Requests that free elections be organized as rapidly
as possible to enable the people of Grenada to choose its
government democratically;
6. Requests the Secretary-General as a matter of
urgency to assess the situation and to report back to the
General Assembly within seventy-two hours. 24
43rd plenarJi meeting
2 November 1983

38/8. Report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency
The General Assembly.
Having received the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency to the General Assembly for the year
1982, 25
Taking note of the statement by the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency of 4 November
1983, 26 which provides additional information on devel­
opments in the Agency's activities during 1983,
Recognizing the importance of the work of and the rele­
vance for the International Atomic Energy Agency to pro­
mote further the application of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes, as envisaged in its Statute, and to improve fur­
ther its technical assistance and promotional programmes
for the benefit of developing countries,
Conscious of the importance of the work of the Interna­
tional Atomic Energy Agency in the implementation of the
safeguards provisions of the Treaty on the Non­
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 27 and other interna­
tional treaties, conventions and agreements designed to
achieve similar objectives, as well as ensuring, as far as it is
able, that the assistance provided by the Agency or at its
request or under its supervision or control is not used in
such a way as to further any military purpose, as stated in
article II of its Statute,
Welcoming the decision of the General Conference of
the International Atomic Energy Agency of 11 October
1983 to grant membership of the Agency to the People's
Republic of China,
Conscious of the useful outcome of the International
Conference on Radioactive Waste Management, held at
Seattle, United States of America, from 16 to 20 May
1983 by the International Atomic Energy Agency,
Recognizing the importance of the work of the Interna­
tional Atomic Energy Agency on nuclear safety, which
increases public confidence in nuclear power,
Bearing in mind resolutions GC(XXVIl)/RES/407,
GC(XXVIl)/RES/408, GC(XXVIl)/RES/409 and GC'
(XXVIl)/RES/415, adopted on 14 October I 983 by the
General Conference of the International Atomic Energy
Agency at its twenty-seventh regular session.
24 See N38/568.
25 International Atomic Energy Agency, The Annual Report for 1982 (Aus­
tria, August 1983); transmitted to the members of the General Assembly by a
note of the Secretary-General (A/38/346 and Corr. I).
26 Official Records of the General Assemblv, Thirty-eighth SeSSion. Plenar\'
Meetings, 45th meeting, paras. 2-48.

I. Takes note of the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency;
2. Urges all States to strive for effective and harmoni­
ous international co-operation in carrying out the work of
the International Atomic Energy Agency and to imple­
ment strictly the mandate of its statute in promoting the
use of nuclear energy and the application of nuclear sci­
ence and technology for peaceful purposes; in strengthen­
ing technical assistance and co-operation for developing
countries; and in ensuring the effectiveness of the Agency's
safeguards system;
3. Expresses its satisfaction at the prospect of mutual
benefit arising from the membership of the People's
Republic of China in the International Atomic Energy
Agency;
4. Ajjirms its confidence in the role of the International
Atomic Energy Agency in the application of nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency the records of the thirty-eighth session of the Gen­
eral Assembly relating to the Agency's activities.
46th plenary meeting
4 November 1983

38/9. Armed Israeli al'gression against the Iraqi
nuclear installations and its grave conse­
quences for the established international sys­
tem concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, the non-proliferation of nuclear weap­
ons and international peace and security
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Armed Israeli
aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its
grave consequences for the established international sys­
tem concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and international
peace and security",
Recalling the relevant resolutions of the Security Coun­
cil and the General Assembly,
Taking note of the relevant resolutions of the Interna­
tional Atomic Energy Agency,
Taking note also with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General, 28
Viewing with deep concern Israel's continued refusal to
comply with those resolutions,
Reiterating its alarm over the information and evidence
regarding the acquisition and development of nuclear
weapons by Israel.
Recalling Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the
United Nations, which enjoins all Member States to
refrain in their international relations from the threat or
use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State, or in any other manner incon­
sistent with the purooses of the United Nations,
Noting that serious radiological effects would result from
an armed attack with conventional weapons on a nuclear
installation, which could also lead to the initiation of
radiological warfare,
I. Reiterates its condemnation of Israel's continued
refusal to implement Security Council resolution 487
27 Resolution 2373 (XXII), annex.
28 A/38/342.
