S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6531st meeting
Tuesday, 10 May 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Briens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Vukašinović
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Zhang Changwei
Mr. Alzate
Mrs. Onanga
Mr. Schroeer
Mr. Choudhary
Mr. Jaber
Mrs. Aguwa
Ms. Vaz Patto
Mr. Tolkach
Mr. Ratlou
Mrs. Stevens
Mr. Banks

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-33111 (E)

*1133111*

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): I wish to
remind all speakers to limit their statements to no more
than four minutes in order to enable the Council to
carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Australia.
Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): Australia
welcomes the opportunity to address the Council on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, a subject
which should be at the centre of our collective efforts
in the field of international peace and security.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this debate and all of the speakers for
their contributions today.
Discussions about the situation in Libya and in
other places quite rightly have occupied the attention
of Governments and peoples from around the world.
Australia is firmly on the record as a supporter of the
strong action taken by the Council on Libya through its
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011). Recent
debates have highlighted the importance of the concept
of the responsibility to protect and the seriousness with
which Governments must take their responsibilities in
relation to their populations.
However, given the broader topic of this debate, I
would like to focus today on a separate subject: the
distinct body of work on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict that has been developed in the United
Nations over recent years.
The protection of civilians during times of armed
conflict is firmly rooted in international law. Our
efforts towards this objective have come a long way,
but there is still much more to be done.
Australia has worked closely with others on
concrete steps and actions to enhance the protection of
civilians by peacekeeping operations. We would like to
highlight four aspects of this work which continue to
require sustained attention from all of us.
First, peacekeepers need to know how to protect
civilians in increasingly complex operational
environments. Guidance and training are key. Australia
is very pleased at the progress made this year by the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, which
recognized the need for guidance for peacekeepers on
the protection of civilians and noted the important

2

work under way to develop training modules for
peacekeepers on this issue. To assist in supporting
these broader training efforts, Australia has been
pleased to partner with the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research to develop a documentary on
the protection of civilians in peace operations.
Secondly, engaging local communities, including
women, in discussions on protection requirements is
key both in the planning stages and while peacekeeping
missions are deployed in the field. Engaging the
community builds trust and lines of communication; it
assists in ensuring consistency with efforts which
communities already have under way, and can help
manage expectations about what peacekeeping
missions are able to do, which can assist in preserving
their credibility. The development of community alert
networks in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
good example of local engagement that allows isolated
communities to contact local authorities and bases of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo when under
threat.
Thirdly, a coherent and comprehensive approach
by peacekeeping missions to protection of civilians is
critical. This includes the clear articulation of roles and
responsibilities within a mission and with other
relevant players. The Strategic Framework for Drafting
Comprehensive Protection of Civilian Strategies,
which was also recognized by the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations this year, is an important
tool in that regard.
Fourthly and finally, peacekeeping missions are
there to support the host Government in building
capacity to protect its civilians. This requires a clear
understanding of the longer-term needs of the host
Government. We would argue that it is important to
work towards defined benchmarks that can, in the
long-term, assist transition planning. Events in Côte
D’Ivoire have demonstrated the need for the use of
force in response to imminent threats to civilians. The
challenge now in Côte d’Ivoire is shifting towards
supporting the Government on longer-term protection
challenges, such as security sector reform.
After a decade of mandating explicitly for the
protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations,
there has been considerable progress, but it is
important that undertakings made in New York flow
through to the field. The establishment of a new United

11-33111

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

Nations mission in southern Sudan provides an
important opportunity to ensure that we draw on the
lessons we have learned and the best practices we have
developed in the field from the very beginning.
Ultimately, the best way to protect civilians is to
prevent armed conflict in the first place. We believe
that the regular horizon-scanning briefings from the
Department of Political Affairs can enhance the
Council’s capacity in this regard. We would also like to
add our voice to those who have expressed support for
the conflict prevention initiatives of regional
organizations, which, given their comparative
advantages, can play a unique role in preventing
conflicts and their harmful effects on civilians.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Acting Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Serrano: The candidate countries Croatia,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Iceland
and Montenegro; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia align themselves
with this declaration.
Let me start by thanking Under-Secretary General
Amos, Under-Secretary General Le Roy and Assistant
Secretary-General Šimonović for their briefings and
important contributions to this very timely debate.
In recent months, the challenges regarding the
protection of civilians have been high on the agenda of
the Security Council. The European Union (EU)
welcomes the increased attention paid by the Security
Council to this important issue.
The European Union commends the work
conducted within the United Nations in recent years to
foster and strengthen a common understanding of
protection of civilians in armed conflicts. The joint
efforts in the United Nations have, in addition to
increasing the understanding of the concept of the
protection of civilians, also resulted in the
establishment of a platform for action. The landmark
resolution 1894 (2009) provides a solid basis, and
recent developments in this regard include the
presidential statement and updated aide-memoire of
November last year (S/PRST/2010/25), the adoption of
resolution 1960 (2010) on sexual violence in conflict,
and the development of a stronger framework for the

11-33111

protection of civilians by peacekeepers. The European
Union strongly welcomes these developments. Indeed,
what is important is to make full and coherent use of
this platform in order to make a difference on the
ground. The informal expert group on protection of
civilians has an important role to play in this regard.
Despite all efforts, civilians continue to be
victims of disproportionate attacks, deliberate targeting
and the indiscriminate use of weapons. Explosive
weapons used in populated areas have a high
humanitarian impact on civilians and civilian
infrastructure. It is estimated that, in contemporary
armed conflicts, 90 per cent of the casualties are
civilians and only 10 per cent are active combatants.
Contemporary armed conflicts leave behind thousands
of victims needing, among other things, appropriate
medical care and psychological assistance, in many
cases for their entire lives.
We need to pay more attention to the situation of
victims. The European Union calls on all parties to
conflicts, including non-State actors, to fully comply
with their international legal obligations to protect
civilians and to prevent human rights violations and
violations
of
international
humanitarian
law.
Compliance with and respect for international
humanitarian law need to be reinforced, as they also
contribute to securing and sustaining humanitarian
space and to guaranteeing safe and unhindered access
for humanitarian operations and humanitarian workers
to populations in need. We are particularly concerned
in this regard by the situation in Darfur, where nothing
has changed. The Government bombing of civilians is
continuing and militia continue to surround internally
displaced persons camps.
Further, it is vital to address the question of
impunity in the context of the protection of civilians.
There must be strong mechanisms of accountability in
case of violations, which also provide an essential
preventive element. Activities in this regard should
seek to support the establishment of an environment in
which all persons, institutions and entities are
accountable to laws that are consistent with
international law, including human rights norms and
standards, and international humanitarian law. There
must be no impunity for perpetrators of the most
serious international crimes: war crimes, crimes against
humanity
and
genocide.
The
EU
supports
accountability mechanisms at the international and
national levels. The EU also supports the

3

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

recommendation of the Secretary-General in his 2010
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2010/579) to establish commissions of inquiry.
With regard to the protection of civilians in the
context of peacekeeping operations, I would like to
welcome the development of designated protection of
civilians strategies by most peacekeeping missions
having a protection of civilians mandate. I would like
to underline the importance of all peacekeeping
missions with a protection of civilians mandate
developing comprehensive protection strategies,
including the necessary benchmarks and indicators,
without delay. The European Union welcomes the
framework for drafting comprehensive protection of
civilians strategies in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, jointly issued by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support, as a useful tool in this regard. The European
Union looks forward to the finalization and
dissemination of the training modules for protection of
civilians to troop- and police-contributing countries.
Peacekeeping operations must be provided with the
necessary resources and capabilities to carry out their
protection tasks effectively, and force commanders
must ensure that these are implemented vigorously. In
addition, we welcome the important progress made in
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
this year on the protection of civilians.
With regard to current developments in Libya, the
European Union has welcomed the adoption of
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011), which offer a
clear legal basis for the international community to
provide protection to the civilian population. We are
determined to act collectively and resolutely with all
international partners — particularly the United
Nations, the League of Arab States, the African Union,
NATO, and other regional stakeholders — to
implement the adopted resolutions on Libya. The
broad-based attendance at the second meeting of the
Contact Group on Libya last Thursday in Rome was.
emblematic of the variety of actors that remain resolute
in their commitment to stopping the violent and
illegitimate repression of the Libyan people.
The European Union condemns the widespread
and systematic violations of human rights, violence
and brutal repression perpetrated by the regime against
the Libyan people. The European Union calls on all
parties to the conflict to respect international
humanitarian law and to allow humanitarian

4

organizations full unhindered and safe access to the
affected population. The European Union welcomes the
referral of the situation to the International Criminal
Court (ICC), and calls on all States to fully cooperate
with the ICC in compliance with resolution 1970
(2011). We express our appreciation for the swift
manner in which the ICC has acted in the situation
referred to the Court.
The European Union is taking its share of
responsibility through its continuous involvement in
the political process and its efforts to provide
humanitarian assistance. The European Union stands
ready, if requested by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, to conduct a military
operation, in the framework of the Common Foreign
and Security Policy, in order to support humanitarian
assistance in the region.
The European Union is also deeply concerned
about attacks by security forces on peaceful
demonstrators elsewhere in the Middle East region,
which constitute flagrant violations of human rights
law. The European Union is adopting targeted
measures to dissuade the Syrian authorities from such
practices.
Allow me to reflect on developments in Côte
d’Ivoire. The European Union welcomed the adoption
and implementation of resolution 1975 (2011), which
authorized the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire to use all necessary means to protect civilians,
including preventing the use of heavy weapons, which
targeted and harmed the civilian population during the
crisis. The effective implementation of resolution 1975
(2011) in Côte d’Ivoire marks an important juncture in
highlighting the role of the United Nations with regard
to the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The EU
also welcomes the establishment by the Human Rights
Council of a commission of inquiry to investigate
violations on the ground and calls on all sides, in
compliance with resolution 1975 (2011), to fully
cooperate with the commission.
In conclusion, the adoption by the Security
Council of recent resolutions on Libya and Côte
d’Ivoire has shown the capacity of the United Nations
to act effectively and decisively to protect civilians.
The EU very much welcomes that fact and encourages
the Security Council to be consistent with decisions
taken and to act decisively in order to make a real

11-33111

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

difference on the ground, as civilians are at grave risk
in armed conflicts.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Miss Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I would also like to begin by thanking
Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. Alain Le Roy, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for
their important briefings this morning.
Thanks to the Security Council’s consideration of
the issue over the past decade, there have been many
recommendations and strategies for the protection of
civilians first and foremost, as well as to overcome
obstacles to that end and to ensure that civilians
receive the humanitarian assistance and protection they
deserve. However, many of those recommendations
have not been implemented as a result of many
impediments. Those include the lack of political will
and, generally speaking, goodwill. In that connection,
we would like to focus on the need for various political
views not to impede the Council’s mission when it
comes to its responsibility for powerless civilian
populations who fall victim to armed conflicts.
Those efforts led to the Security Council’s
establishment of a Working Group tasked with the
protection of civilians and to draw up plans to put an
end to all murder and other forms of violence,
including sexual violence, affecting civilians.
However, the thrust of the recommendations and
presidential statements by the Council have
unfortunately not yielded the desired results. We
therefore call for respect for all legal obligations and
resolutions adopted in this area, as the failure to
implement them would lead to the proliferation of a
culture of impunity and more violence against
civilians.
Over the past two years, the Security Council has
addressed many fundamental issues to enhance the
effectiveness of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. We have also reconsidered efforts undertaken
to further promote the protection of civilians. Many
proposals and ideas have been put forward to meet the
challenges identified in the report of the SecretaryGeneral in 2009 (S/2009/277). However, several
fundamental issues must be clarified, including with

11-33111

regard to the responsibilities of the Security Council
and the international community and speedy
intervention to address the horrors carried out against
civilians in armed conflict in areas of political
instability. It is also important to adopt a
comprehensive approach that allows the Council to
tackle the issue of the protection of civilians in
innovative ways not yet considered by the Council.
Many important events this year have compelled
the Security Council to consider the issue of the
protection of civilians and to take swift and decisive
action — for instance, to assist the brotherly Libyan
people. My country has participated in international
efforts to protect Libyan civilians and to provide the
necessary assistance in accordance with international
legality and resolution 1973 (2011). In that regard,
Qatar has committed itself to implement the resolution
regarding the protection of civilians in populated areas.
We have deployed substantial assistance in the context
of the overall emergency humanitarian assistance
provided to Libya. We have also chartered several
flights to ship hundreds of tons of foodstuffs, as well as
1,450 tons of medical equipment and supplies to that
country. More than 400 wounded persons have been
transported to Qatari hospitals. We have also shipped
approximately 1,000 tons of food supplies and medical
supplies by sea. That is in addition to the in-kind
assistance and equipment valued at $18 million. A field
hospital with full medical facilities has been provided
for Libyans on the Libya-Tunisia border. Qatar has also
transported to various safe areas more than 8,000
refugees from Misrata.
With regard to efforts by Qatar-based
humanitarian organizations, they have provided
assistance in kind as well as medical and nutrition
assistance to people on the Tunisian border, amounting
to $2.5 million. We have also worked to provide the
necessary assistance to refugees moving across the
borders of Tunisia and Egypt.
Qatar was among the first countries to join the
international contact group on Libya. We hosted the
group’s second meeting, at Doha on 13 April, as an
international forum with the top priority of protecting
civilians.
Foreign occupation is one of the main threats to
the protection of civilians. People under occupation
suffer from a variety of challenges that exacerbate their
situation. Given the inhuman embargo and practices

5

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

routinely carried out in the Gaza Strip, we call for
every possible measure necessary to protect the civilian
population of Palestine from the aggression of Israel,
the occupying Power.
In conclusion, the protection of civilians is not
just a humanitarian concern. We must also work to take
comprehensive measures by seeking to implement
existing laws for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, without any sort of discrimination or
selectivity and in accordance with international law,
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful to your delegation, Mr. President, for
convening this debate. I also wish to express my
gratitude for the briefings by Ms. Valerie Amos, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Alain
Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Mr. Ivan Šimonović, Assistant
Secretary-General of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights.
The variety and complexity of current conflicts,
the lack of respect for the norms of international
humanitarian law and the use of increasingly
sophisticated weaponry, which have indiscriminate
effects on civilian populations, are factors that have
increased the challenges for the Security Council. At
the same time, they provide the basis on which to
determine the course that the international community
should follow in addressing this issue of crucial
importance.
On the basis of the five challenges that the
Secretary-General identified in his latest report
(S/2010/579) in order to ensure more effective
protection of civilians in armed conflict, we wish to
underscore some factors that we believe significant.
First, in order to promote the implementation of
international humanitarian law, it is of great
importance that States that have not yet done so adhere
to the international instruments on international
humanitarian law and recognize the customary law
applicable in such situations. It is essential that we
adopt measures to incorporate the content of such
treaties into national legislation and practices.
It is of particular concern that such indiscriminate
weapons as cluster munitions are being used in

6

ongoing armed conflicts, despite being prohibited
under an international treaty, and that weapons and
other explosive devices are regularly used in areas of
high civilian concentration. Such uses contravene the
prohibition under international humanitarian law of the
use of methods and means of combat that cause
needless harm and/or unnecessary suffering, as well as
the principles of distinction and proportionality, which
must be observed at all times.
To that, we would add that the availability of
small arms and light weapons as a result of illicit
trafficking has direct negative repercussions for the
civilian population. We must make progress on the
effective implementation of Security Council sanctions
regimes, in particular arms embargoes and, in a broader
sense, meet international obligations pursuant to the
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
Secondly, we must ensure that obligations falling
to non-State armed groups are met. All parties to a
conflict, whether State bodies, including State
coalitions, armed groups or any other actor, whatever
their nature, are obliged to respect the norms and
principles of international humanitarian law, including
those recognized under customary law. It is therefore
important not only to enact national legislation on the
issue, but also to take broad measures to implement
international law at all levels in order to help prevent
and avoid non-compliance by such actors.
Thirdly, we need to improve the protection of
civilians by peacekeeping missions and other relevant
United Nations missions. We recognize the progress
made within the Organization to provide specific
mandates in that regard, and we recall the importance
of cooperation with other actors involved in such
efforts, such as the International Committee of the Red
Cross and national Red Cross societies. Measures such
as those set out in resolution 1882 (2009) for the
protection of children in armed conflicts, or in the
provisions of resolution 1894 (2009) — which focuses
in an innovative way on ensuring that the mandates of
peacekeeping operations include civilian protection
strategies and action plans that guarantee coordination
between United Nations missions and humanitarian
organizations — represent significant progress.
However, we continue to regret the various attacks

11-33111

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

taking place against civilian populations in different
regions.
Fourthly, it is particularly important to improve
access for humanitarian assistance. The instruments of
international humanitarian law are very clear on the
obligation of States and parties to a conflict to allow
safe, timely and unhindered access for humanitarian
aid. It is regrettable that this obligation is repeatedly
ignored in ongoing armed conflicts.
Lastly, accountability must be improved. States
have the primary responsibility to bring to justice the
alleged perpetrators of violations of international
humanitarian law, including war crimes. We believe
that the international instruments on international
humanitarian law — in particular the four Geneva
Conventions, their Additional Protocols and customary
international law — provide a solid basis of principles
and norms for the protection of all those not
participating in hostilities or who have ceased to take
part in them. It is crucial that they be respected by all
parties to a conflict, regardless of their nature or the
kind of conflict in question.
The International Criminal Court is an
indispensable tool for preventing impunity in that it is
empowered to try alleged perpetrators of such
violations if a State is unable or openly unwilling to do
so. Therefore, we urge the States that have not yet done
so to ratify the Rome Statute and to cooperate fully
with the Court. The Council’s power under the Statute
to refer situations to the Court, as happened with the
situations in Darfur and more recently in Libya, is key
to the efforts under way to prevent future violations of
international humanitarian law. It is crucial that the
Council closely follow up such referrals and urge the
relevant States to fully cooperate with the Court in
order to successfully implement those mandates.
We are following closely and with concern the
situation affecting broad sectors of civilians in North
Africa. In that regard, we recall that all parties to the
hostilities, whether State bodies, armed groups or any
other actor, whatever their nature, are obliged to
respect the norms and principles of international
humanitarian law, including those recognized under
customary international law.
We acknowledge that the resolutions recently
adopted by the Council on Libya and Côte d’Ivoire
were aimed primarily at protecting the civilian
population and helping to ensure humanitarian

11-33111

assistance. The legitimacy of the Security Council’s
actions rests with the fundamental objective of
ensuring the protection of civilians in conflict,
regardless of the region or particular country.
In June 2010, when my delegation held the
presidency of the Security Council, we held a debate
on strengthening the rule of law, in which, through the
adoption of a presidential statement (S/PRST/2010/11),
we acknowledged that respect for international
humanitarian law was an essential element in situations
of conflict, and reaffirmed that the protection of the
civilian population in armed conflicts was essential to
any comprehensive strategy for conflict resolution.
Certainly, the Council must take specific,
effective and resolute actions to address such
situations, as required by those who suffer the trials of
armed conflict and as demanded by States such as
Mexico that are convinced of the leading role that the
Security Council must play in that regard.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Ms. Ojiambo (Kenya): I wish to express my
sincere appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important debate. I thank Ms. Valerie
Amos, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs; Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations; and Mr. Ivan Šimonović,
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights, for
their statements earlier today.
When conflict erupts, its major victims are
civilians, mainly women and children. My delegation
therefore welcomes the Secretary-General’s latest
report (S/2010/579) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, which provides contemporary guiding
principles on the matter.
Eleven years ago, the Council addressed the
protection of civilians in armed conflict as a thematic
issue for the first time. Since then, the adoption of
resolution 1265 (1999) and other related resolutions,
such as 1296 (2000), 1674 (2006), 1738 (2006) and
1894 (2009), as well as the endorsement of the aidememoire (see S/PRST/2010/25, annex) and the
establishment of the Expert Group on the Protection of
Civilians bear testimony to the Council’s continued
commitment to enhancing the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

7

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

However, continual cases, such as those
involving the mass rape of women and children by
rebel groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
are stark reminders that action to stop such violations
needs to be taken now. Therefore, today’s debate
provides us with yet another opportunity to reflect on
the progress made, the challenges we face and the steps
we need to take to address this recurring problem while
renewing our political will and resolve to rally support
for the protection of those helpless civilians who so
often find themselves trapped in conflict situations.
The question of protection deserves deeper
reflection owing to its complex and multifaceted
nature. It involves enhanced compliance with
international humanitarian law by all parties to a
conflict, making more effective use of United Nations
peacekeeping missions, improving humanitarian access
and strengthening accountability for violations. It is
therefore imperative that this critical issue be
addressed while taking into account all of those
underlying considerations.
The task of protecting civilians is currently
enshrined in the mandates of a number of United
Nations peacekeeping missions. The first such mandate
was authorized to provide protection to civilians more
than a decade ago in Sierra Leone, where amputations
were the order of the day. At present, the majority of
United Nations peacekeeping missions operate with
such mandates. However, there are real challenges in
their implementation and the Council needs to provide
peacekeeping missions with clear, realistic guidelines
and achievable mandates. It is prudent that aspects of
the protection of civilians be included in
predeployment training.
Additionally, at the operational level, presence
equals protection. The abuse of civilians in armed
conflict most often takes place in areas that are
inaccessible to peacekeeping contingents. Therefore,
there is a need to ensure that adequate capacity and
resources are made available to peacekeepers so as to
enable them to cover areas where civilians are under
imminent threat of physical violence, while ensuring
that they conduct their tasks without prejudice to the
primary responsibility of the host nation to protect
civilians. That can be achieved only through the
deployment of more armed personnel than is the case
in many missions today.

8

Sexual violence is no longer a simple by-product
of armed conflict. It is being used as a weapon of war,
aimed at dehumanizing and instilling fear in civilians
in situations of armed conflict. Whether carried out by
non-State armed groups or Government security forces
in conflict and post-conflict situations, it is to some
extent designed to achieve political and military
objectives. The adoptions of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) addressing the impact of war on
women, resolution 1820 (2008) calling for the
cessation of all acts of sexual violence against
civilians, and resolution 1888 (2009) establishing the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict are efforts that
are expected to give new impetus to the protection of
civilians in conflict. As the United Nations considers a
new configuration in the Sudan, the issue of protection
of civilians should remain pivotal.
Parties to a conflict have obligations under
international humanitarian law to protect civilians. It is
regrettable that many non-State armed groups do not
understand that such law exists and, hence, have no
regard for it. The Council needs to enhance compliance
by consistently calling on all parties to adhere to their
obligations under international humanitarian law,
especially in exercise of the principles of distinction
and proportionality. Additionally, the Council needs to
apply targeted measures against parties who routinely
violate their legal obligations to respect civilians.
The Council must further ensure that
investigations into alleged violations of civilians in
armed conflict are conducted in a timely manner, with
commensurate consequences for violators. That will
not only promote accountability among the various
actors, but also demonstrate the Council’s intolerance
for impunity as part of a comprehensive approach to
ensuring that perpetrators are brought to justice
through national or international legislation and that
victims are granted redress.
Providing unhindered humanitarian access during
conflicts is a fundamental prerequisite for ensuring
life-saving assistance. It is therefore important for
peacekeeping missions to provide a secure
environment to facilitate humanitarian access to
civilians, including displaced persons. While current
efforts to enhance the capacity of peacekeeping
missions to provide protection to humanitarian service
providers are commendable, significant challenges
remain. The Council should therefore address that

11-33111

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

aspect during the authorization of mandates,
consistently condemn all acts of violence against
humanitarian workers, and call on parties to a conflict
to comply with their obligation to protect such
personnel and their consignments.
I wish to conclude by reaffirming Kenya’s
commitment to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and to guaranteeing their rights in conformity
with international humanitarian law. As the Council
may be aware, Kenya clearly understands the effect of
failures to provide that protection, as we are currently
providing shelter to close to 1 million refugees from
Somalia, which is a war-torn country. Considering the
fact that civilians continue to be subjected to
indiscriminate attacks and other violations by parties to
conflict, and taking into account that they comprise the
vast majority of casualties, we all need to work
consistently towards enhancing their protection.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
congratulate your country, Sir, on having assumed this
month’s presidency of the Security Council and for
your timely initiative to convene today’s open debate
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Unfortunately, that issue has been very much in the
news and requires the attention of the United Nations.
My delegation wishes to express its appreciation
for the briefings given today by the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations and the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Human Rights and Head of the New York
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. Chile associates itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of
Switzerland on behalf of the Human Security Network,
of which Chile is a member.
In recent years, the United Nations has made
significant progress in the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. The Council has adopted a number of
important resolutions, including resolution 1325 (2000)
on the protection of women in armed conflict, the
significance of which marked a milestone in efforts to
address that issue. My country has developed its own
national plan in that regard. The Council also adopted
resolution 1960 (2011) establishing monitoring,

11-33111

analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict-related
sexual violence.
The Secretary-General has expressed particular
concern regarding the protection of civilians and,
within the Department of Political Affairs, has
consolidated a conflict-prevention system that
includes, among other measures, a mediation unit and
provisions for collaboration between the Offices of the
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide and of
the Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect.
Those initiatives have better positioned the
Organization, the Council and the Secretary-General to
identify potential conflicts and, if necessary, take
appropriate measures to potentially prevent them.
However, States themselves hold the primary
responsibility for protecting their populations. They
must create early warning and conflict detection
mechanisms and adopt corresponding preventive
measures. As that has not always been possible,
however, the Council has had to take the measures
necessary to adequately protect civilians in conflict
situations. The adoption of resolutions 1970 (2011) and
1973 (2011) on Libya responds to that need. The
measures contemplated in those resolutions are
adequate for the protection of civilians, and their
implementation must also be so. When States cannot
protect their civilians, the international community,
through the United Nations, cannot remain indifferent
to the fate of those whose rights are being seriously,
systematically and repeatedly violated.
Chile categorically recognizes the important work
carried out by peacekeeping forces in the protection of
civilians. My country appreciates the measures adopted
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to
endow these forces with instruments, resources and
codes of conduct suitable for effective action in this
area. Today, almost all peacekeeping operations carry
out tasks involving the protection of civilians, and
eight of them have a specific mandate to provide
physical protection.
At the same time, peacekeeping operations today
are multidimensional, with important components
having to do with the protection of civilians such as
human rights monitoring, humanitarian assistance,
capacity-building, restoration of infrastructure and
services, and security sector reform, among others.
Chile believes that a comprehensive approach is the
most effective way to address and respond to threats to

9

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

the safety of civilian populations in situations of armed
conflict. We welcome not only the normative measures
adopted but also those practices on the ground aimed at
preventing and mitigating the effects of violence on
civilians in armed conflict.
It is important to enhance interaction between the
host Government, the Security Council, troopcontributing countries and the Secretariat in order to
reduce the gap between the decision-making process
and the concrete implementation of those decisions on
the ground. It is therefore also of great importance to
overcome the major obstacles affecting peacekeeping
operations, such as access to resources, teams and
capacity-building, prior to deployment.
Respect for and implementation of international
law and international humanitarian law are inextricably
linked to combating impunity. Putting an end to
impunity must be seen as part of a comprehensive
approach in the search for a sustainable peace, justice,
truth and national reconciliation. Concerted efforts are
required to cooperate with national judicial
mechanisms in order to develop their capacities and
ensure that perpetrators are brought to justice and tried
in accordance with international standards.
Restoring the rule of law, security sector reform
and the mechanisms for transitional justice are key
areas in which national systems must be strengthened
and receive support through effective international
cooperation. The International Criminal Court, as well
as other tribunals and mixed courts, play an important
complementary role. Chile supports all those measures
aimed at combating impunity, whether at the national
or international levels.
Civilians affected by violence in armed conflict
have a right to reparations and compensation. In this
regard, we must not neglect the value of symbolic
reparations as a way of healing the wounds of societies
in post-conflict countries.
The situation of the civilian population in
countries in crisis is of concern to us. Their physical
and emotional well-being must be respected and the
relevant channels for dialogue must be kept open,
allowing for a political solution to be found, while
ensuring respect for fundamental freedoms and human
rights.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.

10

Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would like to start by thanking France for having
organized this debate on a topic that affords us an
opportunity to take stock of the progress achieved and
the best practices, so that we may together identify
areas in which additional efforts are necessary to
guarantee better protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I would also like to pay tribute to the valuable
contributions to this debate by Ms. Amos, Mr. Le Roy
and Mr. Šimonović.
The Security Council has been considering for
over a decade the question of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. This ongoing commitment by the
Council has led to progress in terms of norms, which
should be welcomed, and to progress on the ground,
which needs to be consolidated. The SecretaryGeneral’s report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, of November 2010 (S/2010/579), underscores
the importance of adopting a comprehensive approach
combining the legal, humanitarian and security aspects
of dealing with the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.
This is a complex, multidimensional task. To
better protect civilians and relieve their suffering, we
must collectively strengthen respect for international
law, especially international humanitarian law, and
provide those peacekeeping operations that have a
mandate for the protection of civilians with the
necessary resources to better implement that mandate.
In this context, the Security Council is called to
develop clear and realistic mandates for peacekeeping
operations. This is particularly necessary when the
protection of civilians is mandated. These mandates
must, furthermore, take into account the financial and
logistical resources provided to peacekeeping
operations as well as the operational command
structure of the operations, in consultation with
Member States.
Seven peacekeeping operations have a mandate to
protect civilians. This is a significant development that
needs to be underscored and welcomed while
mainstreaming the use of optimal practices for the
protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations with
such mandates.
Training for peacekeeping operations leadership
is also an important aspect that we need to focus on.
We welcome the ongoing development by the
Department
of
Peacekeeping
Operations
of

11-33111

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

predeployment and in-mission training modules for
blue helmets in close cooperation with troopcontributing countries. However, and along with these
achievements, we should not forget that the protection
of civilians is but one aspect of the complex mandates
of certain peacekeeping operations. The main task of
these operations is to facilitate a peace process and
ensure transition to a lasting peace.
One of the fundamental items for the success of
mandates for the protection of civilians is programmes
for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of combatants. My delegation believes that additional
efforts should be undertaken to finance the crucial
reintegration phase and to enhance States’ capacities in
post-conflict situations. When it is mandated, the
protection of civilians often gives rise to excessive
expectations in terms of public opinion and among the
population of the host country. However, simply
looking at the numbers of peacekeeping troops and
comparing them to the population to be protected
amply demonstrates that the blue helmets cannot
guarantee protection for all.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict
requires strict respect for international humanitarian
law, as I said, by the parties to the conflict. We must
note that in many situations, the militarization of
refugee camps — which often makes it hard to
distinguish between combatants and non-combatants —
thus prevents humanitarian actors from discharging
their mission and providing assistance and care to
vulnerable populations in these camps.
The control of civilian populations by non-State
actors operating either in connivance with the host
country’s authorities or without their knowledge is a
challenge that the international community must meet.
This control over entire civilian populations sometimes
even leads to a rejection of a basic requirement,
namely the counting and registering of the population,
without which it is pointless to speak of protection,
much less of the right of return. Moreover, it is
precisely that lack of protection and of distinction
between civilians and combatants in refugee camps
that leave the door open for opportunistic terrorists to
abuse some refugees, use them in hostage-taking
actions and even destabilize entire regions.
I cannot conclude my remarks without properly
honouring the work of United Nations blue helmets
and humanitarian workers, who are prepared every day

11-33111

to make the ultimate sacrifice to protect civilians in
conflict zones. The increasing dangers they brave in
carrying out their noble work command our admiration
and more than justify all the praise they regularly earn
from the United Nations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Langeland (Norway): Over the past years,
we have seen encouraging progress in efforts to
enhance protection measures in armed conflict. Despite
progress, the situation for civilians remains grim. That
has been amply proven true as we have witnessed the
unprecedented series of crises in the Middle East,
North Africa and sub-Saharan Africa in the past
months. Norway would like to emphasize six points
that are critical to the debate on the protection of
civilians.
First, the key to the protection of civilians is that
all States and parties bear the primarily duty to protect
civilians. The protection of civilians is a broad agenda
firmly anchored in the responsibility of States to
protect their own citizens and the complementary
responsibilities by the international community to
assist countries to fulfil their obligations.
Secondly, the Security Council has a
responsibility to authorize international protection
when States fail and betray their obligations to the
extreme of widespread and indiscriminate killing of
their own people. We welcome the Council’s
decisiveness in taking necessary measures under
Chapter VII to protect civilians in both Libya and Côte
d’Ivoire. Norway has clearly supported resolutions
1970 (2011), 1973 (2011) and 1975 (2011) and
contributes to the implementation of two of those
resolutions. But we want to emphasize that those are
measures of last resort and were authorized after a
series of other preventive measures, that is,
condemning acts of violence, imposing targeted
sanctions and promoting accountability through
international commissions of inquiry and referral to the
International Criminal Court.
Recent actions taken by the Security Council, in
particular resolutions 1973 (2011) and 1975 (2011),
have raised concerns regarding intentions, impartiality
and possible ramifications for the broader agenda of
the protection of civilians. For us, it is essential that
such mandates are implemented strictly to protect
civilians and do not go beyond that.

11

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

The international community should work
towards common positions without double standards
and be able to take appropriate actions when it is
necessary. We urge the Security Council to continue
responding robustly, swiftly and consistently when
international law and human rights are gravely
violated. The grave situation in Syria should not be an
exception to this rule.
Thirdly, it is important to emphasize that the
common positions on the protection of civilians
agenda, which have been developed by the
international community over the past decade, need to
be upheld and further enhanced. The updated aidememoire (S/PRST/2010/25, annex), the adoption of
resolution 1960 (2010), which establishes a monitoring
and reporting mechanism on conflict-related sexual
violence, and the new strategic framework for the
protection of civilians in peacekeeping missions are
important steps forward.
Fourthly, it is essential to ensure that
humanitarian principles are not compromised and that
humanitarian assistance is not used for military and
political purposes. Constraints on humanitarian access
must be systematically monitored and properly
addressed. Today’s armed conflicts usually take place
in densely populated areas, with extensive civilian
losses and damage to civilian buildings and
infrastructure as a result. In our view, international
humanitarian law also includes the Anti-Personnel
Mine Ban Convention and the Convention on Cluster
Munitions. Norway supports the Secretary-General’s
call for more work by the international community to
better understand the impact of explosive weapons in
populated areas and to develop mechanisms for
improving civilian protection in that regard.
Fifthly, it is vital that the parties to a conflict bear
the primary responsibility to investigate and prosecute
alleged violations of humanitarian law conducted by
forces under their command. The culture of impunity
must end. All parties must be held accountable under
law. That is why we believe it is important to consider
the key recommendations of the Secretary-General’s
Panel of Experts on Accountability with regard to the
situation in Sri Lanka during the war in 2009. We
welcome their report, which reiterates the need for
accountability in Sri Lanka. Credible allegations of
human rights and humanitarian law violations by both
parties to the conflict should immediately be properly
investigated.

12

Sixthly, we witness today the essential role
played by the free media in areas affected by armed
conflicts. Thanks to media reporting, the killings, rapes
and looting in Walikale territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo were brought to the world’s
attention. Journalists can be instrumental in preventing
mass atrocities. Resolution 1738 (2006) calls on all
Governments to protect journalists in armed conflicts
and to end violence and attacks against journalists.
That resolution must be fully implemented, and a
stronger focus on the monitoring of such violations is
necessary.
Let me conclude by reaffirming that Norway is
fully committed to the agenda of the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts. It is important that
common norms continue to be developed and
implemented.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Müftüoğlu (Turkey): We join our colleagues
in thanking Under-Secretaries-General Amos and
Le Roy, as well as Assistant Secretary-General
Šimonović.
The Council is holding this meeting today against
the backdrop of the historic events that are sweeping
the Middle East and North Africa. The dynamics of
change that have been set in motion by the democratic
aspirations of the masses and the transformation we are
witnessing as a result are irreversible. Cognizant of the
fact that fundamental change never comes about easily,
Turkey nevertheless is seriously concerned about the
loss of civilian life and the ongoing suffering of
civilian populations on a daily basis throughout the
unfolding of these dramatic events.
Allow me to emphasize that Turkey condemns
any and all deliberate attacks on civilians and the
deaths resulting from the indiscriminate and excessive
use of force. We are aware that, as always, the primary
obligation for protecting civilians lies with States.
However, the international community also has a
responsibility to help protect civilians in situations
where States openly fail to do so. That is essentially
what happened in Libya. The international community
cannot, and could not, simply look away when civilians
are, and were being, targeted.
Turkey has played an active role from the very
beginning of the crisis, both to alleviate the suffering

11-33111

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

of the Libyan people and to bring about a rapid
political resolution to the conflict. While we are taking
part in NATO operations based on resolutions 1970
(2011) and 1973 (2011), our humanitarian assistance to
Libyans also continues, both bilaterally and in
cooperation with partners. One of the three pillars of
the road map that we have proposed is the formation of
secure humanitarian zones that would provide
unimpeded humanitarian aid flow to all Libyans
without discrimination. Establishing a genuine
ceasefire and setting in motion an inclusive political
process are also key to the stabilization of Libya.
The developments over the past few months, in
particular vis-à-vis Libya and Côte d’Ivoire, have
triggered a new debate on the notion of the protection
of civilians and how it can be taken forward. It is clear
that, both conceptually and pragmatically, new ground
has been broken and there are important questions that
need to be answered. Bearing in mind that perceptions
are as important as realities, Turkey believes that this is
a necessary and welcome debate, which we must have
in the United Nations, especially as the protection of
civilians will continue to be an integral part of the
work we do here in many different settings. It might be
useful for the Council’s informal experts group on the
protection of civilians to take this matter up with a
view to providing a thorough analysis and in-depth
reflection of the state of play.
While Libya has justifiably been given a lot of
attention over the past several months, when the
protection of civilians is being discussed we should not
fail to recall the plight of the Palestinian people.
Whether in Gaza or the West Bank, Palestinians
continue to suffer under blockades and occupation,
while their fundamental rights are denied. This sad
state of affairs is not sustainable, and must be
addressed within the context of a two-State solution as
a matter of the utmost urgency. Let me also take this
opportunity to underscore our determination to follow
up the process of inquiry, until justice is done, into the
Israeli attack on the humanitarian aid convoy to Gaza,
which took place almost a year ago in international
waters and resulted in nine civilian deaths and many
wounded.
With regard to the application of the concept of
protection of civilians, let me reiterate our position that
counter-terrorism efforts do not constitute armed
conflict and cannot be considered as such. We should
make a clear distinction between the counter-terrorism

11-33111

efforts of law enforcement agencies and armed
conflict. Turkey strongly condemns all acts of
terrorism and the use of civilians as human shields, and
acknowledges the legitimate right of Governments to
combat terrorism.
Before concluding, I wish to underline that the
rule of law, human rights, democracy and good
governance should be strengthened in order to ensure
the long-term and lasting protection of civilians. We
should ensure that the perpetrators of violence against
civilians are held accountable for their actions. They
should know that they will face justice eventually.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): Thank you, Mr. President,
for allowing Ukraine to contribute to this important
and timely debate. Let me also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-General Alain
Le Roy and Assistant Secretary-General Ivan
Šimonović for their insightful briefings.
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union.
Ukraine is alarmed by the fact that civilians
continue to account for the majority of casualties in
conflicts, as well as a high number of displaced
persons. We are deeply concerned by the frequency and
gravity of attacks against civilians, especially women
and children, and by issues of safety for humanitarian
personnel and of timely humanitarian access to those in
need, particularly vulnerable groups. My country
attaches great importance to such issues, especially in
its capacity as an active participant in peacekeeping
operations and as a member of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Executive Board of UN-Women.
We welcome the increased understanding of the
primacy of the protection of civilians in situations of
armed conflict and the ever-growing attention to this
issue within the United Nations. Ukraine commends
the work of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, as well
as that of Member States, particularly concerning the
implementation of resolutions relating to women and
peace and security. My delegation fully supports a
comprehensive approach to addressing the issue of the
protection of civilians. This will entail, in particular,
taking further action to address core challenges,
namely, to strengthen compliance with international

13

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

humanitarian law and international human rights law,
including by non-State armed groups; to improve the
mechanisms for the protection of civilians through
United Nations peace operations; and to improve
humanitarian access and strengthen accountability for
violations.
In this context, we support the systematic use of
practical tools such as the updated version of the 2002
aide-memoire (S/PRST/2010/25, annex). We believe
that it is still possible to improve coherence and
mainstreaming in this area, including through
promoting stronger interaction between all relevant
actors and through monitoring and oversight,
particularly by developing indicators for civilian
protection.
Accountability for violations of international
law — including the deliberate targeting of civilians,
their use as human shields, indiscriminate or
disproportionate attacks and delays or denials of
humanitarian access — is also an issue that must be
tackled. The questions of how to translate thematic
principles into actual protection of civilians on the
ground, and how to improve prevention, including with
early warning and assessment, in the context of the
responsibility to protect, should, we believe, be a focus
of all our efforts.
Ukraine’s commitment to the efforts of the
United Nations in the area of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict stems from the principles I have
mentioned. Among recent concrete manifestations of
that unwavering commitment we can single out the
humanitarian mission carried out by Ukraine in April
using its landing ship Konstantin Olshansky to
evacuate civilians from Libya. As a result of this
initiative by the President of Ukraine, a total of 193
citizens of 20 nationalities, including 78 women and 35
children, were put on board the large landing ship
Konstantin Olshansky and transported out of harm’s
way. I should stress that this mission was undertaken in
full compliance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions — namely, resolutions 1970 (2011) and
1973 (2011) — and with due notification of the
Secretary-General from the outset.
It is the same unshakable commitment and sense
of responsibility for the protection of civilians under
threat of imminent violence that lies behind Ukraine’s
decision to be an active participant in the provision of
temporary reinforcements to the United Nations

14

Operation in Côte d’Ivoire. We are proud of the
contribution that the Ukrainian aviation unit made to
the United Nations efforts to save civilians in Abidjan,
thanks to which thousands of innocent lives, mainly of
women and children, were spared the imminent danger
posed by deadly heavy weaponry. As in the first case I
mentioned, Ukraine acted strictly in accordance with
international law, and in particular with the
unanimously adopted resolution 1975 (2011).
Finally, let me assure you, Mr. President, that my
country will spare no efforts to continue to contribute
to our common goal of protecting civilians around the
world.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Let me begin by
congratulating you and your delegation, Sir, on your
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. I assure you of the full support of my delegation.
I also thank you and your delegation for initiating this
meeting and bringing the Council together to discuss
an issue that is critically important to the Republic of
Croatia, and surely to all nations.
Allow me to thank Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs Valerie Amos, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations Alain Le Roy and
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights Ivan
Šimonović for their enlightening briefings. Their
presence here today shows the clear commitment of the
United Nations to placing this issue at the highest
possible level.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the European Union. I would
now like to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.
In our opinion, the question of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict deserves more consistent
attention from the Council. Statistics over the past 20
to 30 years clearly show that civilian casualties in
conflict areas have consistently outnumbered military
casualties and continue to do so. In the twenty-first
century we are still witnessing gross violations of
international humanitarian law in which civilians are
increasingly and deliberately becoming a primary
target of armed groups. It is evident that the nature of
contemporary conflict has changed. Nowadays, in the
conduct of armed conflict, civilians more often than

11-33111

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

not become the targets of armed attacks and atrocities
that include murder, deportation and ethnic cleansing,
as well as rape and sexual violence, which have thus
become weapons of war.
This goes directly against the commitments made
in the 2005 World Summit Outcome document
(General Assembly resolution 60/1), as well as the
relevant Security Council resolutions that reaffirm the
provisions of paragraphs 138 and 139 in that
document. The international community should
encourage and help States to exercise their
responsibility to protect their populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. Such acts of violence must be
thoroughly investigated and the perpetrators brought to
account. It is therefore imperative that the International
Criminal Court, as well as national courts, be the
crucial focus of justice for victims, and thus a reminder
that there can be no tolerance for any criminal act.
This has proved a valuable tool in combating
impunity, a corrosive force that can undermine
opportunities for reconciliation and building lasting
peace. Over the years, the Security Council has acted
in numerous other ways to enhance the agenda of the
protection of civilians. The Council has promoted the
use of mediation in order to help prevent the outbreak
of armed conflicts in crisis situations. It has used its
influence on parties to armed conflicts to observe
standards of protection, including by imposing targeted
measures against parties in cases of violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law. We
should not be seen to be deficient in fulfilling our
commitments.
Despite several positive developments in the
Council, Croatia remains extremely concerned about
the severity and prevalence of attacks on civilians,
especially women and children. The Council has a
responsibility to respond to situations of armed conflict
where humanitarian assistance is being deliberately
obstructed, not merely by calling on the parties
involved to allow unimpeded passage to relief, but also
by imposing targeted measures in grave instances of
the wilful impediment of the delivery of such supplies.
The Council needs to provide strong and effective
leadership on this issue, including by taking concrete
action when necessary, with the ultimate aim of ending
mass atrocities. We thus support the international
community’s increased preparedness to take collective
action through the Security Council when national

11-33111

authorities manifestly fail to protect their populations
from violations of humanitarian law.
In addition, we express our deep concern over the
further worsening of the situation in Libya and plead
for the cessation of violence that is claiming more
victims by the day. We harshly condemn the use of
force by the Al-Qadhafi regime against civilians and
demand that such violence cease immediately. As a
country taking active part in the international efforts to
prevent further civilian casualties in Libya, Croatia
fully supports the implementation of resolution 1973
(2011) on establishing a no-fly zone and stiffening the
existing sanctions against the Al-Qadhafi regime
imposed under resolution 1970 (2011). Once more, we
recognize the importance of fully respecting the legal
framework and mandate set out by the relevant
resolutions in order to take, individually or through
regional organizations and arrangements — especially
by members of the League of Arab States and the
African Union — all necessary measures to protect
civilians in Libya.
Additionally, we share the deep concern over the
humanitarian situation, the number of casualties and
the escalation of violence in Syria, Yemen and Bahrain,
as well as in the now-appeased Côte d’Ivoire. We
invite the governing structures in these countries to
refrain from using violence against political opponents
and civilians who are committed to change. Continuing
repression leads to unnecessary killings, strengthens
antagonisms and contributes to the radicalization of
certain social and political groups. Political, economic
and social reforms are necessary for restoring lasting
and non-oppressive stability in those countries, and
they can be implemented only through a
comprehensive national dialogue.
Croatia also co-sponsored a resolution adopted
during the special session of the Human Rights Council
on 29 April, whereby it condemned the use of lethal
violence against peaceful protestors by the Syrian
authorities and urged the Syrian Government to put an
end to all human rights violations and respect all
fundamental freedoms, including the freedoms of
expression and of assembly.
Lastly, I would like to welcome the establishment
of the New York Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, which we see as a step forward in
strengthening a heightened profile for human rights in
the United Nations system. We commend the Office for

15

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

its consistent and structured work and its integrated
approach to human rights, which is necessary to
enhance the protection civilians in armed conflict. We
look forward to our continued cooperation.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rivard (Canada) (spoke in French): I would
like at the outset to thank France for having convened
this open debate. I also wish to express my
appreciation to Ms. Amos, Mr. Le Roy and
Mr. Šimonović for their remarks to the Council today.
The protection of civilians is a cross-cutting issue
involving various dedicated actors. Close collaboration
among these actors is key to ensuring that our approach
is effective, comprehensive and coherent.
Since the last open debate on this item (see
S/PV.6427), the evolving situations in Libya, Côte
d’Ivoire and, most recently, Syria have once again
drawn the attention of the international community to
the protection needs of populations affected by
violence and armed conflict. Canada welcomes the
strong protection of civilians mandates for Libya and
Côte d’Ivoire adopted by the Security Council in
resolutions 1970 (2011), 1973 (2011) and 1975 (2011).
Deliberate and targeted attacks on civilian populations
must not be tolerated. In Libya, Canadian forces have
proudly joined other NATO allies and regional partners
in implementing these resolutions.
I would like to focus on three specific areas
where the Council’s attention and action are required.
First, Canada believes that continued efforts are
required to ensure a coherent United Nations approach
to addressing protection issues. It is essential that
United Nations agencies work in close collaboration
with each other and build on each other’s expertise.
The Security Council can play a leadership role
ensuring a comprehensive approach to addressing
protection issues. To that end, Canada strongly
encourages Council members to use all the tools at
their
disposal,
such
as
the
aide-memoire
(S/PRST/2010/25, annex) and the informal group of
experts on the protection of civilians, to ensure greater
consistency in the manner the Council addresses
protection issues.
Secondly, it is critical that international
protection norms and comprehensive protection
strategies be more effectively implemented. That is

16

why Canada welcomes the framework for drafting
comprehensive strategies for the protection of civilians
in United Nations peacekeeping operations, which will
assist senior mission leadership to develop
comprehensive mission strategies. Building on this
initiative and past lessons learned, we also urge the
development of effective operational guidance on the
tasks and responsibilities of peacekeeping missions in
the implementation of protection of civilians mandates,
as recognized in resolution 1894 (2009).
Success can be truly achieved, however, only
when protection strategies are fully integrated into the
day-to-day work of United Nations country teams and
peacekeeping missions. Protection mandates need
therefore to be taken into account from the earliest
planning stages of a United Nations mission. It is
important that protection objectives be adequately
resourced and that training for military and civilian
mission staff be more consistent and readily available.
New missions to be deployed in the near future, such
as that in South Sudan, will offer opportunities to put
these concepts into practice.
(spoke in English)
Humanitarian access is also an important
component of a protection strategy. Humanitarian
actors require full, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access to populations in need of assistance. The access
challenges facing humanitarian workers in Libya
highlight the challenges that remain. Canada calls on
the Council to continue efforts to systematically
monitor and analyse constraints on humanitarian
access.
It is also important that protection strategies be
clear, concrete and measurable. That can be ensured by
drawing on clear indicators and benchmarks, which can
help demonstrate where progress is being made and
where additional efforts are required. Monitoring and
reporting mechanisms contribute to ensuring that
violations of international human rights and
international humanitarian law are documented and
reported to the Council for consideration and action. In
this regard, Canada welcomed the Security Council’s
adoption of resolution 1960 (2010) in December 2010,
which calls for the establishment of monitoring,
analysis and reporting arrangements to address
conflict-related sexual violence.
Finally, accountability for those who violate
international law by targeting civilian populations is

11-33111

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

fundamental. Canada has been a consistent supporter of
the international courts and tribunals that strive to hold
individuals to account and contribute to the prevention
of such crimes. The recent decision of the Security
Council to refer the situation in Libya to the
International Criminal Court sent a clear message that
there will be consequences for committing serious
international crimes, including for those who have
ordered and incited illegal attacks on civilian
populations.
Strengthening accountability mechanisms in
national jurisdictions is also key, as it is States that
bear the primary responsibility for investigating and
prosecuting violations. Recent convictions of highranking army officers for mass rape in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are providing a useful example,
and Canada commends these efforts.
In closing, Canada welcomes the Council’s
continued attention to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. It is essential that the implementation
of protection strategies be strengthened through
concrete, effective and measurable actions. The
Council can count on Canada’s full support so that
together we develop a better understanding of the
challenges that remain, identify effective means to
address the gaps and ensure that civilians everywhere
are better protected from the harms of armed conflict.

will continue to work with interested Member States
and the Secretariat to enhance the United Nations
protection capacities.
I would also like to say that we welcomed the
initiative under the presidency of Brazil to address all
three protection clusters on the Council’s agenda in one
set of consultations. Recent years have seen substantial
improvements in the United Nations ability to prevent
and react to serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. Comprehensive
consultations, such as those held in February, can
enhance the coordination between the existing
protection frameworks and mechanisms.
The events in Libya and in Côte d’Ivoire over
recent months have shown how challenging the issue
of the protection of civilians remains. The Security
Council has a core responsibility in ensuring the
compliance of all parties to a conflict with
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law. With the adoption of resolutions 1970 (2011) and
1973 (2011) on Libya, as well as resolution 1975
(2011) on Côte d’Ivoire, the Security Council has sent
a strong signal that serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law cannot and will not
be tolerated by the Council.

I should also like to thank Under-SecretariesGeneral Amos and Le Roy and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Šimonović for their interesting presentations.
Let me add that we have always felt it particularly
important that the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights be associated with this debate. Austria
aligns itself with the statements made on behalf of the
European Union and the Human Security Network.

As stated in resolution 1894 (2009), the Security
Council also has an important role to play in ending
impunity, as the representative of Canada has jus said.
We call on the Council to consistently use the tools at
its disposal, which include referring situations to the
International Criminal Court, as was recently done
with the situation in Libya; mandating commissions of
inquiry, as proposed in the Secretary-General’s latest
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2010/579); or imposing targeted sanctions. We
welcome the Secretary-General’s announcement that he
will undertake a review of the United Nations
experiences in establishing commissions of inquiry in
order to identify how such mechanisms might be used
more consistently.

Members of the Council and others present will
not be surprised that this is the first debate for which
my country has decided to return to this table since our
term as member of the Council came to an end. This is
an issue to which we have been particularly attached,
including during our presidency in November 2009,
which saw the adoption of resolution 1894 (2009).
Austria remains strongly committed to this issue and

We also share the concern of the SecretaryGeneral over the threat posed to civilians by explosive
weapons, as outlined in his 2010 report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Deployed in
populated areas, these weapons cause unacceptable
suffering for women, children and men, even years
after their initial use. Austria urges all States to accede
to and strengthen relevant international instruments,

Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
very important debate.
(spoke in English)

11-33111

17

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

such as the Mine Ban Treaty, the Convention on
Cluster Munitions, and Additional Protocols II and V to
the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons.
United Nations peacekeeping operations are
among the Organization’s most effective tools to
protect civilians affected by armed conflict. We
therefore welcome the efforts made by the Secretariat
pursuant to resolution 1894 (2009) to improve the
implementation
of
protection
mandates
by
peacekeeping operations. The finalized strategic
framework for drafting comprehensive protection
strategies provides a solid basis for a coordinated and
coherent approach. In addition, the resource and
capability matrix can serve as a useful tool in the
planning of missions and help to ensure that protection
mandates are matched with adequate resources.
Appropriate predeployment and in-mission training is
key in order to increase the awareness and
responsiveness of peacekeepers to protection needs.
The events in Walikale in August 2010 and other
incidents of widespread sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict show that peacekeepers need to have the
capacity to interact closely and communicate
effectively with local communities and the host
Government in order to carry out their mandate and
prevent an escalation of violence. We would like to
reiterate the importance of taking gender sensitivities
into account and making full use of all components
available to mission, including civil affairs officers and
community liaison interpreters.
A consistent approach by the Council to the
protection of civilians includes an accurate assessment
of the achievements and remaining challenges in the
field. We therefore strongly support the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that peacekeeping and other
relevant missions develop specific benchmarks against
which to measure and review progress. In this regard,
lessons learned from the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad could serve as a
very useful basis.
We also welcome the development by the
Secretariat of guidance for United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions on protection
of civilians reporting. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s intention to develop indicators in relation to
the monitoring and reporting of achievements in
protecting civilians in armed conflict. This will be an

18

important tool for measuring progress and, as a
consequence, adjusting the Council’s actions.
Finally, we would like to underline the
importance of the Secretary-General’s recommendation
that pressing protection issues be consistently and
comprehensively dealt with by the Council, even in
cases where they are not formally on its agenda. I think
that the experience we have had with such innovative
formats as informal interactive debates can also help
the Council to deal with these challenges. Discussions
and briefings in the informal expert group on the
protection of civilians should be used in a continuous
manner to ensure that the Council’s deliberations are
informed and comprehensive.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians of
3 May 2011 identifies some contentious issues that
have emerged during discussions at the United Nations.
Is military force the best way to protect civilians? Does
the Security Council truly resort to the use of force
only as a last resort to protect civilians? Has the
Security Council acted selectively when choosing
which civilians deserve protection and which do not?
These issues must be discussed in the United
Nations, where some are using the noble purpose of
protecting civilians as a pretext to occupy sovereign
countries and promote national interests. Humanitarian
reasons are invoked while war crimes are committed.
Civilians are being killed, including women and
children, allegedly in the defence of civilians.
The boundless avarice and neo-colonialist
ambition of some countries are the greatest threats to
civilians, human life and nature in the world.
Venezuela stresses the need to address the broader root
causes of conflict, including inequality, poverty,
unemployment and domination by a foreign power,
which would make it possible to contribute to the
prevention and peaceful resolution of conflicts and the
genuine protection of civilians.
Venezuela has consistently condemned attacks
against civilians, regardless of the perpetrator. Attacks
on civilians and civilian targets are banned under
international law; however, indiscriminate attacks

11-33111

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

using missiles and bombs are being launched on
Libyan territory, killing civilians and even troops of the
opposition forces, in places that have no connection
with the no-fly zone or the protection of civilians.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela condemns
the killing of the son of leader Muammar Al-Qadhafi,
Saif Al-Arab Muammar Al-Qadhafi, and three of his
grandchildren, the victims of one of the bombings that
day after day massacre civilians in that sister African
nation. The Bolivarian Government demands that the
United Nations condemn such illegal acts.
The Fourth Geneva Convention and the Rome
Statute define as war crimes the indiscriminate and
disproportionate use of force; attacks against civilians,
regardless of their perpetrator; and the imposition of
collective punishment.
It is deplorable that some of the countries
members of the Security Council should provide
weapons and military advice and be part of the military
structure of the opposition to the Government of
Muammar Al-Qadhafi, when they should, as members
of this body, maintain impartiality in an internal
conflict, one that the Libyan people must resolve
independently.
It is deplorable that NATO forces are acting as an
army in the service of an insurgent group against the
Government of Libya, thereby detracting from the
humanitarian character of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
It is regrettable that certain countries are seeking
regime change in Libya, in violation of the Charter of
the United Nations. Those actions contravene
resolution 1973 (2011), which calls for respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Libya.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela calls for
the creation of independent and impartial international
mechanisms for monitoring a ceasefire and promoting
a dialogue between the parties as well as a peaceful
solution to the conflict that would preserve the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Libya.
The Security Council not infrequently acts
selectively when deciding which civilians deserve
protection, and it also implements sanctions regimes in
a biased fashion so as to punish Governments of
developing countries.

11-33111

How is it that Israel has not been sanctioned for
its massive violations of the human rights of the
Palestinian people? Why have the massacres of
innocent civilians in Iraq and Afghanistan not been
condemned?
Venezuela believes that powerful countries are
manipulating the concept of the responsibility to
protect, when they are seeking solely to impose their
strategic interests on the world. The responsibility for
protecting civilians lies solely with States. The
assistance that the international community can offer in
this regard should be in support of national efforts at
the request of the State concerned.
Venezuela believes that in situations of internal
conflict, diplomacy and dialogue are the only means of
protecting civilians. It is of great concern, therefore,
that the Security Council, instead of promoting peace
and security throughout the world, could become a
mechanism for war.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the floor to share the
views of my delegation on this very important subject.
I wish also to thank the French presidency for having
convened this open debate.
Our main concern in dealing with this question
should be how the international community can ensure
that the people who, in most cases, contribute the least
to a conflict are not harmed by it.
It is a foregone conclusion that civilians continue
to account for the majority of casualties in conflict
situations around the world. The numbers of those
forced to flee their homes to escape violence, internally
or across borders, is quite staggering.
History is replete with examples of innocent
civilians who perished in the millions or were
displaced permanently by the unforgiving horrors of
war. The survivors of the initial onslaught often
succumb to the second stage of atrocities, where
lifesaving food, water, medicine and other forms of
humanitarian relief are denied them.
It is reprehensible to resort to armed conflict
whenever there is a small difference of opinion
between contending parties, each claiming exclusive
rights and control over the other. In this conflagration,

19

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

it is, unfortunately, the women and children who suffer
the most, as they are subjected to acts of violence that
include murder and maiming; sexual violence; forced
displacement from their homes; forced recruitment, in
the case of children, as child soldiers; and kidnapping
and human trafficking, as well as enslavement and
other traumatic psychological experiences.
It is deeply regrettable that violent attacks against
civilians continue to this day, even after the adoption
by the international community of a robust
international legal framework and conventions and
protocols designed to serve and protect civilian
populations to a much greater extent than had been
intended by the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907,
which centred on the danger of indiscriminate warfare.
Half a century later, the Geneva Conventions of
1949 and their Additional Protocols, which act as the
central pillar of international humanitarian law, have
not enjoyed strict observance by warlords and other
aggressors.
While the international community remained
united in the utilization of this body of international
law to effectively curb the effects of conflict and
protect those who do not take part in the hostilities, the
instigators of violence undermined that objective by
directing attacks at vulnerable segments of their own
populations, killing their own people and depriving
them the basic necessities of life, even to the extent of
impeding the delivery of humanitarian relief supplies
to them.
In their actions, belligerents deliberately choose
to blur their vision in distinguishing between active
combatants and non-combatants and often fail to abide
by the intents and purposes of the provisions of
landmark resolutions such as General Assembly
resolution 2444 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968, which
stipulates that a distinction should be observed between
persons taking part in hostilities and members of the
civilian population, so that the latter can be spared as
much pain and suffering as possible.
We note that there have been significant steps in
providing guidance for the effective protection of
civilians, especially through the production by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of
the
fourth
edition
of
the
aide-memoire
(S/PRST/2010/25, annex), which serves not only as a
practical tool for facilitating the Council’s

20

deliberations but also as a repository of useful
information for the benefit of Member States.
We note with appreciation that, following the
Council’s adoption of resolution 1894 (2009), there has
been forward movement in the five core pillars
identified in the resolution as the main challenges to
ensuring more effective protection of civilians, namely,
enhancing compliance by parties to a conflict with
international law; enhancing compliance by non-State
armed groups; enhancing protection by United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions; enhancing
humanitarian access; and enhancing accountability for
violations of international law.
The resolution places primary responsibility for
the protection of civilians on the States themselves, as
well as on the authorities on the ground. The critical
question of countering impunity cannot be
overemphasized. Even though arrests and prosecutions
for crimes against humanity, war crimes and human
rights violations remain disappointingly low at both the
domestic and the international levels, there is a
necessary deterrent value in the establishment of the
international legal architecture represented by bodies
such as the International Court of Justice and the
International Criminal Court (ICC). Besides the
deterrent value of ending impunity, promoting
accountability on the part of leaders and thereby saving
thousands of lives, international judicial bodies such as
the ICC have provided victims with their only avenue
to justice, especially in situations where local judicial
systems are either unwilling or lack the capacity to
prosecute crimes and acts of violence.
In order to give impetus to the effective
protection of civilians in armed conflict, Botswana has
ratified many of the main international law
conventions, including the 1949 Geneva Conventions
and their 1977 Protocols, as well as the main
conventions on refugees. In addition, Botswana
continues to host refugees and asylum seekers from a
number of countries in the region. My delegation
shares the view expressed by other delegations that the
burden of providing and sustaining security and
humanitarian assistance in refugee camps and
settlements should be shared by the rest of the
international community, including in the area of
demobilization and repatriation.
Allow me to seize this opportunity to pay tribute
to those countries that have been at the forefront of

11-33111

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

saving lives by sending their own men and women to
the front lines to assist in the management of conflict
and the protection of civilian populations around the
world. Although Botswana does not presently have
active military contingents in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, due to its limited resources,
the country has in the past contributed troops to the
African Union Mission in Sudan before it was replaced
by African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, as well as in Somalia and in Mozambique. We
are proud of our modest contribution to international
peace and security in this regard.
Let me conclude by raising the thorny issue of the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. This is
an issue that unfortunately does not receive sufficient
attention in the recent report of the Secretary-General
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2010/579). However the issue is featured
prominently in the aide-memoire I referred to earlier in
my
remarks.
The
aide-memoire
contains
recommendations for consideration by the Council
involving arms embargoes, sanctions and legal
measures against corporate actors involved in the
manufacture and supply of weapons used to sponsor
and sustain conflict. Even though resolution 1894
(2009) highlights the point that the accumulation of
such weapons has a destabilizing effect and poses
“a considerable impediment to the provision of
humanitarian assistance and [has] a potential
to … prolong conflicts, endanger civilians and
undermine security and the confidence required
for a return to peace and stability” (resolution
1894 (2009), para. 29),
it does not go far enough.
My delegation is of the view that perhaps it is
time for the Security Council to adopt more aggressive
measures to deal with the problem of the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons and their supply and
use, as well as the undesirable effect of such weapons
in the sustenance of conflict. The Security Council has
enough capability to be more rigorous in addressing
the challenge and destabilizing effect of small arms
and light weapons with possibly the same vigour as
that devoted to the effects of landmines and other
explosive remnants of war.
In conclusion, my delegation is of the humble
opinion that consideration should be given to extending
to small arms and light weapons the call of the

11-33111

Secretary-General in his report for “more systematic
data collection and analysis of the human costs”
(S/2010/579, para. 50) of the use of explosive weapons
in order to deepen similar understanding of the
humanitarian impact of these weapons, to guide and
strengthen the implementation of international and
human rights law and, above all, to increase the
chances of survival of innocent civilians in conflict
situations.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Leskovar (Slovenia): Allow me at the outset
to thank France for having organized this open debate
on protection of civilians. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretaries-General Amos and Le Roy and
Assistant Secretary-General Šimonović for their
important contributions to today’s discussion.
Slovenia fully aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the Acting Head of the Delegation of the
European Union and by the representative of
Switzerland on behalf of the Human Security Network.
The situation of civilians in armed conflicts
around the world remains alarming. Civilians continue
to account for the majority of casualties in conflicts
and are often the deliberate targets of different forms of
violence by all parties to conflict. Special attention
should be paid to the most vulnerable groups, in
particular women and children.
The issue of the protection of civilians is gaining
importance in this Chamber. In November 2009, the
Council took an important step forward with the
adoption of resolution 1894 (2009) and introduced new
provisions that focus on humanitarian access, the
implementation
of
protection
measures
in
peacekeeping operations, and monitoring and
reporting. We welcome the informal consultations of
the Security Council on the broader issue of
protections of civilians that took place in February
under the Brazilian presidency.
The Security Council’s activities in protecting
civilians have been of particular relevance over the
past few months, particularly with the adoption of
resolutions on Libya and Côte d’Ivoire. The Council
proved that it can act both timely and decisively in
order to protect civilians. We welcome the fact that the
Council has started to address concerns with respect to
the protection of civilians more systematically, and we

21

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

call upon it to continue to address these concerns
consistently in its country-specific resolutions and
presidential statements.
As we have emphasized in our previous
statements in this Council, impunity represents one of
the major obstacles to the prevention of grave and
systematic violations committed against civilians in
armed conflict on the ground. All parties to conflict,
including non-State actors, must comply with
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law. Ending impunity is essential if war-torn societies
are to recover from conflict and to prevent any future
human rights abuses. That is why we believe that the
Council should also be sensitive to the issue of
accountability when discussing country situations on
its agenda.
In that context, we stand firm on the position that
there can be no sustainable peace without justice. We
therefore welcome the fact that resolution 1970 (2011)
on Libya also contains a reference to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). The systematic fight against
impunity for grave crimes committed predominantly
against civilians started with the establishment of
international tribunals, such as the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and later
on the ICC. In our opinion, the support of the
international community and of individual States for
those tribunals is of vital importance. Equally
important is the cooperation of States with them.
Slovenia reiterates its support for all international
criminal tribunals, especially the ICC.
Situation-specific resolutions have increasingly
called for protection to be prioritized in the
implementation of peacekeeping mandates. We
particularly
welcome
the
development
of
comprehensive strategies on the protection of civilians,
which assist missions in understanding the relevant
threats facing civilians in their areas of operation and
enable them to better channel their efforts towards
addressing them. Special attention should be given to
including appropriate wording on sexual and genderbased violence when formulating peacekeeping
mandates, given the ongoing reports of mass rapes and
similar crimes from conflict zones. It is essential that
the Council provide peacekeeping missions with clear
mandates and appropriate resources to enable
peacekeepers to implement their mandate fully.

22

The impact of explosive weapons on civilians,
particularly in densely populated areas, remains a
concern. They cause severe harm to individuals and
communities and increase suffering by damaging vital
infrastructure. They continue to constitute an obstacle
to the return of refugees and displaced persons,
humanitarian aid operations, reconstruction and
economic development, as well as the restoration of
normal social conditions, and have serious and lasting
social and economic consequences for populations.
Here, I wish to emphasize that my country implements
various projects in the field of mine action carried out
by the International Trust Fund for Demining and Mine
Victims Assistance in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
established by the Slovenian Government.
Let me conclude by stressing that the continuous
support and engagement of the Council are crucial to
the protection of civilians on the ground. The Council
has recently demonstrated its willingness to act swiftly
and decisively, together with relevant regional
organizations, in responding to disproportionate attacks
on civilians. Future efforts should seek the
consolidation of such determination and of applicable
international law into effective action on the ground.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Gutiérrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to thank France for having
organized this debate. I am also grateful for the
briefings given by Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs; Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
and Mr. Ivan Šimonović, Assistant Secretary-General
for Human Rights.
In the previous debate on the issue last November
(see S/PV.6427), we outlined a clear message to the
effect that the United Nations can and must do more on
the ground to meet the requirements for the protection
of civilians. We believe that considerable progress has
been made in determining the operational mechanisms
and guidelines to accomplish that task, in particular in
the context of peacekeeping operations, as can be seen
in the strategic framework for drafting comprehensive
protection
of
civilian
strategies
and
the
recommendations adopted only yesterday by the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
The treatment of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is multidimensional and cuts across the

11-33111

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

work of the various United Nations bodies, in
particular in the context of the General Assembly and
the work of the Third and Sixth Committees through
various resolutions, among which those on the “Status
of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 and relating to the protection of victims of
armed conflicts” and the “Intensification of efforts to
eliminate all forms of violence against women” stand
out.
The protection of civilians is a fundamental
factor in achieving peace, sustainable and viable
political processes, and the credibility and legitimacy
of this Organization. While parties in conflict have the
obligation and responsibility to take the steps
necessary to protect civilians and to assist the
provision of humanitarian aid, the political
commitment not only of such parties, but also of this
Organization, in particular the Security Council, must
be strengthened, bearing in mind that, as resolution
1894 (2009) notes, the deliberate targeting of civilians
and the systematic violation of international
humanitarian law and human rights norms in situations
of armed conflict may constitute a threat to
international peace and security.
In that regard, it is vital that protection of
civilians mandates be clear, viable and specific so that
their implementation is not left to the free
interpretation of those executing them. It is a priority
to underscore the elements that the mission must
address, and provision must be made for such mandates
to include appropriate and sufficient allocation of the
necessary resources for their implementation in order
to avoid expectations exceeding the capacity of the
missions, in particular with respect to the use of force.
When peacekeeping operations are charged with the
task of protecting civilians, their multidimensional
nature and the various actors of which they are
comprised, as well as the indispensable political
commitment that they require, must be considered.
Another clear message from the ongoing
consideration of the issue is the need to improve and
strengthen the fight against impunity in the light of
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law and the aforementioned responsibility to
protect civilians. There is international criminal
responsibility in the case of such violations. We should
recall that the international community, through the
four Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Additional
Protocols, as well as under customary international

11-33111

law, provided mechanisms for States to try and punish
the perpetrators of war crimes.
Likewise, through the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, the Court’s jurisdiction to
try those who commit war crimes was established
pursuant to article 8 of the Statute, regardless — and I
repeat, regardless — of which party to the armed
conflict commits them, under the principle of
complementarity and through effective cooperation
with the Court. Allow me here to underscore once
again the importance of avoiding selectivity so that the
Court’s work and the mandates of the Security Council
are not perceived as tainted with any political bias.
To conclude, as mandates for the protection of
civilians are developed case by case, we believe it to
be of the greatest importance to develop preventative
analysis prior to the deployment of a mission. That will
require an analysis of the risks to be faced in order to
have the best possible knowledge of the parties to and
circumstances of the conflict and to achieve a better
comprehensive political and strategic direction. It will
also make possible better guidance on the necessary
coordination in the field.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
debate. Of course, I align myself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the European Union.
My comments will focus on the relationship
between the protection of civilians and the
responsibility to protect, which is an important
relationship that has been acknowledged in various
resolutions on the protection of civilians in recent
years.
The two principles — the protection of civilians
and the responsibility to protect — have different
origins, and their practitioners do not always seem to
see eye-to-eye. The Netherlands therefore believes that
it is important to enhance our collective understanding
of both principles and how they are related in their
implementation.
Conceptually, the responsibility to protect and the
protection of civilians are indeed distinct. The
responsibility to protect is focused on the four specific
crimes of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity, be they committed in conflict

23

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

or non-conflict situations. The protection of civilians,
however, is broader in scope, as it aims to protect the
general safety, dignity and integrity of all human
beings, while at the same time being focused on
conflict situations in particular.

Timely mediation by the international community in
Kenya and Guinea prevented further mass atrocities
and protected civilians. Both have made further action
by the Council unnecessary and, at the same time, set
important precedents for preventive measures.

At the same time, the two principles are also
closely related, as they share a similar normative
foundation that consists of four elements. The first is
that the protection of individuals is a primary
responsibility of each State. Secondly, the international
community plays a supportive role concerning both
principles. Thirdly, prevention and early warning are
key aspects of the protection of civilians and the
responsibility to protect. Let me repeat here that
prevention is a key component. Fourthly, neither the
protection of civilians nor the responsibility to protect
is synonymous with military intervention. Both are
much broader concepts.

As far as military measures are concerned, a
distinction can be made between situations in which a
United Nations mission is already present on the
ground and those in which that is not the case. For
instance, the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
(UNOCI) played an important role in halting further
violence in the country through the robust
implementation of its mandate to protect civilians. In
doing so, UNOCI also contributed to the prevention of
further developments that might have amounted to
crimes against humanity.

Support for the protection of civilians and the
responsibility to protect alike has also grown among
the membership of the United Nations. We welcome
that development. The Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations has made important progress
this year on the protection of civilians and effective
peacekeeping.
The
framework
for
drafting
comprehensive strategies for the protection of civilians
in United Nations peacekeeping operations is a
welcome tool. The three-tier approach for the
protection of civilians, as described in that framework,
holds great promise and enhances prevention aspects.
We also saw increasing consensus on the
responsibility to protect during the General Assembly
debates in 2009 and 2010. In 2009, the SecretaryGeneral articulated a three-pillar approach for
implementing the responsibility to protect, which has
been very useful.
In his 2010 report (A/64/864), the SecretaryGeneral focused, much to our agreement, on the
importance of early warning mechanisms in preventing
the four responsibility-to-protect crimes. The proposals
to strengthen the Office of the Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide attracted the overwhelming
support in the Fifth Committee and the General
Assembly in December 2010.
A second positive development is that progress in
practice has also been achieved, especially in two
respects, namely, prevention — the importance of
which I already mentioned — and military measures.

24

In Libya, the implementation of resolutions 1970
(2011) and 1973 (2011) by the coalition resulted in the
protection of civilians and the prevention of massive
crimes against humanity in Benghazi and other cities in
the country. The language of the recent resolutions on
Libya acknowledges the very close relationship
between the protection of civilians and the
responsibility to protect. The Netherlands is very
pleased about that.
We believe that we need to acknowledge the
relationship between the responsibility to protect and
the protection of civilians. In our view, doing so
strengthens the implementation of both principles,
individually and jointly. That includes looking for
synergies between the two principles. For example, the
reform of the judiciary creates a safer environment for
civilians and helps to prevent the four responsibilityto-protect crimes from happening.
The same holds true for the implementation of
human rights conventions, the training of police forces
and support to inclusive political processes. Early
warning is another area where synergies are possible. I
would like to highlight two specific issues in that
regard. First, the United Nations, and the Council in
particular, should focus more systematically on
prevention, including in situations that are not yet on
the Council’s agenda. We therefore welcome the
monthly briefings to the Council by the Department of
Political Affairs. We also welcome the statements by
the Secretary-General on serious country situations and
his role in drawing the Council’s attention to them.
That is a good example of putting into practice his

11-33111

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

promise to inform the Council about what it needs to
hear, not what it wants to know. We hope that the
Council will consistently act on his recommendations,
and we are heartened by the progress already made in
that respect.

However, efforts to ensure a peaceful, just and
prosperous world have not always been consistent and
successful. As a consequence, civilians continue to
suffer from inadequate protection and discriminatory
treatment in situations of armed conflict.

Secondly, integrated peacekeeping missions and
special political missions of course have a very
important role to play in the protection of civilians. In
our view, those missions can and should also support,
within their means and capabilities, host Governments
in the prevention of the four crimes and in the exercise
of their responsibility to protect. Where appropriate,
mandates should enable missions to fulfil both of those
roles.

Azerbaijan’s interest in the issue under
consideration is obvious and stems from its efforts to
contribute to the achievement of sustainable peace and
development and its practical experience of addressing
the impact of armed conflict on civilians.

In conclusion, we believe that the protection of
civilians and the responsibility to protect are extremely
important principles. We have to acknowledge their
similarities and strengthen their relationship in
practice. That will benefit both principles and their
implementation in any given situation.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this timely and important open debate on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict.
It is symbolic that today’s meeting has been
convened immediately following the celebration of the
sixty-sixth anniversary of the end of the Second World
War and the commemoration of its victims. That war
was a great tragedy that demonstrated the destructive
consequences of tyranny and disregard and contempt
for human dignity, rights and freedoms.
A response to the overwhelming horrors of
crimes perpetrated during the wartime occupation of
large parts of many nations served as the basis for the
founding of the United Nations, the establishment of
multinational judicial institutions and the proclaiming
of fundamental values, such as peace and respect for
human rights. The significant development of
international norms and standards for the protection of
civilians and the engagement of the Security Council,
including the adoption of a number of important
resolutions and practical steps towards their
implementation, have turned increased attention to
protection issues.

11-33111

As is known, in its resolutions adopted in 1993 in
response to the occupation of Azerbaijani territories,
the Security Council referred specifically to violations
of international humanitarian law, including the
displacement of a large number of civilians in
Azerbaijan, attacks on civilians and bombings of
inhabited areas. The European Court of Human Rights
later arrived at an important conclusion qualifying the
behaviour of those carrying out the incursion into the
territory of Azerbaijan as acts of particular gravity that
could amount to war crimes or crimes against
humanity.
In recent years, important steps have been taken
for the protection and vindication of rights and the
prevention and punishment of crimes having an
international dimension and scope. We believe that
ending impunity is essential, not only for the purposes
of identifying individual criminal responsibility for the
most serious crimes of international concern but also
for ensuring sustainable peace, truth, reconciliation, the
rights and interests of victims and the well-being of
society at large.
It is essential that peace efforts and peace
agreements never encourage the acceptance of the
situations achieved by the unlawful use of force or
other egregious violations of international law and
never promise amnesty for genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity and gross violations of human
rights.
Particular consideration must be given to the
implications for the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts aggravated by population displacements and
foreign occupation. The impact of conflict on housing,
land and property, as well as discrimination on ethnic
grounds and forced demographic changes in such
situations, require a more consistent approach in order
to put an end to illegal practices and policies and

25

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

ensure the safe and dignified return of displaced
populations to their homes.
It is important that the recognition of the right to
return, along with increased attention to its practical
implementation and concrete measures aimed at
overcoming obstacles preventing return, be applied by
the international community with more systematic
regularity. Ensuring the right to return constitutes a
categorical rejection of the gains of ethnic cleansing
and offers important measures of justice to those
displaced from their homes and land, thereby removing
a source of possible future tension and conflict.
The lack of agreement on political issues cannot
be used as a pretext for not addressing problems caused
by continued and deliberate disrespect for international
humanitarian human rights law in situations of armed
conflict and military occupation.
Therefore, we proceed from the importance of
reaffirming, with respect to such situations, the
continuing applicability of all relevant international
legal norms, achieving the invalidation of activities
aimed at the consolidation of military occupations,
initiating urgent measures towards removing the
adverse effects of such activities and discouraging any
further practices of the same or similar nature.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Mahmood (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
congratulating France on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May 2011. I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting. Allow me also to
express our sincere thanks to the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations and the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Human Rights and Head of the New York
Office of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their
comprehensive briefings this morning.
Civilians continue to account for the vast
majority of casualties in armed conflicts. It is against
this backdrop that the States Members of the
Organization pledged in the Millennium Declaration to
expand and strengthen the protection of civilians in
complex emergencies. Protection for civilians is a
basic principle of humanitarian law. Civilians not

26

taking part in the fighting must on no account be
attacked and must be spared and protected. The 1949
Geneva Conventions and their 1977 Additional
Protocols contain specific rules to protect civilians. In
situations that are not covered by these treaties, in
particular internal disturbances, civilians are protected
by the fundamental principles of humanitarian law and
human rights law. However, a large number of civilians
continue to be exposed to the atrocities of conflict.
The vulnerable situation of civilians in postconflict societies needs special attention. Long after
guns have fallen silent, such people remain traumatized
by the atrocities of war. For peace to be sustained, they
must be rehabilitated and reintegrated into their
communities more effectively, and the perpetrators
must bear the resultant cost.
Peacekeeping operations are one of the important
tools available to the United Nations to protect
civilians in armed conflict. As one of the largest troopcontributing countries, Bangladesh is playing its part in
ensuring peace and security in different parts of the
world. In several situations, such as in Côte d’Ivoire,
our peacekeepers have also been injured by the parties
to the conflict while performing their duties. We feel
that the issue of the resource gap in peacekeeping
missions should be adequately addressed.
Similarly, it should also be kept in mind that
United Nations blue helmets cannot be seen as the only
instrument to protect civilians in such situations. The
host country has the primary responsibility for
protecting its civilians. International efforts including
the use of force should be the last resort, and the
relevant provisions of the United Nations Charter must
be respected. Allow me to add here that the presence of
uniformed female personnel may play a pivotal role in
a State’s ability to protect its citizens. In that regard, I
would like to take this opportunity to refer to the
efforts of the all-female Bangladeshi formed police
unit working in the peacekeeping mission in Haiti.
I would like to mention what my delegation
considers to be two overarching themes for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. The first
relates to prevention and the building of a culture of
peace. Prevention is at the heart of protection. The
preventive capacity of the Organization must be
enhanced. At the same time, Member States need to
take steps to inculcate the values of peace, tolerance
and harmony that contribute to long-term prevention.

11-33111

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

The second theme is that of coordination among
all
stakeholders,
including
various
political,
humanitarian, military and development components of
United Nations missions in the field. We appreciate
some improvements in that regard. However, much
needs to be done. My delegation stresses the need for
effective coordination, particularly between the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Political Affairs.
My delegation condemns all violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law and
stresses the need to combat impunity, safeguard access
for humanitarian assistance and protect the safety of
humanitarian aid workers. My delegation expresses its
grave concern over such violations and breaches of
law. For example, total disregard and rejection of
humanitarian and international laws and values,
especially that of the occupation forces in the occupied
territories of Palestine for years now, is a disgrace to
humanity.
In Libya, civilians continue to be attacked during
the conflict. We are greatly worried by the reports of
deaths, injuries and violence. The delivery of essential
medical supplies and other relief items and the
evacuation of third-country nationals, the wounded and
others who require emergency medical assistance have
also been severely affected.
Finally, my delegation strongly urges the
international community, particularly the Council, to
take effective steps to ensure respect for and
compliance with the Geneva Conventions in all such
situations in a uniform manner. We urge parties to
conflict to comply strictly with international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law for the
protection of civilians and provide unimpeded access
to humanitarian aid. We call on all parties to conflicts
to strengthen the protection of civilians through
heightened awareness at all levels, particularly through
the training, orders and instructions issued to armed
forces.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr.
Nazarian
(Armenia):
Thank
you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important discussion
on a topic that has gained sound public and political
acknowledgement.

11-33111

It is commendable that this body has continued
its practice of holding open debates on the protection
of civilians, featuring briefings by the UnderSecretaries-General and Assistant Secretary-General,
which offer an analysis of the Council’s action as
compared with previous years and also touch upon
important developments. In a lessons-learned process,
this open debate should also enable the Council to
more effectively address specific concerns related to
the protection of civilian populations.
The Council has to send a clear message to all
parties in armed conflict regarding their obligation and
condemning violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law. In this context, the Security
Council should have clearly defined goals and
priorities for its work. It is important that the Council,
while preventing conflict, be focused on the protection
of civilians within the overall process of peaceful
resolution of disputes, because only by addressing the
root causes of conflicts can sustainable peace be
achieved, which in turn will contribute to the
protection of civilians.
The frequency with which the Security Council
addresses this issue reflects the urgency of the matter
and the need for the international community to fulfil
its commitments to protecting civilians through the
implementation of provisions of international
humanitarian law. Therefore, we share the views
expressed by Council members and other speakers
calling for more systematic attention to protection, and
we believe that it should be frequently reflected in the
deliberations of the Security Council.
We strongly condemn deliberate attacks on and
the killing of civilians through the indiscriminate or
disproportionate use of force, which is a gross
violation of international humanitarian law in any
conflict in any part of the world. In this context,
increased efforts to fight impunity at the national and
international levels are essential.
It is unfortunate that, despite the existence of
international legal instruments and normative
mechanisms, innocent civilians, including women and
children, as well as international humanitarian
personnel, continue to suffer in conflict situations.
Undoubtedly, the prosecution of those responsible for
crimes committed against peaceful populations
continues to be an urgent matter. We believe that the
Security Council should further contribute to the

27

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

strengthening of the rule of law and the upholding of
international law by supporting criminal justice
mechanisms. The relevant United Nations entities and
international treaty bodies should also continue to play
their important role. The priority at this point is to
ensure
the
comprehensive
and
effective
implementation of existing norms.
Today’s debate also offers an opportunity for the
Council to evaluate progress on key issues, such as the
implementation of resolution 1894 (2009), and to
indicate areas where further focus is needed, including
the enhancement of compliance with international
humanitarian law and the strengthening of
accountability for its violation. Ensuring such
accountability and enhancing compliance with
international legal obligations by parties to a conflict
should be viewed as key elements of the Council’s
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security. Bettering the use of established sanctions
regimes and implementing the binding resolutions that
call upon all States to adopt national legislation for the
prosecution of individuals responsible for genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes are important
in this context.
Armenia welcomes the French initiative to hold
this open debate. It is an opportunity to recapitulate
and reflect on the Council’s past experiences in dealing
with the issue of protection and to highlight priority
aspects of the practical actions of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): On behalf of my country, I would like to thank
the Security Council for the holding of this open debate
to discuss the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The entire international community understands
that this very important subject cannot be dealt with
selectively or subjected to one-sided interpretations.
We therefore believe that the protection of Palestinian,
Syrian and Lebanese civilians suffering under Israeli
occupation is part and parcel of this much-appreciated
international effort in the context of the impartial and
exact implementation of the mandate to protect
civilians in armed conflicts. I say this in particular
because the Security Council has long been involved in
debating this important matter, while Israel, rightly and
legally referred to as the occupying Power, has all the

28

while continued its gross violations against civilian
populations in occupied Arab territories.
Paragraph 3 of the guidelines annexed to General
Assembly resolution 46/182 — by which the Assembly
established the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs — states that
“The sovereignty, territorial integrity and
national unity of States must be fully respected in
accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations. In this context, humanitarian assistance
should be provided with the consent of the
affected country and in principle on the basis of
an appeal by the affected country.”
In addition, paragraph 4 of that resolution states
that
“Each State has the responsibility first and
foremost to take care of the victims of natural
disasters and other emergencies occurring on its
territory. Hence, the affected State has the
primary role in the initiation, organization,
coordination, and implementation of humanitarian
assistance within its territory.”
Jurisprudence has concluded that international
efforts to protect civilians in cases of armed conflict
must be carried out in strict observance of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations —
which affirm the need to respect the sovereignty of
States, their political independence and their territorial
integrity — and be consistent with the provisions of the
Geneva Conventions and international humanitarian
law. Every international instrument has affirmed that
national Governments have the primary responsibility
in providing protection for their citizens and that such
responsibility is exclusive and cannot be substituted for
or influenced in the service of a given political agenda.
We must therefore not confuse the subject of the
protection of civilians, on the one hand, and threats to
international peace and security on the other, in
particular when such an important subject is discussed
in the Security Council. We must also avoid using
vague or loose interpretations of the subject of the
protection of civilians, as well as the use of
terminology outside United Nations documents and
materials that are controversial, such as the
responsibility to protect and humanitarian intervention.
Were that to happen, it would inevitably harm the
credibility and neutrality of the United Nations and

11-33111

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

undermine the noble efforts carried out to protect
civilians in armed conflicts.
An old paradox for the international community
is the fact that, with the development of the concepts of
international law over past decades, in both the general
and humanitarian aspects, the suffering of civilians
during conflicts — and, indeed, the very number of
conflicts — have increased. The distinctive march of
the international community over many centuries
towards the codification of humanitarian law must not
be undermine through the selective implementation of
such law against the powerless — not the powerful —
and the violation of the sanctity of sovereignty and the
inviolability of the borders of Member States, while at
the same time absolving the authorities of foreign
occupation from the consequences of their violations,
in total disregard for the norms and principles of
international humanitarian law.
The crimes committed by Israel over several
decades in the occupied Arab territories, its violations
of the most basic principles of international
humanitarian law and the impunity it enjoys not only
prove the violations of law by the Israeli occupation
and its political and military leadership; they are also
evidence of how certain countries in the Security
Council have condoned and tolerated those violations
and have been reluctant to end them.
Israel continues to refuse to return the occupied
Syrian Golan to its motherland and to abide by the
resolutions of international legitimacy, especially
resolution 497 (1981), which was adopted by
consensus by the Council and resolved that Israel’s
annexation of the occupied Syrian Golan was null and
void and without legal effect. We really do not know
how long we can continue to turn a blind eye to Israel’s
occupation of Arab territories, including the Syrian
Golan and East Jerusalem, and to Israel’s inhuman acts
against civilians in the armed conflict that, in United
Nations terminology, is known as the Arab-Israeli
conflict and the question of Palestine.
We wonder why we fail to see, with regard to
Israeli aggression, the same enthusiasm exhibited today
by certain representatives in expressing the great
importance they attach to the protection of civilians in
certain parts of the world where the agenda item
“Protection of civilians in armed conflict” does not
apply. These representatives have gone to great lengths
to express their concern for civilians in the Chamber of

11-33111

the Security Council, whose mandate is the
maintenance of international peace and security, in
order to endorse a flawed reading and interpretation of
the concept of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict in order to justify their flagrant intervention in
the internal affairs of Member States.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Park In-Kook (Republic of Korea): My
delegation believes that today’s debate is a timely
opportunity to further the progress on key issues such
as the implementation of resolution 1894 (2009), in
particular as political developments over the past few
months have refocused our attention on this issue. In
this regard, I would like to highlight the following
points.
First, no violators of international humanitarian
law should go unpunished, under any circumstances.
As the Security Council reaffirmed in resolution 1674
(2006), ending impunity is essential. In this
connection, we fully endorse the Secretary-General’s
emphasis in his 2010 report (S/2010/579) on
accountability for those who commit mass atrocities
and on the responsibility of States to investigate and
prosecute those suspected of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes. In addition, my delegation
also emphasizes the role of the International Criminal
Court as the last line of defence for upholding the
principle of no impunity.
Compliance should also be enforced among
non-State armed groups, which are involved in an ever
greater number of conflicts. As such, the Security
Council and other relevant international bodies need to
devise measures to ensure full compliance, regardless
of the status of the parties in conflict.
Secondly, access to provide humanitarian aid and
basic safety and security to civilians affected by armed
conflict also needs to be guaranteed. Unfortunately, we
have seen many cases where humanitarian personnel
and supplies have failed to reach those in urgent need
due to the interference of certain parties involved in
armed conflicts. Such acts clearly constitute crimes
against humanity, and those involved should be held
accountable. My delegation hopes that the Security
Council, on the basis of the relevant paragraphs of
resolution 1894 (2009), can deliberate further on this
issue.

29

S/PV.6531 (Resumption 1)

Thirdly, sexual violence against women and girls
in armed conflicts is one of the most horrible forms of
violence, not only against civilians but against
civilization itself, and it deserves our special attention.
Women and girls are most vulnerable, and sexual
violence has a devastating and corrosive effect on
society as a whole. My delegation hopes for increased
coordination among the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
UN Women, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and other relevant organizations to better
tackle these atrocious crimes.
Fourthly, more urgent attention should be paid to
the issue of refugees. Due to globalization and
deepened integration, it is expected that more refugees
will be involved with armed conflict. More specific
protection mechanisms should therefore be established,
with the contribution of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and widely
respected.
Fifthly, the role of regional organizations must be
duly recognized and enhanced. With their deeper
understanding of and sensitivity to the specific
circumstances of both inter-State and intra-State
conflicts, including a ready capacity for swift
intervention, regional organizations can play a greater
role in this regard.
Finally, my delegation also believes that such
efforts to protect civilians should be an integral part of
all United Nations peacekeeping missions. It cannot be
denied that the primary responsibility for protecting

30

civilians rests with States and the parties involved in a
conflict. However, we have witnessed situations of
armed conflict where the States and the parties
involved have failed to provide adequate protection
measures to civilians and armed groups, and where
States have even resorted to using violence against
their own innocent civilian populations as a means of
combat. In such situations, United Nations
peacekeeping operations are taking on greater
responsibilities to support and provide security to
civilians at risk, as seen recently in the case of Côte
d’Ivoire. In addition, the Security Council needs to
establish clear, credible and achievable mandates to
ensure the successful and effective protection of
civilians prior to deployment.
My delegation shares the deep concerns over
systematic, flagrant and widespread violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law and
crimes against humanity, all of which have a serious
effect on civilians. In this regard, the Republic of
Korea fully supports the continued attention that the
Security Council is giving to this issue. We welcome
the Council’s timely actions over the past few months.
My delegation is also committed to rendering its full
commitment.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

11-33111
