TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

MEETING: 3 I MAY 1967

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 134.5) , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page

Adoption of the agenda . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . .

1
I

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and \
Denmark addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/7902) . . . . . .
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab Republic in a letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and security in the Middle East
and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907) . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/79 10) . . , . . . . . , . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

S/PV. 134.5

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secutity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FORTY-FIFTH

Held in New York on Wednesday,
President: Mr. LIU Chieh (China).
Present:
The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 345)

1. Adoption

of the agenda.

2. Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902).
3. Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907).
4. Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7910).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives
of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902)
Complaint
of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international
peace and security” (S/7907)
Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern
Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/791 0)

I. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Council, and with the consent of
the Council, I now invite the representatives of Israel, the
United Arab Republic, Jordan, the Syrian Arab Republic

MEETING

31 May 1967, at 3 p.m.

and Lebanon to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. G. Rafael (Israel),
Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic), Mr. M. H. ElFarra (Jordan), Mr. G. J. Tomeh (Syria) and Mr. G. Hakim
(Lebanon) took the places reserved for them.

2. The PRESIDENT:
Letters dated 30 May 1967 have
been received from the representatives of Iraq /S/79/#]
and Morocco [S/791.5/ requesting that they be invited to
participate in the Council’s discussion. Accordingly, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite the
representatives of Iraq and Morocco to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber in
order to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Pacizachi (Iraq)
and Mr. A. T. Benhima (Morocco) took the places resened
for them.

3. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now continue its
discussion of the item on its agenda. Members of the
Council will have noted that a United States draft resolution has been distributed this afternoon in document
S/7916.*
4. The first speaker on my list is the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq. I now invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
5. Mr. PACHACHI (Iraq): I am grateful to the Council for
giving me this opportunity to make a statement in the
present debate. I have been instructed by the Government
of the Republic of Iraq to appear before this important
body to explain the position that my country takes in
respect of the present situation in the Near East.
6. The grave crisis endangering peace and security in our
area has arisen because of Israel’s threat to start a war if its
demands concerning navigation in the Gulf of Aqaba are
not met. While the Government of the United Arab
Republic has informed the Secretary-General that it “would
not initiate offensive action against Israel” [S/7906,
para. 91,’ no such assurance-I repeat, no such assurance-has been given by the Israel Government; on the
contrary, responsible Israel officials such as the Prime
* Subsequently replaced by document S/7916/Rev.l in English
only.
1 Ofjcicial Records of the Security Council, Twenty-second Year,
L%plemerzt forApril, May andJune 1967.

NOTE
@nbolsof UnitedNations
documentsare composed of capital letters combined with
figures,jkvtion of ntchasymbolin&&es a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents
oftheSecurityCouncil(symbol S/. . ,) are normally published in quarterly
Jupp/etrterlts
of theOfjcialRecordsOfthe Securi~ Council. The date of the document

indicates
thesupplement
in whichit appearsor in which information about it is @en.
Theresolutions
of the SecurityCouncil, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted
in 1964,arepublishedin Yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
sccuri/yCouncil,Thenewsystem,whichhas been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted
before1January
1965,becamefully operativeon that date.

THIRTEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIFTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday, 31 May 1967, at 3 p.m,
President: Mr. LIU Chieh (China).
Present; Tlie representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 345)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902).
3. Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907).
4. Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7910).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902)
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international
peace and security” (S/7907)
j Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Councif (S/791 0)

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Council, and with the consent of
the Council, I now invite the representatives of Israel, the
United Arab Republic, Jordan, the Syrian Arab Republic

and Lebanon to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.
At the imitation of the President, Mr. G. Rafael (Israel),
Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic), Mr. M. If. ElFarra (Jordan), Mr. G. J. Tomeh (Syria) and Mr. G. Hakim
(Lebanon) took the places reserved for them.

2. The PRESIDENT: Letters dated 30 May 1967 have
been received from the representatives of Iraq [S/7914/
and Morocco (S/791.5] requesting that they be invited to
participate in the Council’s discussion. Accordingly, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite the
representatives of Iraq and Morocco to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber in
order to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Pachachi (Iraq)
and Mr. A. T. Benhima (Morocco) took the places reserved
for them.

3. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now continue its
discussion of the item on its agenda. Members of the
Council will have noted that a United States draft resolution has been distributed this afternoon in document
S/7916.”
4. The first speaker on my list is the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq. I now invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
5. Mr. PACHACHI (Iraq): I am grateful to the Council for
giving me this opportunity to make a statement in the
present debate, I have been instructed by the Government
of the Republic of Iraq to appear before this important
body to explain the position that my country takes in
respect of the present situation in the Near East.
6. The grave crisis endangering peace and security in our
area has arisen because of Israel’s threat to start a war if its
demands concerning navigation in the Gulf of Aqaba are
not met. While the Government of the United Arab
Republic has informed the Secretary-General that it “would
not initiate offensive action against Israel” [S/7906,
para. 9/, 1 no such assurance-I repeat, no such assurance-has been given by the Israel Government; 011 the
contrary, responsible Israel officials such as the Prime
* Subsequently replaced by document S/7916/Rev.l

only.

in English

1 Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-second
Supplement
for April, May and June 1967.

Year,

the Palestine question. But essentially it is the unique
tragedy of a people who have been denied their birth-right
of freedom in the land which has been theirs from time
immemorial.

Minister, Mr. Eshkol, and the Foreign Minister, Mr. Eban,
have stated in clear and unmistakable terms that unless
Israel’s demands concerning navigation in the Gulf of
Aqaba are fully satisfied, Israel will use force to obtain
them.

12. Those Powers which demand an immediate solution to
the problem of navigation in the Gulf of Aqaba-on which
not a single resolution of the General Assembly or the
Security Council has ever been adopted and on which the
United Nations has taken no position-do not display the
same sense of urgency and concern for the fate of one and a
quarter million human beings whose right to repatriation to
their homeland has been solemnly proclaimed and reaffirmed in no less than eighteen resolutions of the General
Assembly. Nor do they seem to be disturbed by the
repeated violations of so many other resolutions adopted
by the Assembly and this Council, including the cease-fire
resoiution adopted by the Security Council on 15 July
1948 [54 (1948/l, under Chapter VII of the Charter, and
the resolutions adopted pursuant to it.

7. This is the situation in all its stark simplicity: one side
solemnly declaring tllat it will use force only if attacked,
and the other side giving notice to the world that it will
employ military means in order to acquire certain rights in
another country’s territory on the basis of arguments of
doubtful validity. Never before has such a challenge been
hurled at this Organization and the international community. It is therefore incumbent upon this Council, if it
wishes to discharge its responsibilities, to determine first of
all the real causes of the crisis and where the real threats to
peace come from.
8. Israel is asking the Council to be party to an attempt to
impose upon the United Arab Republic a solution that
flouts that country’s sovereign rights as an independent
State and that would endanger its national security. In his
brilliant analysis two days ago, my friend Mr. El Kony of
the United Arab Republic fully covered the legal aspects of
the problem, and I would like to say now that my
Governement fully endorses the point of view he expressed
regarding the sovereign right of the United Arab Republic
to control navigation through its territorial waters whenever
it feels such control is necessary for its own national
security. Prior to 1956 such control was not challenged by
the users of the gulf. The United Arab Republic has now
restored the status quo ante, that is, the situation as it
existed before the Israel aggression against Egypt in 1956.
It is evident that no rights or privileges derived by the
aggressor from his aggression can have any legal or moral
validity. Yet that is exactly what certain Powers are calling
on the Council to state. Instead of helping to remove the
last traces of that odious adventure, they wish to ensure
that Israel continues to enjoy the fruits of its aggression.

13. If the Arab States today were to declare that the
non-implementation
of these resolutions was a cams be&
would they not be on far more solid ground than Israel,
which claims a right which it does not possess under
international law and on which the United Nations has
taken no position, formally or otherwise? Are we not
entitled to conclude, therefore, that according to those who
now vigorously uphold Israel’s illegal demand for free and
unfettered passage in the Gulf of Aqaba, the fait accompli
is the only principle to guide United Nations actions? One
wonders if that is why Israel, this persistent and avid
practitioner of the fait accompli, is permitted to defy with
impunity so many resolutions of the United Nations.
14. The Armistice Agreements themselves have been violated repeatedly by Israel. The representative of the United
Arab Republic has given a few examples of such violations,
namely, the occupation of the demilitarized zones and the
deliberate disruption of the functioning of the armistice
machinery. We endorse the Secretary-General’s proposal to
reactivate this machinery, provided it is accompanied by
the strict implementation of the Armistice Agreements and
the full restoration of the conditions which prevailed at the
time of the signing of these Agreements.

9. The questions arising from the withdrawal of the
United Nations Emergency Force, including the problem of
navigation in the Gulf of Aqaba, are only symptoms of a
deeper conflict, a conflict which is commonly called “The
Pales tine question”. We fully agree with the statement of
the Secretary-General in his latest report that “the underlying basis for this and other crisis situations in the Near
East is the continuing Arab-Israel conflict which has been
present all along” [ibid., qara. 21.

15. It follows from that brief account of some of Israel’s
more notorious activities that it would be illogical, and
indeed unreasonable, to isolate and give priority to the
secondary question of navigation in. the Gulf of Aqaba,
while ignoring the other, far more weighty and urgeat
problems with which the United Nations and the Security
Council have been concerned for years. The fact that the
Israelis threaten to start a war on the question of navigation
does not detract from the importance of the other
questions; nor does it give the question of accessto the
Gulf of Aqaba any special importance, unless the Coud is
prepared to give in whenever a Member State, irresponsibly
and for reasons of prestige, decides to make a particular
question a casus belli.

10. May I take this opportunity to express, on behalf of
my Government, our appreciation and support for the
decision of the Secretary-General to comply promptly with
the request of the United Arab Republic Government to
withdraw the United Nations Emergency Force. In paragraphs 2 to 7 of his latest report, the Secretary-General
makes what we believe to be an unanswerable case for the
withdrawal.
11. Regarding the question of Palestine, I would say that
rarely has a problem evoked such deep emotions or had
such enduring significance. This is because there are few
problems which raise as many fundamental questions. All
the great issues of our time are interwoven in the fabric of

16. There are two ways of dealing with the Palestirle
question. First, there are those who believe that this
question should be examined objectively on its own merits,
2

and that on the basis of that objective examination
decisions that are consistent with the Charter and the
principles of equity and justice should be taken. Secondly,
there
are those who feel that expediency should be the
deciding factor; that the United Nations should attempt
only what is, in their view, possible or feasible, even to the
extent
of condoning and perpetuating an injustice. The
latter
theory is based on the belief that the passageof time
will
m&e the victims of any crime or injustice, however
grave it may be, accept their fate. But this in effect grants
Zicellce to any State to take the law into its own hands,
defy
and ignore resolutions with impunity, and dictate its
own
terms for the solution of problems. HOW can the
United
Nations survive if it surrenders to expediency and
allows itself to becomean instrument for the consolidation
of
aggression? Yet this is precisely what the effort to
ensure Israel navigation in the Gulf of Aqaba amounts to.

The Council should take up the real issues which underhe
the crisis and without the solution of which there call be no
peace in the area-the issues relating to the people of
Palestine and their rights and relating to the necessity to
reactivate the elaborate machinery which the Security
Council itself established to keep the peace in the area.
Until and unless that is done no real progress can be
achieved in fulfilling the Council’s primary responsibility Of
keeping the peace-not a peace of convenience or eXpediency, but a peace based on the principles of the
Charter, a peace based on respect for the resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly, a peace based
on justice, and not a peace based on allowing an aggressor,
which ten years ago treacherously attacked Egypt, to
maintain and keep the one remaining fruit of its aggression,
in contravention of the principles of international law and
equity.

17.

22. Mr. President, I ask for your indulgence, since we have
the floor and since the United States draft resolution is now
before us, to say that we do not believe that the draft
resolution fully conforms with the intent of the report of
the Secretary-General. But, naturally, before giving our
final view on this text, we shall await the explanations of
the representative of the United States as to what is
intended by the draft resolution, as to what conditions it
intends to establish.

In this present crisis, brought about by Israel, the Arab

States have repeatedly stated that they will not initiate
military operations or take the first step on the road to war.

But
if Israel uses force, then the conflict will not be
localized, but will spread to all the other theatres, and it
will not end until Israel aggression has been totally defeated
and the Israel menace to the peace and security of the area
removed. Those who think that the issue will be settled by
a quick, lightning thrust are indulging in dangerous delusions.

23. Mr. MATSUI (Japan): Last Wednesday, I had the
opportunity to express /1342nd meeting] the very grave
concern of my Government regarding the situation in the
Middle East. Our concern has grown more acute and has
deepened, particularly since we have received the Secretary-General’s second report of 26 May 1967 [S/7906/, in
which, having just returned from visiting Cairo, he reiterated his assessment of the general situation in the area,
already described in his first report of 19 May as being
“more disturbing, indeed . . . more menacing, than at any
time since the fall of 1956” [S/7896, para, 191.

18.
My friend and colleague, the Foreign Minister of
Lebanon, yesterday gave the Council [1344th meeting] an
eloquent and moving account of the feelings of our people
and
their unshakable determination to put an end to
twenty years of humiliation at the hands of the aggressor in
our midst. We shall defend ourselves whatever the cost and
however long and difficult the struggle may be. We are
prepared to use every tool at our disposal. The conflict will
be total and uncompromising.
The day before I left Baghdad my Government
to deny our oil resources to any State which takes
part in or supports the Israel aggression against the Arab
States. We have invited all the other Arab oil-producing and
exporting
countries to meet with us to co-ordinate our
positions.
This must prove that our people are prepared to
bear any hardship and accept any sacrifice. But there will
be no retreat. Make no mistake about that; make no
miscalculations.
19.

decided

24. The deeper our concern, however, the stronger becomes our conviction that it is incumbent upon the
Security Council to face squarely the problem in ail its
aspects and to discharge its responsibilities promptly and
effectively. My delegation notes that the second report of
the Secretary-General deals with a considerable number of
substantial matters of great importance affecting the
maintehance of international peace and security in the Near
East, at present and in the future. In the view of my
delegation, the Secretary-General’s assessment of the situation, and the various substantive r&ters referred to by him
in his report, provide a very good basis for the Council to
consider the present situation in the Near East, without
unnecessary acrimonious interventions.

20.
For fifty years we witnessed the Zionist peril steadily
advancing. From a mere promise given by a colonial Power
in time of war, Israel was able to carve for itself a precious
part of our homeland, continually threatening and trying to
intimidate our people with murderous attacks across the

armistice

lines, which as the Foreign Minister of Lebanon

said, the Arab countries have not once crossed since 1949
but which the Israelis have crossed with their armies twelve

times.
unleash
keep

25. The Secretary-General’s reiterated assessment of the
situation strengthens the view of my delegation that the
foremost and most important consideration is for all
Governments concerned to exercise maximum restraint,
scrupulously avoiding any action of any kind which might
lead to further deterioration of the present grave situation.
Because this is our strongly held view, we support, with
other delegations, the Secretary-General when, in his
report, he urges all parties concerned “to exercise special

And now they are not hesitating to threaten to
a war on us, and maybe on the world, in order to
their ill-gotten gains.

21.
The problem before the Council is to prevent Israel,
which
alone is threatening war, from carrying out its threat.
But this should not be done by giving in to its demands.
3

“Concerned at the gravity of the situation in the Middle
East,

restraint, to forgo belligerence and to avoid all other actions
which could increase tension, to allow the Council to deal
with the underlying causes of the present crisis and to seek
solutions”[S/7906,
para. 141.

“Noting that the Secretary-General has in his report
expressed the view that ‘a peaceful outcome to the
present crisis will depend upon a breathing spell which
will allow tension to subside from its present explosive
level’, and that he therefore urged ‘all the parties
concerned to exercise special restraint, to forgo belligerence and to avoid all other actions which could
increase tension, to allow the Council to deal with the
underlying causes of the present crisis and to seek
solutio$,

26. My delegation believes that the Council as a whole-I
would venture to hope unanimously-might
very well
support the Secretary-General’s efforts to reduce present
tensions by appealing to all the parties concerned to
exercise the maximum of self-restraint.
27. The relaxation of present tensions should provide, as
the Secretary-General put it, a “breathing spell”. Such a
“breathing spell” would offer, first of all, a better opportunity for the parties concerned to seek, as they are clearly
obliged to do under Article 33 of the United Nations
Charter, a solution of their disputes by negotiation or other
peaceful means of their own choice.

“1. Calls 012all the parties concerned as a first step to
comply with the Secretary-General’s appeal,
“2. Elzcozlyuges the immediate pursuit of international
diplomacy in the interests of pacifying the situation and
seeking reasonable, peaceful and just solutions,

28. We note in this connexion that the Secretary-General
has mentioned, in his discussions with officials of the
United Arab Republic and Israel, possible steps which could
be taken by mutual consent, The Secretary-General also
expressed, in paragraph.s 10 and 12 of his second report, his
particular concern over the dangerous consequences which
could ensue from restricting innocent passage of ships in
the Strait of Tiran. I have no intention at this juncture of
discussing the legal aspect of this question. My delegation,
however, cannot help sharing the Secretary-General’s deep
concern in this regard, We therefore strongly urge the
parties concerned to refy on peaceful means, as specified in
the Charter, for a solution of this problem.

“3, Decides to keep this issue under urgent and
continuous review so that the Council may determine
what further steps it might take in the exercise of its
responsibilities for the maintenance of international peace
and.security.“(S/7916/~ev.l./
32. It is obvious that this is an interim draft resolution. It
simply endorses the Secretary-General’s appeal for a breath.
ing spell in order, in his words, to “allow tension to subside
from its present explosive level” /S/7906, para. 14/ and to
gain time in which “to seek, and eventually to find,
reasonable, peaceful and just solutions” [ibid., para, 19J*
To this end the draft resolution urges all parties to exercise
the restraint necessary to allow both the Council and
international diplomacy to pursue the further steps required to defuse the situation and move towards peace.

29. To conclude my remarks, my delegation is fully aware
of the innumerable difficulties and complexities involved in
seeking a peaceful solution of the prolonged conflict
between the Arab States and Israel. We do not foresee that
such a solution will come easily or quickly, but the stakes
of peace or war in the Near East are altogether too high to
permit even the slightest degree of cynicism, defeatism or
despair. The conflicting parties have the most solemn
obligation to make every effort to find peaceful solutions
of their basic conflict acceptable to all of them.

33. In offering the draft resolution at this time, my
delegation is conscious of the fact that it is now one week
since the Council first met in,the present crisis. Our meeting
today is the fourth in this series of meetings, during which
all of us-the members of the Council and the parties to the
dispute-have had the opportunity to state our respective
positions. Five days ago the Secretary-General returned
from his arduous mission to Cairo. Four days ago hc
submitted his report to the Council, in which he said that
his major concern at this critical juncture was to “gain time
in order to lay the basis for a detente” [ibid., para. 121,

30. Meanwhile, almost two weeks have passed since the
present tense situation in the Near East was brought to our
attention. Now is the time for the United Nations as a
whole, and particularly the Security Council, in close
co-operation with the Secretary-General, to seek the positive, specific and objective measures that may be necessary
to bring that basic conflict to a just and peaceful end.

34. The events since then have certainly underscored the
urgency which the Secretary-General expressed to us last
Friday in his report. To be sure, in my statement to the
Council on Monday (1343rd meeting], I was able to refer
to a brief and welcome respite which had been obtained by
diplomatic efforts in which my country actively part%*
pated. Nevertheless I was obliged to emphasize that the
crisis has not substantially eased, tension remains great, aad
the time-span in which to avert a clash is short, Those
remarks, regrettably, still hold true today.

31. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I have
asked to speak briefly in order to submit a draft resolution
for the consideration of the Council. Tllis draft resolution is
1
simple and reads as follows:
“The Security Council,
“Having considered the report of the Secretary-General

in document S/7906,

35. The Security Council, in a world body of 122
Members, is a relatively small and compact body; it wasso
designed under the Charter. It is charged, in Article 24 of

“Having heard the statements of the parties,

4

7

4

the Charter, with “primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security”. Let us not
forget the reason, which is made expressly clear in the same
Article. It is, to quote the Charter: “In order to ensure
prompt and effective action by the United Nations , . .“.

44. The PRESIDENT: I invite the representative of Jordan
‘to take a place at the Council table and make a statement.
45. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I deeply regret that the
Israelis’ persistent violations of the General Armistice
Agreement, which brought about the present tension in the
area, has compelled my Government to addressthe Council
with a sense of deep urgency, Little has been heard about
the chain of Israel violations, murders and plunder which
created the present situation endangering international
peace and security.

36. TO that end the United States believes that the
Council ought to take, step by step, the necessary decisions
in this extremely grave and important matter, The draft
resolution which we now submit reflects the first step
which, in otlr view, the Council should take. The measures‘
which we propose in this interim resolution are designed, in
the spirit of the Secretary-General’s report, to ensure a
coaling-off period in the Near East without prejudice to the
ultimate rights or claims of any party. This will afford the
necessary time for more deliberate disposition of the
underlying issues.

46. We have time and time again reminded the Council of
the determination on the part of the Israel authorities to
create a situation convenient for their expansionist designs
in the area. We have recorded events, serious incidents and
acts of aggression committed against our area and people.
However, in spite of the seriousnessof the situation, no
effective and deterrent remedy has been taken by the
Council.

37. It is not our intention in offering this interim
resolution to attempt in any way to evade or delay the
exercise by the Council of its responsibility to seek
solutions to the underlying causes of the present crisis. On
the contrary, our aim is to gain time and to create a climate
in which. such solutions can be sought under more
favourable conditions.

47. I need not dwell at length on a description of the
attacks by Israel troops and regular armed forces against
Jordan. We have described them earlier, either through
formal complaints or in official documents presented to the
United Nations. Let us, however, very briefly consider the
behaviour of the Israel authorities after the decision taken
on As Samu by the Council in which Israel was censured
and in which the Council emphasized to Israel that military
actions could not be tolerated and that if they were
repeated the Security Council would have to consider
further and more effective steps, as envisaged in the
Charter-that is, jn Chapter VII-.to ensure against the
repetition of such acts.

38. Indeed, our draft resolution takes into account the
fact that the Council has two types of responsibilities. In
addition to its responsibility to avert an imminent clash, it
has also the responsibility conferred by Chapter VI of the
Charter, and described in the Secretary-General’s words:
“to seek, and eventually to find, reasonable, peaceful and
just solutions”/S/7906,
para. 191.
39. And corresponding responsibilities lie also, under the
Charter, on every Member State in the international
community to support our common effort in the United
Nations to achieve peace and security in the Near East.
40. There is one great issue in the balance here today: the
issue of keeping the peace in the Near East, with all that
that implies for world security. But we in this Council must
also recognize that we face another issue as well: the issue
of the potency and efficacy of the United Nations.

48. Only last month Israel forces, in spite of the decision
of the Security Council, again crossed the armistice
demarcation line illto Jordan, south of Hebron, an! Israel
helicopters transporting Israel forces also crossed the
armistice demarcation line and landed in Jordan. The
intruding Israel forces, while inside Jordan, engaged in a
serious clash with Jordanian civilians, causing the death of
one Jordanian and the wounding and kidnapping of another
who waslater murdered inside Israel.

41. The twenty-one-year record of the Security Council
contains numerous instances of historic decisions, decisions
by wliich we, the members, were able to “harmonize our
actions”, as the Charter says, sufficiently to savethe world
from the scourge of war. We have proved that we have the
capacity to serve the purpose assigned to us by the Charter.
The issue now is whether we have the courage, the
resolution and the vision to exercise that capacity.

49. We had filed a complaint with the United Nations
machinery in the area, and the Mixed Armistice Commission found that the Israelis’ action constituted complete
disregard by Israel of its obligations under the Armistice
Agreement. The Commission also determined that this
hostile and warlike act was the most serious end flagrant
violation of article III, paragraphs2 and 3 of the JordanIsrael General Armistice Agreement.

42. It must be candidly acknowledged that we have many
conflicting interests represented at this table, But we have
one overriding common interest, which is peace. I suspect
that a detached observer following these proceedings, as
they are being followed all over the world, will be watching
above all to see whether partisan concerns and narrow
national interests will be subordinated to our common
overriding interest in peace.

50. The Mixed Armistice Commission took a most serious
view of the Israel authorities, who openly admitted the act
of aggression, in utter disregard of their obligations. The
Commission finally used what has become a routine
formula and called on the Israel authorities in the strongest
terms to desist from a most serious threat to peace and
security.

43. I earnestly commend
attention of the Council,

this draft resolution

5 1. This act committed last month wasthe Israel reaction
to the Security Council decision on AS Samu of 25
November 1966 [resolution 228 (1966/l.

to the
5

52. Furthermo;e, a month later, on 15 May 1967, the
Israel authorities conducted a military parade in the
occupied part of the Holy City of Jerusalem. Not a single
Ambassador of any member Government of the Security
Council attended that parade, which not only violated the
Armistice Agreement, but also amounted to an act of
well-planned provocation as part of the Israelis’ expansionist designs.

celebrating the nineteenth year of their usurpation of
Palestine, now that the bells of danger are ringing everywhere so that the United Jewish Appeal can collect more
American tax-deductible donations, now that many politicians, mayors, governors, senators and congressmen are
joining in a campaign to “give to Israel”-1 mean now that
pressure groups are working at full speed, now that Israel is
exploiting an Israel-created situation-to
meet its internal
economic difficulties.

53. No words could better describe that flagrant provocation than the statement of Mr. Ysrael Galili, an Israel
Cabinet member, which was reported in the Israel Jerusalem Post of 7 May 1967 as follows:

57. Only last Sunday we witnessed a parade by supposedly
American citizens, who carried an Israel flag in one hand
and an American flag in the other. I just heard referencesto
conflicting interests. I was wondering, in case of a conflict
of interest between the United States of America and Israel,
where their loyalty would be, with the Israel flag or the
American flag. The behaviour of citizens of a country is an
internal matter and comes squarely within the domestic
jurisdiction of a Member State. I am aware of Article 2,
paragraph 7 of the Charter. But I submit that when that
behaviour affects the interests of other Member States,
thirteen or seventeen Member States, I am entitled in sitting
here to discuss the behaviour of pressure groups which are
working against the interests of the Americans, a peaceloving people. The parade called for war against the Arabs. I
saw in the parade many of the same faces that were in an
earlier parade on Fifth Avenue to champion peace.

“ ‘We’ “-meaning
the Government of Israel-“ ‘shall
judge the Independence Day parade in Jerusalem not by
the number of ambassadors present, but by our attitude
towards the Defence Forces and the capital. No country
would be relieved of its obligation to send a representative to the parade,’ Israel had not asked permission”-1 want to underline this-“to declare Jerusalem its
capital or to transfer the Knesset there, he said. The day
would come when all the world’s statesmen would realize
that Jerusalem is the capital of Israel by ‘virtue of the
political fact we shall create’.”
54. The Israelis, as can be seen, in all arrogance and
defiance declared Jerusalem their capital and transferred
the Knesset there, and they are now confronting the world
with a fait accompli. Mr, Galili’s Government is challenging
the will of the Security Council and indeed the world at
large when he states that the day would come when the
world’s statesmen would realize that Jerusalem was the
capital of Israel by virtue of “the political fact we shall
create”.

58. I shall not continue on this subject. This may be very
embarrassing to a big Power, because it is not only a
privilege to be a big Power, but it is also a responsibility.
The responsibility is to fulfil the tasks of a big Power in
accordance with the principles enshrined in the Charter and
with human rights.
59. We do not think, Mr. President, that Israel is now in a
mood to abandon its aggressive designs, despite your
appeals and genuine desire. These events which I have
described in brief before you indicate beyond a shadow of
doubt that, firstly, there has been a continuing violation of
the armistice demarcation line; secondly, there has been a
violation of the no man’s land; thirdly, the acts committed
by Israel regular forces constitute both a violation of the
Armistice Agreement and acts of aggression within the
meaning of Chapter VII of the Charter, This whole
campaign is part of an expansionist plan aimed at acquiring
more Arab lancls and displacing more Arab people.

55. I need not take much of the Council’s time at this
stage to present evidence of more violations, more condemnations and more defiance. It will be sufficient to refer
at this stage to the diversion of the Jordan River. Through
this diversion the Israelis would not only deprive the
helpless refugee families of their only means of livelihood,
but would also gain serious military advantages. It is a fact
that this Israel act is in violation of international law and of
the Armistice Agreement in the area, which expressly states
that no party should effect any change whatsoever which
would give it any military advantage. But now, as a result of
this diversion, Israel troops in the northern part of Jordan
cross the river easily by foot to come into Jordan and
commit their crimes, The attack on Tel El Arba’in and Jisr
Sheikh Hussein committed on 29/30 April 1966 offers a
glaring example, In that attack the Israelis crossed the river
in the dark by foot and razed buildings to the ground,
killed and murdered innocent civilians and then crossed
back on foot into the Israel-occupied area.

60. We find, therefore, that the Security Council cannot
but react to these grave developments. It should compel the
Israel authorities to desist from committing suc11 deliberate
acts of aggression. It should order the Israelis to retire from
the demilitarized zone and the no man’s land and stop
trespassing on the armistice demarcation line.
61. The worsening of the situation is caused by the lack of
adequate action by the Security Council on every one of
these violations. The Secretary-General, in his able report,
reminded us that the underlying cause for this and other
crisis situations in the Near East is the continuing Arab
Israel conflict which has been present all along. This was
explained very clearly in the complaint and in the interventions made by Mr. El Kony, representative of the United
Arab Republic.

56. There has been no fighting which the Israel authorities
did not initiate. Not once did Jordan start the fighting,
except in self-defence and after having suffered heavy Iosses
and much destruction. We were hoping that the Security
Council decision on As Samu would have its effects on the
Israelis, but apparently they are still in no mood to
abandon their aggressive campaign. I doubt whether they
are in a mood to do so at. present, now that they are
6

62. Now that the situation has reached a grave dimension,
it is incumbent upon the Security Council to prevent the
recurrence of such acts of aggression, thus preventing the
case of peace from being threatened. This is the more so
since the Israelis are now boycotting two out of the four
United Nations machineries in the area, despite repeated
requests by the Security Council, which call on Israel to
co-operate with the Mixed Armistice Commissions.

a trespasser in his own land, or a burglar in his own home,
or a foreigner in his own country?
67. As I said, the lands worked now by Israelis were taken
by them through occupation, forgery, acts of aggression, or
violation of United Nations resolutions. Such deeds and
violations created the crisis. The Secretary-Genera1 very
ably referred to the crux of the problem in paragraphs 2
and 14 of his report (S/7906]. These paragraphs should be
read together. No interpretation is needed; the words are
clear. The Secretary-General is with us, and the. meaning
and intention behind these paragraphs is very clear to all of
us.

63. I have just come from the Arab East. I visited most of
the places in Jordan that were the scenes of Israel brutality
and crimes. I visited As Samu and talked to the people
there, to the widows of the victims, to the orphans, to the
injured, to those who suffered for no reason other than the
fact that they happened to be on the demarcation line next
to a foreign substance injected into our area against our
will, against United Nations principles and the Charter, with
the criminal intention to kill and to murder in order to
create a vacuum for further expansion.

68. Mr. Rafael spent some time speaking about El.Fatah.
But can the Israel representative cite one single incident
that took place in any place outside the Arab area, even by
United Nations resolutions? Can he cite one single case
where El-Fatal1 worked in an area not an Arab area
according to your resolutions, or in an area not taken by
conquest in violation of the Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions?

64. I visited a school of little children, adjacent to the
armistice demarcation line in the village of Bidross. Some of
the children, young boys of nine to ten years of age, were
hit by the bullets of Israel soldiers who were shooting at
them across the armistice line, while the children’ were
playing in the school yard. I met some of those boys. They
showed me their wounds. Most of them refuse now to leave
their classes for the playground, afraid of more Israel
bullets. Those children are now the victims of fear. They
were treated by the Israel troops as though they were birds
in a hunting game. These children will grow up, and I put
tllis question to you, Mr-President, and through you to
every member round this table: would it be surprising if
many of these boys become members of El-Fatah,
El-Assefa, or Abtal Al Awdah organizations? I visited a
farmer who left his village and home in the Israel occupied
area in order to live on, and cultivate, his land on the
Jordanian side of the demarcation line. Recently, Israel
attempted to annex this farmer’s land as part of its
expansionist plan and for strategic purposes. Had Israel
succeeded, this farmer would be away from his land and
home. Would this helpless and aged man be blamed if he, at
this unfortunate old age, turned out to be an El-Fatah or
El-Assefa member? In all honesty and sincerity, I pose this
question to all of you: how would you feel if you found
yourself in the shoes of this aged man or in the place of any
expellee from Palestine?

69. And if those foreign Zionist Irgunists-criminals-who
committed the massacre of Deir Yassin were called by the
leaders of Israel “freedom fighters” is it not ridiculous to
call the Arab people of Palestine “terrorists”? Terrorism is
not a part of our values, nor is it a part of our tradition. It
was first imported into the Holy Land by the Zionist
movement and by those who immigrated from Germany to
carry on their Nazi-like terrorist activities in the Holy Land.
In this connexion we may mention Mr. Rafael himself, the
representative of Israel. Mr. Rafael is German, born in
Berlin, and he came to Palestine to be among the leading
figures of an underground movement. Mr. Rafael happens
to be a member of Haganah-which may be news to many
of you here. So when he speaks about terrorism, I do not
think he is qualified to sit in judgement. He introduced
terrorism to our area, to the Holy Land, to the land of
peace.
70. The people of Palestine are becoming most impatient.
They have waited for a just United Nations solution for
nineteen years, Their present action is the result of the
Security Council’s inaction, They are the victims of
injustice and they are determined to regain their beloved
homeland. They are human. They have become a forgotten
people. But they have not forgotten and cannot forget their
homeland.

65. Some of you speak about sabotage and terrorism. I
beg you to examine this matter carefully. The lands of all
those people were annexed to Israel-occupied areas by
various vicious and illegal means, either by conquest or
forgery or armistice violations, or other evil Zionist means.
The legitimate owners, the Arabs of Palestine, look and find
foreigners coming from South Africa or Germany or other
places to pick fruit from trees they had never planted, in
lands they never lawfully possessed, owned or cultivated.

71, I have not heard the name “Palestine” mentioned by
those of you around this table who lead the opposition.
This, we believe, is wrong. The problem is there and
Palestine is there, and it is to regain their homeland that the
people of Palestine will sacrifice their own blood. Any
human being who does not sacrifice himself for a just cause
does not deserve to live. A homeland is a precious thing,
and by deleting the name “Palestine” from their speeches
those representatives do not make a contribution to peace
and security. This is a contribution to war; this is an
invitation to every Palestinian to rise, to struggle, to fight,
to die so that others may live.

66. A Palestinian looks to the Council and hears some
members speak about forgetting the past and looking to the
future, Out of bitterness and despair, such legitimate
owners InaY sometimes cross the armistice demarcation line
into his land. He may put a little hand-made mine in a road,
but the question arises; can this legitimate owner be called

72. War is a tragedy, No one wants war. But when
injustice is permitted in the Council to continue because of
7

power politics, because of political expediency in order to
secure a so-called peace, no peace is secured. There can be
no peace with injustice; there can be peace only with
justice. They go together. They are-quoting a great man,
exPresident Eisenhower-two sides of the same coin.

members an idea where the Israel forces were at the time of
the cease-fire resolution, showing exactly the place wherle
they were situated when the Jordanian delegation left fol
Rhodes to sign the Armistice Agreement. It shows the
violation committed by Israel in violation of the Securit:y
Council’s will, Are they not estopped from even claiming e
shadow of a right-the right acquired by conquest ir
violation of Security Council resolutions? I am having
these maps distributed to you, Mr. President, SO thar
members may have an opportunity to look at this map
This map appears in a book called A Soldier with tht
A&s2 written by an Englishman, Mr. John Bagot Glubb

73. Having said this, I must express at this stage my
astonishment at finding that, for the first time in the
history of the question of Palestine, the right title was not
incorporated in the agenda of the Security Council. For the
first time in the history of this problem, not only have
some members deliberately refused to acknowledge the
presence of a problem called “The Palestine question”, but
the correct title has not been placed on the agenda. The
title “The Palestine question” was used in every single
agenda in the past: the last one involved As Samu; the one
before that was the Syrian complaint; the one before that
was the Israel complaint against Syria. I have them here,
and in every single one the correct title was used.

79. My delegation has said in the Council that illegia
occupation does not give a right. It imposes a duty, a dut:
to get rid of the usurper and occupier. What is more, th
Security Council is duty bound to restore the condition
which existed before the aggression, because aggression
never conveys a right, The Emergency Force was neve
intended as an instrument to validate what is illegal
otherwise, one would be using the Force to defy the law o
nations.

74. Now of course, I have no right to speak here on
questions of procedure; I am not a member of the Council.
But this is substance, this is a substantive matter. We are
discussing here the matter of Palestine. The complaint of
the United Arab Republic involves many phases of the
problem of Palestine. You cannot discuss it in a vacuum.

80. The Gulf of Aqaba is an Arab Gulf. Neither the Unite
States nor the United Kingdom is entitled to perform th
task of a self-appointed jurist, to pass judgement on th
status of Arab waters in the Gulf of Aqaba. The issu
before the Council is whether the United Arab Republic i
applying in the Gulf now the same rules that were in font
prior to the Israel aggression. This being the case, there :
nothing new in ,the declaration of the United Ara
Republic. It contained nothing but a return to tlil
conditions existing prior to the 1956 campaign.

75. Having said this, I must state that it is a waste of time
to look at any of the items in isolation. We should go
deeper. Let us look at the problem as a whole, understand
it and be aware of all its phases. Let us know the whole
truth, because only half the truth is a lie.
76. Those who objected to the withdrawal of the United
Nations Emergency Force should be reminded that it was
never intended to stay in the area for ever. The Emergency
Force was not a cure but a step to facilitate one. It was a
bandage, not a cure. After eleven years of its presence with
no attempt on its part to put an end to Israel’s arrogance
and defiance, why should it surprise some quarters that a
request was made for the withdrawal of the Emergency
Force from the area? The Israel authorities have been
exploiting and taking advantage of the presence of the
Force in the south of Palestine and the presence of the
United States Sixth Fleet to the west of Palestine in order
to turn north against Syria and strike east against Jordan
with safety. Thus, secure in the south and the west, Israel
couId attack, murder and destroy.

8 1. The other day the Security Council heard a lecture 11
the Israel representative on international reality. I belie\
that friends of Israel should advise him to give sorr
thought to international morality, to the rule of law, f
respect for fundamental human rights and strict adherent
to the provisions of the Charter.
82. Mr. El Kony very ably illustrated to the Council wh
the Israel representative meant by “international reality
Mr. El Kony presented to the Council the run-down of t.1
events that led to the conquest of Naqab. He showed WI
was the aggressor, the conqueror and the perpetual ins
gator of all the troubles in the area. I therefore need nl
dwell on this issue.
83. Finally, I should like to emphasize that it is the
illegal acts of forcible occupation which form the bait
ground for the so-called international reality. Let me reple
to Israel, and let its friends know, too, that anything bu
on force is unreal and could not receive the support oft
international community, nor could it be in conformi
with international law or morality, let alone the Armisti
Agreement and the Charter. Might, conquest and aggressi
cannot sustain a right and they are ultimately doomed
disintegration and failure.

77. And if tho’se who now champion the campaign against
the United Arab Republic were indifferent to all such Israel
defiances, are they in a position to criticize the exercise of a
sovereign right by a sovereign State? And if Israel refused,
after its Sinai aggression, to permit one single soldier of the
Emergency Force to stand on the Israel-occupied part of
the armistice demarcation line, can they come, are they
entitled to come, and lecture us about the legality of the
presence of the Force in the area?
78. Much has been said about the so-called right of Israel
to passage through Aqaba. Let us not forget that the Israel
presence on the Red Sea_...
is a military “.”presence resulting
from an act of occupation in vioratlon or a security Council
cease-fire resolution. I have a map here which will give the

84. 1 heard the representative of the United Stat
Mr. Goldberg, referring to the policy of the United Sta
vis-h-vis the area, He referred to the territorial integrity
2 London, Hodder and Stoughton, 1957.

8

all countries of the Middle East. To my knowledge the

Council, in accordance with rule 38 of the provisional rules
of procedure of the Security Council, the following draft
resolution:

question of Palestine is still before the Security Council.

The problem is not solved. There is an Armistice Agreement. The Agreement did not fix boundaries; it fixed a
demarcation line. The Agreement did not pass judgement
on rights-political,
military or otherwise. Thus I know of
no territory; I know of no boundary; I know of a situation
frozen by an Armistice Agreement. And I should like
clarification on this. Does this mean that the United States
is also endorsing the conquest of Israel, of almost one third
of what is now occupied by Israel? This is very important.
It should reflect the policy of the United States.

‘<TheSecurity Council,
‘Mindjitll of its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, in accordance
with Article 21, paragraph 1, of the Charter;

‘LCo~zscious of the grave situation prevailing in the
Middle East resulting from the inability of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization to function in
accordance with the r&.olutions of the Security Council
and in conformity with the obligations of the parties to
the Egyptian-Israel General Armistice Agreement;

85. Our problem is that we are always victims of vague
terms. And we are also victims of lack of communication
with the great nation of the United States, because of a
curtain put between us and the people of the United States.
We can hardly reach them because of the influence of
pressure groups in big cities. I hope the time will come soon
when this curtain will be lifted, when justice will prevail,
when knowledge and understanding will be the means of
cbmmunication,
because with understanding comes awareness, with awarenessproblems can be solved on the basis of
justice and truth.

‘NotiMg with grave concern that in accordance with the
various reports of the Secretary-General and, in particular, his latest report [S/7906/, the aforementioned
United Nations machinery became particularly inoperative due to the attitude of Israel authorities regarding the
General Armistice Agreement;
“Considering that the unilateral denunciation by Israel
of the Egyptian-Israel General Armistice Agreement
cannot be accepted or tolerated by the Security Council,
and does not absolve Israel of its obligations and
responsibilities under that Agreement;

86. The determination of our people is stronger than all
Israel fabrications and distortions. We have the means, the
resources and the will which will enable us to put an end to
any aggression, to regain our homeland and protect our
liberty despite the efforts of those who want to destroy our
liberty.

“‘Fully convinced that such unilateral denunciation by
Israel and its flagrant violation of the Egyptian-Israel
General Armistice Agreement is responsible for the
deterioration of the situation in the Middle East, threatening international peace and security in the area

87. The PRESIDENT: I now invite the representative of
the United Arab Republic to take a place at the Council
table and to make a statement.

tt
,f
.e
0
I)t

:s,
i?S

of

88. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): Mr. President,
as you may recall, at the end of my submission to the
Council on 29 May [1343rd meeting/, I, on behalf of my
Government,
put before the Council certain suggestions
which we deem essential for the partial alleviation of the
present tension in the Middle East, The Secretary-General,
in his report, stated-and I shall read, with your permission,
Mr- President, the relevant part of the report:

“1. Decidesthat the Egyptian-Israel General Armistice
Agreement is still valid and reiterates that the United
Nations machinery emanating therefrom should be fully
operative;

“2. Calls upon the Israel Government to respect and
abide by its obligations and responsibilities as stipulated
in the Egyptian-Israel General Armistice Agreement and
to act accordingly;

“There are other possible courses of action which might
contribute substantially to the reduction of tension in the
area. In paragraph 16 of my report to the Security
Council on 19 May (S/7896] I referred t? the possibility
of the Egyptian-Israel Mixed Armistice ‘Commission providing a limited form of United Nations presence in the
area. In that report I stated that ‘it would most certainly
be helpful in the present situation if the Government of
Israel were to reconsider its position and resume its
participation
in the Egyptian-Israel Mixed Armistice
Commission.
I suggest that the Council consider this
possible approach also during its search for ways out of
the present crisis. This form of United Nations presence
could
to some extent fill the vacuum left by the
withdrawal of the Force.“[S/7906, para. 15.1

“3. Instructs the Chief of Staff of the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization to proceed promptly and
reinstitute within two weeks the headquarters of the
Egyptian-Israel Mixed Armistice Commission in El Auja
from where it discharged its duties prior to the Israel
unilateral action forcing its expulsion from that zone;
“4. Decides to bolster additional measures necessary
for the full implementation
of this resolution in case of
the non-compliance by the Israel Government with the
terms of this resolution;
“5. Requests the Secretary-General to contact the
parties to the Egyptian-Israel General Armistice Agreement for the immediate implementation of this decision
and to report to the Security Council within fifteen days
for its approval with regard to additional measures;

89. Therefore, consonant with my previous suggestions
and in support of the ideas contained in, the SecretaryGeneral’s report, my Government is presenting to the
9

“6. Decides to reconvene to discuss the report of the
Secretary-General immediately
upon its submission.”

detail by the representative of Egypt. However, even tll
assumption on which the resolution was based must ha
bken completely invalidated by the treacherous IsIX
attack on Sinai in 1956.

[Sf 7919.1

90. I am confident that this draft resolution will receive
the thorough attention it deserves, and that the reaction to
it by the members of the Council will be favourable.

97. Mr. Goldberg went further: he denied us the state
belligerency, basing himself on the fact that we si@ed
Armistice Agreement. In his view, that should terminate t
state of war.

91. May I now be permitted to make a comment on the
statement
made yesterday 11344th meetingj- “by
Mr. Goldberg, the representative of the United States. In
that intervention, Mr. Goldberg opted not to argue the
merits of the non-applicability of article 16, paragraph 4, of
the Geneva Convention on the Territorial Sea and the
Contiguous Zone, although he was the one who invoked
this article in his statement on 29 May [1343rd meeting], I
wish to express my gratification that Mr. Goldberg, to
satisfy his professional pride, at least ventured to discuss
legal arguments. He, however, chose only one aspect. He
referred to Security Council resolution 95 (1951) of
1 September 1951.

98. This, we contest. In addition to the argument v&icll
have already put before the Council, I shall limit myself
a reference to the following opinion of the United Sta
Supreme Court in the case of Ludecke versus Watkins,
which it was declared in 1948 that “War does not ce:
with a cease-fire . . ,“.3 Moreover, the late Justice l?rar
furter in the same case indicated that “ ‘The state of W
may be terminated by treaty or legislation or Presidenl
pr0clamation”.4
Therefore, according to United Sta
practice, an armistice does not end the state of war.
99. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
11
publics) (translated from Russian): The Soviet delegat:i
would like to make some comments on the question unl
discussion in the Council.

92. It is true that that resolution was adopted by the
Council, but two highly important factors affected the
resolution. First, four of the nine States that voted for the
adoption of the resolution were parties to the dispute, and
according to Article 27, paragraph 3, of the Charter, “a
party to a dispute shall abstain from voting”. It follows
that, according to the provisions of the Charter, the
resolution should not have been adopted.

100. At today’s meeting of the Council the represental
of Jordan, Mr. El-Farra, has drawn the Council’s attent
to the fact that the question we are discussing she
appear in the Council’s agenda under the general hea ding
“The Palestine question”, as has always been the practicum
the past. In this connexion we shouId like to state that
consider that the point made by Mr. El-Farra is a valid C:
and we believe that the Security Council should make
necessary correction in the wording of the item un
discussion.

93. That there was a dispute was clear from the fact that
Israel and other countries, some of which have tried in vain
to hide behind Israel, were disputing our rights to impose
restrictions on the passage of some war mntlriel to Israel
through the canal.
94. The representative of Egypt quoted and placed in the
records of the Security Council meetings at that time the
very clear and unequivocal views expressed by the representatives of the United Kingdom and the United States at
earlier meetings of the Council. He showed how much they
supported the opinion that a party to a dispute should
abstain from voting, He expressed his belief that an
elementary principle of justice required that a party to a
dispute should not be a judge of it, and that it was this
great principle which inspired the provision in Article 27 of
the Charter that a party to a dispute should abstain from
voting.

101. In his statements here in the Council, the re:i
sentative of the United States of America has on a nurr
of occasions delivered himself of some very exten
judgements on subjects including, inter alia, internatiq
navigation, the principles governing international relat:i
in that field, and so forth. At this meeting too, when
representative of the United States spoke again to rr
some comments on his draft resolution, we heard c
more for the umpteenth time the all-too-familiar collec
of terms such as “peace-loving”, “justice”, “legality”,
so on.
102. In our view at least, these statements, whicl~ SCI
like wearisome sermons, create a strange impression.
not indeed ironical that the official representatives of
United States of America should here be trying to pre
Washington as a champion of “peace”, an observe
“legality” and “justice”, and on a world-wide scale at tl

95. Yet, when there was a case which would not uphold
their own interests, the same members whom he had
quoted challenged the relevance of their previous views.
However, apparently political expediency was the aim and
method of those members of the Council at that time. Need
I say that they still maintain that attitude?

103. As one listens to statements of this kind, one cali
help wondering how the United States representat
discourses about exalted principles of international
la\:1
supposed to tally with the deeds and practical act

96. Secondly, the resolution was based on the assumption
that for two and a half years no fighting had occurred
between Egypt and the Israel authorities. Again, for
political aims, those members of the Council at that time
flagrantly disregarded the numerous aggressive acts committed by the Israelis during those two and a half years, in
spite of the fact that they were presented to the Council in

3 United States Reports: Cases Adjudged

p. 167.
4 Ibid., p. 168.

vol. 335,

10

in the Supreme

c

-

Wasfington. How are the statements of the United States
representative, Mr. Arthur Goldberg, a professionai lawyer,
to be reconciled with the fact that the United States has
grossly violated the most elementary principles of international law in the very field to which the United States
representative is referring-in particular, how are they to be
reconciled with the naval blockade of States with which the
United States is not at war and which are States Members
of the United Nations?

110. The Armistice Agreements prohibited all hostile acts,
all acts of incursions and all crossings of borders, whether
by regular or irregular forces. Under the cover of those
Agreements, the Arab countries have carried on their
warfare against my country by means of their choice. Their
terrorists, fedayaen, saboteurs, marauders-irregular or
regular-have crossed our borders not twelve times: over the
years they have crossed them and invaded our territory
thousands of times. Their Governments have openly declared their support for this war by stealth, a war that has
cost Israel many hundreds of casualties.

104. We venture to ask what international principles can
be invoked, for instance, to justify the unlawful acts of the
United States of America against Cuba. One is forced
inevitably to conclude that people in Washington begin to
think about international law only when it suits the
purposes of the White House. When it does, the statements
of United States representatives are liberally strewn, as if
from some cornucopia, with references to “international
agreements”, ‘Ijustice ” , “rules of law” and “legal practice”.
But when it does not suit Washington’s interests, all signs of
attachment to international laws-and particularly observance of these laws-disappear without a trace.

11 I. The representative of Egypt has openly declared here
that his country is in a state of war with Israel and that it is
therefore permitted to carry out acts of war and belligerence against it. That is his justification for the blockade
instituted in the Gulf of Aqaba, and maintained in the Suez
Canal.
112. It is the ruling of this Council that the Armistice
Agreements terminate belligerence, but it is the policy of
the Arab States to practise this outlawed belligerence. That
is the crux of the matter, that is the. fundamental
controversy, The Armistice Agreements envisaged the restoration of total peace, while the Arab States are engaged
in preparations for total war.

105. I think, gentlemen, that it migrtc be interesting for us
to hear a reply to this particular question from the
representative of the United States of America in the
Security Council.

113. Belligerence is not a one-way street. It cannot be
travelled with safety and impunity. The representatives of
the Arab States who have spoken here wish to assure the
Council that they do not intend to take offensive action
against Israel. Yet they practise, yet they proclaim, a
people’s war. They organize armed incursions into my
country, they plan and execute sabotage and terrorism in
Israel. Their leaders openly threaten to destroy Israel. They
mass large offensive forces on the borders of my country
and proclaim a blockade. They proclaim a blockade in an
international waterway which is vital for my country.

106. The PRESIDENT: I now invite the representative of
Israel to take a place at the Security Council table and to
make a statement.
107. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): In the course of two meetings
of the Security Council held yesterday and today, representatives of five Arab States have launched an assault of
unprecedented ferocity against my country. They have
threatened Israel and the world with total war. They have
tried with the threat of sanctions to intimidate countries
which uphold international morality and legality. They
have threatened to destroy the independence of my
country and to extinguish the existence of my people. That
is the message which the representatives of Iraq, Jordan,
Lebanon, Syria and Egypt have brought to this Council.

114. I ask the members of this Council to judge for
themselves: is this offensive action, or is it not? IS this
compliance with the Charter obligations of peaceful coexistence, or is it not?
115. My country has faced that kind of unrelenting
warfare with supreme restraint. I wonder whether any other
State represented here or in the United Nations as a whole
would have exercised such patience under similar circumstances and provocations. My people have manifested
that patience, but it should not be mistaken for a lack of
determination to defend its liberty and to fight for its
existence.

108. They have taken off the make-up of diplomatic
niceties and shown to us and to the world the contorted
face of brutal reality. They have employed the worn-out
and transparent technique of portraying the victim of
aggression as the aggressor. In shining innocence and with
flowing eloquknce they come to the Council and pretend to
have no offensive intentions towards Israel. What a
mockery. They enumerate Israel’s alleged violations of
United
Nations resolutions and proclaim their faithful
compliance with resolutions of the United Nations and the
provisions of the General Armistice Agreements.

116. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): We have before us
the United States draft resolution [5’/7916/Rev.l]. My
delegation has already endorsed the idea of an appeal for
restraint to the parties concerned-in fact, to al] Member
States. But it seems to me that the terms of the appeal
would have to be so carefully drafted as to command the
approval of the overwhelming majority of the Sej-:urity
Council. I would therefore defer any further comments on
this question until our next meeting.

109. Did the Arab States take up arms against the General
Assembly resolution of 29 November 1947 [lSl (II)],.
providing for the establishment of Israel, or did they not?
Did the Security Council on 1 September 1951 adopt a
resolution
(95 (19.51)] outlawing blockade practices
against Israel, or did it not? Did that resolution state in
clear terms that such belligerent actions as blockades are
incompatible with the armistice r&me, or did it not?

117. Speaking this afternoon, the representative of the
United Arab Republic read out the +text of a draft
11

-

124.. If we, on the other hand, in an attempt to formulate
resol$ion, which the Security Council should consider very
carefully. The draft resolution lists certain practical steps an appeal at this stage introduce elements and controversial
which, if taken by the Council, would help to maintain / concepts which either party will interpret as affecting or
prejudicing any legal claim emanating from its sovereignty,
peace in West Asia. Further, the draft should be viewed in
then I submit we shall not be advancing our work, nor shall
the light of the latest report of the Secretary-General,
we be advancing the cause of peace.
which it follows closely in certain respects. It is the
intention of my delegation at the appropriate time, after
due consideration has been given to it by the Council, to
125. It is needless to point out that absolute caution is
ask for a vote on the draft resolution under rule 38 of the
necessary if we are to obtain the kind of unanimous
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council.
resolution that we have in mind. What we should aim for at
this first phase is to gain time, time badly needed to carry
out intensive consultations and to allow passions to subside,
118. We reserve the right to speak again on this matter.
thereby creating an atmosphere in which some issues of
long standing can be tackled.
11.9. Mr. MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): I shall not comment on
the draft resolutions that have been submitted today,
except to say that we shall, of course, study all suggestions
126. Such an appeal should thus set the stage for the next
with care and attention. My brief remarks will deal only
phase, for the second approach, to deal with the fundawith the possible methods of approach that the Council
mental issues and other issues arising therefrom. This
may see fit to consider with a view to making its efforts
second phase, which, by mutual accord, can be a phase of a
both realistic and expeditious.
defined period of time, can be the phase of intensive effort
by the Council to resolve the problem by peaceful means.
120. It will be recalled that in my last statement at the
There is, in our opinion, much to be said for the need for
1343rd meeting of the Council on 29 May with regard to
quiet diplomacy and intensive negotiation under the
the present crisis in the Middle East, I indicated the
auspices of the Security Council. A public debate such as
readiness of my delegation to join in any effort directed at
the one we have had in the last few days, while useful in
addressing an appeal to the principal parties concerned in
clarifying matters and issues, also has the disadvantage of
the crisis to refrain from engaging in any act that might
hardening positions. We thus feel that the Secretary-General
aggravate the situation, and thus to allow the Council to
should continue to undertake further contacts with the
gain time for its efforts to preserve peace in the area. I can
parties principally concerned in the crisis. Given his unique
only reiterate today that this readiness on the part of my
position and personality, the confidence of the parties that
delegation continues and that the need to gain time is as he personally enjoys and the prestige and authority of his
imperative as ever. As I also said in my last statement, I
high office, we believe that 11 Tbant has a definite and
should hasten to add that such an appeal, if its great value is
constructive role to play in preventing this dangerous
not to be lost, should enjoy the unanimous support of all
situation from deteriorating further.
members of the Security Council.
127. I know that calling for more time is easier said than
121. My delegation believes that this limited but highly
done. I know that for some members of the Security
important initial objective that we have set for ourselves, as Council this may seem to be a long-drawn-out process. This
it emerged from the first round of the debate in the
might also be interpreted by the parties concerned as a
Council, is within our reach, provided we diagnose the
passive attitude, an evasion of one’s responsibility in the
situation realistically and avoid at this stage all elements
face of what they consider to be, from their point of view,
and arguments that would tend to create division and
a clear case for immediate rectification. But, on the other
discord in our present deliberations in the Security Council.
hand, what is the alternative to a further and persistent
search for a solution?
122. It is well-nigh impossible to prescribe a solution for
this long-present crisis in the Middle East, the present
128. I respectfully submit that the alternative could only
“crisis situation” as the Secretary-General has put it, is but
be one fraught with great danger. Is it too much, then, to
the latest expression of “the continuing Arab-Israel conflict
ask for restraint and for limited time to enable the Council
which has been present all along” [S/7906, para. 2/.
to proceed with its urgent and serious task of preserving
peace in that troubled area? My delegation submits, in alI
123. It is thus well-nigh impossible to prescribe a solution
humility,
that it is not too much to ask for that.
for this long-standing problem at one stroke, as it were.
Even as we consider this latest expression of a long-standing
129. It is in that spirit and in the spirit of this statement
conflict, we should have a two-phased and double-pronged
that my delegation approaches the challenging task that the
approach to the problem. The first phase of that approach,
Security Council is called upon to face in the vital area of
which I shall call the “appeal phase”, if it is to be useful
the Middle East.
should, in our opinion, aim at restraining the principal
parties and all other countries from taking action that could
only aggravate the situation. This can only be done in the
130. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): The
form of an appropriate appeal formulated in language that
representative of the Soviet Union, my friend and colleague
will not be susceptible to interpretation by any party as Mr. Fedorenko, has given the Council a disquisition on
prejudicing some of its claims of long-standing sovereign
international law-not only on this situation, but on other
rights with regard to a number of issues with which
situations-and
he has asked me to answer his legal
members of the Council are only too familiar.
commentary. I am glad to oblige, and this is my answer.
12

-~

I31
like
is. 1
shd
trea
13:2

in t
regrl
then
shall
and
the
wo 1.l
mY(
133,.
lovin
AIXlb
this !
134.
PUbIi
expo,
Unite
exert
encec
sub st,
135.
Wash

OursI:

sfater
Unite
diswr

136.
of vii
‘Ijusti
and s:(
137.
attent
armeld
invadi
carryi]
138.
specil?
sador,
judges
States
contra

-ite

;ial
01

tY1
1all
1 is 2
DUS

r at
irry

ide,
; of :

lext
Ida ?
l-his
ofa t
‘fort

am

for
the
11 as
11 in
,e of
leral
the
ique
that

f his
and ;
:rous

than

wily
This
as a
1 the
view :
Dthe; ’
stent
only
:n, to
buncil
:dlg

in all

merit
at the
Yea of
: The
league
m on’
othe1~
legal j
:r.
;

131. On legal questions, the Soviet representative speaks
like the great authority on Chinese literature that indeed he
is. I shall leave it to him to rely on Chinese proverbs, and I
shall continue to rely on international law, including
treaties to which his Government is a party.
132. Ambassador Fedorenko also complains that I have
repeatedly used words such as “peace-loving”, “justice” and
“legality”. I should not imagine that it would be necessary
in this Council to apologize for using these words, and I
regret that I have to serve notice on him that I shal.l use
them again and again and again until they are heeded. I
shall also say to Ambassador Fedorenko, with all friendship
and respect, that I do not purport to tell him how to phrase
the views of his Government, and I also say to him that I
would thank him not to tell me how to phrase the views of
my Government.
133. I am not surprised, however, that the words “peaceloving”, ‘tjustice” and “legality” have a strange sound to
Ambassador Fedorenko. I am just surprised that he admits
this so frankly and so publicly.

statements but the acts of the United States Government,
particularly those relating to the blockade of one of the
Members of the United Nations which enjoys equal rights
with us all? What principles were the competent authorities
in the United States of America taking for their guidance
when they indulged in acts of this kind-particularly,
the
blockade of Cuba?
140. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I said
the other day; and I repeat it now, that at any time when
the representative of the Soviet Union is prepared, with
respect to an item properly on the agenda, to talk about the
matter and to vote on it, I am ready to do so, whether it
concerns Vie&Nam, Cuba or anything else. The chips are
down not only when you make speeches but when you
vote: I have found that when we try to inscribe items so
that we can discuss these important issues, there are
objections. Let the objections be withdrawn and we shall
proceed to discuss these subjects at the proper time, We are
discussing the item on our agenda now.
141. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): We are convinced once
again that the United States representative is evading a
direct answer to our question; and it is not, of course,
without reason that he is evading it. In other words, he does
not have any explanations to offer.

I34. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Z?oviet Socialist Republics) (translated jiom Russian): We have just heard an
expost;, as one might call it, by the representative of the
United States, who-as was to be expected-continued his
exercises in legal terminology and eloquence and, experienced lawyer that he is, refrained from replying to the
substance of the question.

142. Mr. SEYDOUX (France) (trwzsZatedf?om French): It
was, naturally, with keen interest that my delegation, which
had expected to make its contribution to this debate today,
learned of the draft resolution circulated by the United
States delegation at the beginning of this meeting. Although
this text is a statement of views which have already been set
forth in the Council, I am sure that all will agree with me
that it requires on the part of our Governments very careful
study, befitting the gravity of the present crisis. The same is
true of the text which has been read out to us by the
representative of the United Arab Republic and on which
the representative of India has requested a vote by the
Council.

135. We have tried to draw a comparison between
Washington’s statements and its acts. We have confined
ourselves to asking one single question relating to the
statements made by the official representative of the
United States of America in this exalted body during the
discussion of the situation in the Near East.
136. We have indeed heard many insistent reaffirmations
of Washington’s attachment to the lofty principles of
‘?ustice”, “lawfulness”, “legality”, “morality”, and so on
and so forth.

143. My delegation would, in any case, like to have more
time to study these two draft resolutions and any other
proposals which may be made by members of the Council. I
therefore consider it advisable to propose that we adjourn
until the day after tomorrow, until Friday morning, for
example, to give us time for reflection and the usual
consultations among members of the Council.

137. In our earlier statements we had already drawn
attention to what the White I-Iouse is saying, and what the
armed forces of the United States of America are doinginvading foreign territories, violating every rule of law, and
carrying out reprisals against entire peoples.
138. The question we are asking today has one very
specific purpose. We should like the United States Ambassador, who is often addressed as “Judge”, to tell us how he
judges the slatements made by official circles in the United
States of America, and the practical acts which completely
contradict these statements.

144. The PRESIDENT: The representative of France has
suggested that the Council be adjourned until Friday
morning. If this is agreeable to the incoming President and
if there is no objection, the meeting will be adjourned until
Friday morning at 10.30. The representative of Denmark,
who will be the next President of the Security Council, has
signified to me that this is agreeable to him.

139. The peoples of the world base their judgements on
deeds, and not on eloquent statements. And we ask the
United States Ambassador: “Now do you explain not the

The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

13

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATlONS

United
Notions
publicationr.mey
the world.
Consult
your
bookstore
or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

be

PUBLICATIONS
obtained
or write

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
der
Nations
Unies
sent
d4poritaires
du monde
entier.
Informer-vous
Notions
Units,
Section
des ventes,
New York

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Las publicociones
en todar
porter
Ventos,

Litho

in U.N.

Nucva

PUBLICACIONES
de
del

York

from bookstores
to: United
Notions,

DES

NATIONS

and

distributors
Sales
Section,

throughout
New York

UNIES

en vente
dons
les libroiries
et les ogencer
aupr&s
de votre
librairie
ou adresrez-vous
L:
ov Gen&ve.

DE LAS NACIONES

Ias Nocioncr
Unidos
est6n
mundo.
Conrulte
a IV librero

en vento
o dirijore

UNtDAS
en librerios
a: Naciones

y ccuos dirtribuidorar
Unidas,
Secci6n

de

o Gincbra.

Price: $U.S.

0.50 (or equivnlent

in other

currencies)

06042-December

1970--2,100
