S/2016/352

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 April 2016
Original: English

Letter dated 15 April 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
As requested by the Security Council in its resolution 2279 (2016), I have the
honour to transmit options for the deployment of a United Nations police
contribution to increase the United Nations capacity to monitor the security
situation, promote the respect of human rights and advance the rule of law, in
compliance with the United Nations human rights due diligence policy (see annex).
I should be grateful if you could bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

16-06232 (E)

200416

*1606232*

220416

S/2016/352

Annex
Options for the deployment of a United Nations police contribution
1.
By its resolution 2279 (2016), the Security Council requested me to present
within 15 days, in consultation with the Government of Burundi and in coordination
with the African Union, options for the deployment of a United Nations police
contribution to increase the United Nations capacity to monitor the security
situation, promote the respect of human rights and advance the rule of law, in
compliance with the United Nations human rights due diligence policy.
United Nations engagement in Burundi
2.
In response to the political crisis in Burundi, in November 2015 the Security
Council adopted resolution 2248 (2015), in which the Council requested me, inter
alia, to update the Security Council within 15 days, including by presenting options
on the future presence of the United Nations in Burundi, and then regularly on the
situation in Burundi, in particular on security and on violations and abuses of human
rights and incitement to violence or hatred against different groups in Burundian
society. The Council also invited me to deploy a team in Burundi to coordinate and
work with the Government of Burundi, the African Union and other partners to
assess the situation and develop options to address political and security concerns.
3.
Pursuant to resolution 2248 (2015), I submitted a letter dated 1 December
2015 to the President of the Security Council (S/2015/926), in which I outlined
options for the future United Nations presence in Burundi. The options included the
deployment of a multidimensional integrated peacekeeping operation under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations and a fully -fledged integrated
special political mission. In the same letter, I informed the President that I would
proceed with the deployment of a support team to my Special Adviser, as mandated
by the Council in paragraph 7 of resolution 2248 (2015).
4.
In its resolution 2279 (2016), the Security Council requested me to enhance
the United Nations engagement in Burundi by strengthening the team of my Special
Adviser in order to work with the Government of Burundi and other concerned
stakeholders to support the inter-Burundian dialogue, as referred to in paragraph 5
of the resolution, and in the areas of security and rule of law.
5.
The existing United Nations political engagement in Burundi aims at
peacefully resolving the current political crisis in the country. Any United Nations
police contribution would be in support of that effort. The objective of a United
Nations police contribution would therefore be to help to create an environment
conducive to political dialogue by averting a further deterioration of the security
situation and decreasing the occurrence of human rights violations.
6.
A United Nations police contribution would be an integral part of the United
Nations political strategy and could have implications for the type of future United
Nations presence in Burundi, the options therefor I outlined in my letter of
1 December 2015.
Context
7.
A credible and inclusive dialogue process remains the only way to peacefully
resolve the current crisis in Burundi. So far, however, there has been no tangible

2/14

16-06232

S/2016/352

progress in launching such a process. The political situation in the country therefore
remains at an impasse. In this regard, I have welcomed as an encouraging
development the appointment by the East African Community of the former
President of the United Republic of Tanzania, Benjamin Mkapa, as facilitator to
support the mediation efforts of the East African Community under th e leadership of
the President of Uganda, Yoweri Museveni. I also take note of the request in
paragraph 7 of resolution 2279 (2016) for the United Nations, through the good
offices of my Special Adviser, to support the inter-Burundian dialogue, as referred
to in paragraph 5 of the resolution, and in that regard to coordinate and work with
the East African Community-led, African Union-endorsed Mediator and his
Facilitator, as well as with the high-level delegation from the African Union, and to
provide technical and substantive support to the mediation.
8.
Since the onset of the political crisis early in 2015, there have been numerous
reports of serious human rights violations by the security forces, including the
National Police of Burundi, the military and intelligence services, members of the
Imbonerakure youth group and unidentified armed movements. The security
situation in Burundi remains alarmingly precarious. Although incidents of hand
grenade attacks on public venues peaked late in February, attacks t argeting military
and police personnel, including assassinations and abductions, have increased.
Sporadic attacks by armed groups have also continued.
9.
While extrajudicial killings have declined in the past two months, reports
indicate a rising trend in enforced disappearances, arbitrary arrests, illegal detention
and ill-treatment and torture. A sharp deterioration in the security situation, with
serious implications for the human rights situation, intercommunal cohesion and
regional stability, remains a persistent risk. Reports of human rights violations and
abuses, including those committed during security and cordon and search operations
and in the wake of incidents of public disorder, have increasingly undermined
public confidence in the role of the national police in maintaining the rule of law
and prompted allegations by some of an ongoing politicization of policing.
10. Established in 2004 by the merger of several security institutions and the
integration of former members of the Burundian armed forces and other armed
groups, the police force expanded from 2,000 to 18,000 service personnel. The large
size of the force, the incomplete integration of a large number of former combatants
and the force’s limited organizational and operational capacity have hampered the
establishment of democratic civilian oversight. Weak internal accountability
mechanisms hinder both the identification and the sanctioning of misconduct,
contributing to a pattern of impunity.
Consultations with the Government of Burundi
11. My Special Adviser has held extensive consultations with the Government of
Burundi on options for a United Nations police contribution. In addition to the
consultations with my Special Adviser, the Government has made its views known
in two written communications: a letter dated 7 April 2016 (see enclosure I) and a
letter addressed to me from the Permanent Representative of Burundi dated 13 April
2016 (see S/2016/344, annex). In the letter of 7 April, the Government expressed its
reservations with regard to any “international armed presence”, adding that the
Government and the people of Burundi would not be in agreement with any large
armed United Nations police presence. In the letter of 13 April, it is st ated that the

16-06232

3/14

S/2016/352

Government was ready to receive on its soil around 20 unarmed police experts to
provide support to the Burundian national police and welcomed United Nations
support in the form of logistics and, above all, capacity-building in 13 specified
areas.
Coordination with the African Union
12. Pursuant to the request of the Security Council and in response to a note
verbale dated 6 April from the Secretariat, the African Union Commission, in a note
verbale dated 11 April 2016, emphasized the need for close coordination and
collaboration between the African Union human rights observers and
military/security experts and any United Nations police contribution in Burundi.
Against that background, the African Union requested that the Secretariat consid er
modalities through which the United Nations would assist the African Union in
completing the deployment of and providing support to its human rights observers
and military/security experts so that the strength agreed upon with the Government
of Burundi could be reached. It also specified that such support could include
communications and other equipment, mobility and co -location, which would
maximize the use of available resources as well as facilitate mandate
implementation. A copy of the note verbale is provided in enclosure II.
Strategic objective and tasks for the deployment of a United Nations
police contribution
13. Considering the stalled political process and persisting political tensions, the
prevailing low-intensity conflict and the fluid threat environment, targeted human
rights violations and continued displacement of the population, a United Nations
police contribution should be viewed as contributing to a preventive effort aimed at
mitigating the risk of further deterioration. The deployment would enhance United
Nations capacity to maintain situational awareness; deepen analysis of the security
situation and promote respect for human rights; and inform continued contingency
planning and any future review of the United Nations strategy for Burundi.
Information, including on potential sources of conflict and risks of atrocity crimes,
would be reported systematically to the Security Council in a timely manner to
enable the Council to respond to any further deterioration of the situation in
Burundi, as a form of deterrence and prevention. But a police deployment cannot be
a substitute for political engagement aimed at launching a credible and inclusive
dialogue process.
14. It is important to acknowledge what can and cannot be achieved with any
United Nations police contribution. The key shortcomings of the national police
cannot be resolved without addressing the underlying political problems, which
relate to how governance is exercised in the country, including in the area of
security. For this reason, previous efforts aimed at police reform have had a limited
impact. Recently, international efforts to provide techn ical assistance to the police
have been suspended by key donors. Addressing the political and rule of law issues
requires strengthening legal frameworks and an independent judiciary, enhancing
civilian democratic oversight mechanisms, ensuring accountabili ty for serious
human rights violations and instilling an institutional culture of respect for human
rights and the rule of law, all of which will have to be considered further within the
context of broader international support to strengthen justice and se curity sector
governance. The building of the national police as an impartial, professional and

4/14

16-06232

S/2016/352

reliable police service, with sustainable systems and processes, is a long -term
undertaking that requires strong political will from the Government and needs to be
addressed in a broader rule of law context.
15. The deployment of a police contribution would build on the African Union
deployment and would be progressive and scalable in scope. The deployment should
form part of an overall response of the internatio nal community to address the crisis
in Burundi, which includes contingency planning, the modalities of which are
updated regularly. Any significant deterioration of or improvement in the situation
would require a change of strategy and transformation of th e international response,
including the United Nations presence on the ground. However, the deployment
would not be sufficient to resolve the crisis. It would have a very limited effect on
public order management and would not be able to provide an adequat e protection
of civilians response in the absence of a more robust mandate to use all necessary
means.
16. Full cooperation of the Government, as well as other national stakeholders,
would be a precondition for the success of any police contribution, inclu ding with
regard to access throughout the country to relevant facilities, such as detention
centres and courts, and access to relevant stakeholders, as required.
17. The deployment of United Nations police personnel would require an updated
security risk assessment, on the basis of which the requirements for ensuring the
safety and security of the personnel and installations would be determined. On the
basis of prior United Nations experience, this could potentially include the
deployment of additional United Nations uniformed personnel, notwithstanding and
without prejudice to the responsibility of the Government to ensure the safety and
security of United Nations personnel and installations.
18. In line with the United Nations human rights due diligence policy, United
Nations support to uniformed State authorities would require an assessment of the
risks involved in providing or not providing such support, in particular, the risk of
the law enforcement agencies committing grave violations of human rights l aw.
Under the current circumstances, reputational risks arising from a perceived
association of United Nations police personnel working alongside national
authorities would also need to be seriously considered.
Tasks
19. In accordance with the functions identified in resolution 2279 (2016) for a
United Nations police contribution, the three interrelated lines of activity to be
performed by United Nations police personnel are set out below. In performing the
tasks, United Nations police personnel would work in close cooperation with the
existing United Nations presence, in particular the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), as well as the African Union. The
lines of activity are:
(a)

Monitor the security situation:

(i)

Monitor police and other law enforcement agencies;

(ii) Monitor security incidents and human rights violations in close
cooperation with United Nations human rights monitors;
(iii) Collect, verify and analyse information in its areas of operation;

16-06232

5/14

S/2016/352

(iv) Generate reliable situational awareness;
(v) Report on any restrictions of the police contribution’s freedom of
movement or other impediments to the fulfilment of its mandate;
(b)

Promote respect for human rights:

(i) Participate in collecting information on human rights violations, in
coordination with OHCHR;
(ii) Support OHCHR in investigating security incidents and human rights
violations;
(iii) Mentor and advise the National Police of Burundi in accordance with the
activities permitted under paragraph 9 of the United Nations human rights due
diligence policy and engage with civil society, particularly members of
vulnerable groups;
(c)

Advance the rule of law:

(i) Investigate security incidents and human rights violations (including the
provision of specialized investigative expertise on forensics, DNA and
firearms);
(ii) Training of the National Police of Burundi in accordance with activities
permitted under paragraph 9 of the United Nations human rights due diligence
policy;
(iii) Monitor prosecutions and court proceedings;
(iv) Monitor detention facilities, conditions and legality of detention and
treatment of detainees.
20. The extent to which these functions can be executed will be dictated by the
size and scope of the option selected, the quality of the personnel deployed and the
support of the national authorities. Advancing the rule of law or monitoring
detention facilities and court proceedings will require highly skilled specialists.
21. In accordance with resolution 2279 (2016), any United Nations police
advisory, training or other capacity-building functions would include activities that
are intended to promote the compliance of the National Police of Burundi with
human rights law, subject to a risk assessment, as noted in paragrap h 18 above, to
ensure compliance with the United Nations human rights due diligence policy, such
as:
(a) Training or sensitization of the personnel of the National Police of
Burundi on international humanitarian and human rights law;
(b) Advice on and review of Burundi’s legislation and codes and policies of
the National Police of Burundi to strengthen its implementation of and compliance
with human rights laws and standards and to foster democratic governance;
(c) Capacity support to establish effective internal and external
accountability mechanisms of the National Police of Burundi to combat impunity
for serious human rights abuses;

6/14

16-06232

S/2016/352

(d) Engagement with the National Police of Burundi to promote compliance
with humanitarian, human rights and refugee law or negotiate humanitarian access
and carry out relief operations.
Options for a police contribution to the United Nations presence
22. The options set out below present the Security Council with a range of
possibilities for a United Nations police contribution, which differ considerably in
their impact, scale, focus and degree of reputational risk to the Organization. The
options could also be considered as a phased deployment, depending on the
evolving situation on the ground. Subject to a decision by the Council on any of the
below options, further detailed planning on the exact size, composition and
reporting arrangements, as well as rigorous risk assessments, including a security
risk assessment, would be required. In order to enhance the effecti veness of the
below options, guarantees of security and access, including unimpeded access for
police and civilian monitors to places of detention and individual detainees, should
be requested by the Council and provided by the Government of Burundi.
Option 1: United Nations police protection and monitoring presence
23. The first option would be a police deployment, which, in addition to the three
key tasks set out in paragraph 19 above, would provide visible patrolling, including
in hotspot areas, and an expanded monitoring and investigation range and produce
regular reports to the Security Council. The police contribution would include
formed police units. However, any meaningful contribution by formed police units
to public order management through support to national counterparts may not be
possible in the current context, in compliance with the United Nations human rights
due diligence policy. Enabling the units to take action to protect civilians
unilaterally would therefore require an executive p olicing mandate until such time
as operational support to the national law enforcement agencies was possible under
the human rights due diligence policy. In addition, formed police units are not
equipped to respond to military-type threats, including from armed groups.
24. Subject to a more detailed assessment, this option envisages the deployment of
approximately 3,000 police personnel, including those in formed police units. It
should be reinforced by a small rule-of-law element, as indicated in paragraph 20
above. The presence would deploy and operate in parallel with the African Union
and the existing United Nations presence in Burundi, requiring close coordination to
ensure coherence. This deployment is the only option that could provide some
degree of physical protection to the population against increased threats.
25. A United Nations police presence of this size would require considerable
resources and lead time to generate such a high number of police personnel,
particularly officers with the appropriate language skills and the specialized
expertise needed to execute the functions outlined in paragraph 19 above. On the
basis of previous experience, it would take months or longer to generate this
contribution. An appropriate Security Council mandate, the consent of the
Government of Burundi to deploy and the Government’s continued cooperation to
ensure the necessary access would be required.

16-06232

7/14

S/2016/352

Option 2: United Nations police monitoring presence
26. The second option would be the deployment of United Nations individual
police officers, together with the OHCHR presence in Burundi. They would perform
the three interrelated lines of activity set out in paragraph 19. The United Nations
police personnel would be deployed in Bujumbura and four existing United Nations
regional offices (Bujumbura Rural, Gitega, Ngozi and Makamba) to allow coverage
of all 18 provinces in Burundi with a view to ensuring sufficient situational
awareness and early warning capacity.
27. In order to maximize the United Nations capacity to promote respect for
human rights, the police deployment should be combined with an increased OHCHR
presence on the ground to step up efforts to monitor, report and follow up on human
rights violations, as well as rule-of-law specialists, as indicated in paragraph 20
above. Coordination with and support for the work of other entities, in particular the
African Union, would be critical, in full respect of their respective mandates.
28. A further possibility under this option is for the United Nations police
contribution to be co-located with the African Union human rights observers and
military experts (current approved strength is 100 each) to leverage existing
capacities and comparative advantages. The establishment of a small police and
civilian capacity would be required to process and analyse the information
collected, as well as a small planning capacity to plan for contingencies in case of a
deterioration of the situation on the ground or a possible scaling-up of the United
Nations engagement based on progress in the political process.
29. Subject to a more detailed assessment, this option envisages the deployment of
228 United Nations police personnel working together with the OHCHR office in
Burundi and possibly co-located with the African Union deployment. This option
could expand progressively to include the deployment of more police personnel as
the situation warrants.
30. This option is likely to have a positive impact on the situational a wareness of
the United Nations and provide early warning capacity to enable national, regional
and international stakeholders to address emerging security and human rights
concerns. It would not provide any physical protection to the population. It carries
considerable risk for the United Nations, including exposure to a higher threat level,
and it would not respond to possible public expectations of protection.
Option 3: United Nations police assessment presence
31. The third option is a smaller deployment with a focus on strategic engagement
with and assessment of the National Police of Burundi. The presence would assess
the operational and institutional limitations of the national police, oversight
weaknesses and issues of accountability, and would identify strategies for future
United Nations police engagement. It would provide a detailed diagnostic of the
shortfalls of the national police and an analysis of entry points and
recommendations for a potential further United Nations police contribution. In
doing this, the police presence would use its contacts within the national police and
other government entities to help to bring about concrete and measurable
improvements in the area of respect for human rights and the rule of law by State
authorities, in particular the national police. On the basis of the recommendations, a
scalable and phased deployment could be envisioned in the future, subject to the

8/14

16-06232

S/2016/352

appropriate Security Council mandate and the consent of the Gover nment. This
option would initially be deployed for three months, after which I would report back
to the Council, or earlier should a deterioration of the security situation so require,
in order to provide the Council with the information necessary to reass ess the
security and human rights situation and the configuration of the United Nations
police contribution on the ground.
32. With a light footprint of between 20 and 50 police personnel, this option
would entail only a limited and periodic presence outside the capital region and
could only provide a limited capacity to fulfil the three lines of activity outlined in
resolution 2279 (2016). However, it has the advantage of flexibility and swift
deployment. The reputational risks associated with United Nati ons police personnel
focusing on engagement with the Burundian police, which could be perceived as
partial, would need to be assessed and mitigating measures identified. This option
would also not respond to expectations to provide protection.
Support implications
33. United Nations support arrangements in Burundi are currently configured to
support a small Bujumbura-based presence of the Office of the Special Adviser.
Under the options proposed, this support platform would need to be strengthened
and, for two of the options, significantly so.
34. As a landlocked country with correspondingly long supply lines, Burundi
presents a logistical challenge. At a minimum, and depending on the prevailing
security situation, the first two options would require t he identification and
preparation of multiple new locations around the country to accommodate an
expanded presence, including the provision of offices, transportation,
communications, information technology and medevac capacity.
35. Should formed police units be authorized, the scope of requirements would
expand significantly to include the full range of support services and capacities
normally associated with them, including a camp construction and maintenance
programme, the delivery of rations and fuel, strategic airlifts, vehicle maintenance
and reimbursements for contingent-owned equipment and personnel. The
development of infrastructure for an expanded formed police presence, as proposed
in option 1, in multiple locations would imply a long lead time a nd would need to
be phased, along with police generation timelines. In addition, centralized capacities
in Bujumbura would need to be strengthened, including medical facilities,
warehousing and a logistics base, contract oversight and administrative functi ons.
Back-office support would continue to be provided by the Regional Service Centre
in Entebbe, Uganda, with capacities calibrated in accordance with the option
proposed.
36. In leveraging the capacities and comparative advantages of the African Union,
OHCHR and a possible United Nations police contribution, I have considered the
request of the African Union and believe that it is important to the broader success
of our collective efforts that the efforts of the African Union should be reinforced by
predictable and sustainable operational support. The Security Council could
consider mandating the United Nations to provide targeted logistical support to the
African Union, in addition to establishing a United Nations police contribution. If
requested to do so, the Secretariat would develop proposals on the most appropriate
means of supporting these distinct but related presences in line with United Nations

16-06232

9/14

S/2016/352

standards and practices and in strict compliance with the United Nations human
rights due diligence policy.
Conclusion
37. As the Security Council considers the above options for a United Nations
police contribution, I will proceed with strengthening the team of my Special
Adviser, as requested by the Council in paragraph 10 of resolution 2279 (2016), i n
order to work with the Government of Burundi and other concerned stakeholders to
support the inter-Burundian dialogue, as referred to in paragraph 5 of the resolution,
and in the areas of security and rule of law.

10/14

16-06232

S/2016/352

Enclosure I
[Original: French]

Letter dated 7 April 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Burundi addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the Government of Burundi wishes to
reiterate its willingness to cooperate fully with the United Nations count ry team in
Burundi and with the new and dynamic team led by your Special Adviser, Mr. Jamal
Benomar, some members of which are already working on the ground in Bujumbura.
I should like to take this ideal opportunity to take due note of the offer to deploy
a United Nations police contribution, contained in paragraph 10 of Security Council
resolution 2279 (2016), unanimously adopted on 1 April 2016, which refers explicitly
to options to be formulated in consultation with the Government of Burundi.
In that connection, the Government of Burundi remains at your disposal,
through your Special Adviser, to discuss and agree on the nature, size and duties of
this United Nations police presence in Burundi. In this regard, as I reminded the
Security Council on 1 April 2016 when resolution 2279 (2016) was adopted, and,
most importantly, wish to recall now once again, the Government of Burundi
emphasizes that the option of an unarmed international presence was among the
recommendations of the most recent Summit of Heads of State of the African Union
in Addis Ababa, the high-level delegation of the African Union composed of five
Presidents that visited Bujumbura on 25 and 26 March 2016, the meeting of the
Committee of Defence Ministers of the International Conference on t he Great Lakes
Region, held on 10 February 2016 in Luanda, and the Government of Burundi,
through the country’s parliament, acting on behalf of its electorate.
These national, regional and continental stakeholders have all expressed their
opposition to a large, international armed presence in Burundi and their preference for
the deployment of unarmed experts and human rights observers. It is solely this
unarmed option, which is the choice of the African Union, the region and the
Government of Burundi, that we intend to discuss with your team in more detail, in a
spirit of openness and, above all, with strict adherence to the sacrosanct principle of
the national sovereignty of Burundi, as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
to which Burundi subscribes. Should any large, armed police presence be deployed by
the United Nations, this will be without the agreement of the Government of Burundi
and its people; it constitutes our red line, as reiterated by His Excellency Pierre
Nkurunziza during the talks held in Bujumbura on 23 April 2016.
It should be remembered that Burundi has worked closely with the United
Nations since achieving independence in 1962 with the invaluable support of the
Organization. The Government of Burundi will of course continue t o cooperate
constructively with the United Nations and its teams in Bujumbura. We must
continue to work more closely in a spirit of openness to consolidate peace and
stability in our country and the region with a view to securing a better and more
stable future for our country.
Accept, Sir, the assurances of my highest consideration.
(Signed) Albert Shingiro
Ambassador
Permanent Representative

16-06232

11/14

S/2016/352

Enclosure II
Note verbale dated 11 April 2016 from the African
Union Commission
The Commission of the African Union presents its compliments to the United
Nations Office to the African Union in Addis Ababa, and has the honour to
acknowledge receipt of the note verbale of 6 April 2016 regarding the situation in
Burundi.
The Commission wishes to welcome the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 2279 (2016) on 1 April 2016. Building on the earlier pronouncements of
the Security Council on the situation in Burundi, including in Council resolution
2248 (2015) of 12 November 2015, this resolution marks a new and significant step
in the efforts of the international community aimed at facilitating the search for an
early and lasting solution to the crisis facing Burundi.
The Commission notes the provisions of paragraph 5 of resolutio n 2279
(2016), in which the Security Council urged the Government of Burundi and all
stakeholders committed to a peaceful solution, both those who are in Burundi and
those outside the country, to extend full cooperation to the East African Community led and African Union-endorsed Mediator and his Facilitator in order to urgently
agree on a timetable and on a list of participants of an inclusive and genuine
inter-Burundian dialogue, and highlighted the importance of the decision by the
African Union Peace and Security Council to hold such a dialogue outside Burundi,
in a venue to be determined by the mediation. This reinforces the repeated calls by
the Peace and Security Council for the early convening of a truly inclusive and
genuine inter-Burundian dialogue to overcome the serious challenges confronting
the country, preserve the gains made thanks to the August 2000 Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi, and lay the foundation for lasting peace,
security and stability in Burundi.
The Commission wishes to recall that, in pursuance of the relevant
communiqués of the African Union Peace and Security Council, the African Union
has deployed to Burundi human rights observers and military experts. They are
mandated to, respectively: (a) monitor the human rights situation on the ground,
report violations of human rights and international humanitarian law, and undertake
local conflict prevention and resolution activities; and (b) verify the process of
disarming militias and other armed groups. The deployment was undertaken as part
of a comprehensive strategy for addressing the challenges at hand in Burundi, as
articulated by the Peace and Security Council, including the imperative need for
dialogue and full support to the East African Community-led mediation.
To date, the Commission has deployed 32 human rights observers and
15 military experts. Steps are under way to deploy an additional 15 human rights
observers and 19 military/security experts (including 6 police officers). The
objective is to reach as early as possible a total strength of 200 personnel
(100 human rights observers and 100 military/security experts), as agreed upon with
the Government of Burundi during the visit of the African Union high-level
delegation to Bujumbura, conducted on 25 and 26 February 2016. The Com mission
notes with satisfaction the support conveyed on a number of occasions by the
Security Council for the deployment of the African Union human rights observers
and military/security experts.

12/14

16-06232

S/2016/352

The Commission notes that, in paragraph 10 of its resolution 2279 (2016), the
Security Council requested the Secretary-General, in consultation with the
Government of Burundi and in coordination with the African Union, to present
options for the deployment of a United Nations police contribution to increase the
United Nations capacity to monitor the security situation, promote the respect of
human rights and advance rule of law, in compliance with the human rights due
diligence policy on United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces.
The Commission welcomes the request made by the Council for the options for the
deployment of a United Nations police contribution to be presented in coordination
with the African Union. The Commission stresses that the objectives outlined in
resolution 2279 (2016) are similar to those being pursued by the African Union
human rights observers and military/security experts.
In this respect, and as part of the African Union-United Nations partnership in
the area of peace and security and consistent with the provisions of Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, the Commission wishes to underline the need for
close coordination and collaboration between the African Union human rights
observers and military/security experts and any United Nations police contribution
in Burundi. Specific modalities could be identified and agreed upon, building on
earlier relevant collaborative and joint endeavour s between the two organizations in
the area of peace and security.
Against this background, the Commission could be grateful if, within the
framework of the options to be submitted to the Security Council, the Secretariat
could consider modalities through which the United Nations might assist the African
Union in completing the deployment of its human rights observers and
military/security experts so that the strength agreed upon with the Government of
Burundi can be reached. It is worth highlighting that, in resolution 2279 (2016), the
Council called for the full and speedy deployment of the African Union
military/security experts and human rights observers.
The Commission would also be grateful if the United Nations could, similarly,
give consideration to the provision of support on the ground to the African Union
human rights observers and military/security experts. This could include
communications and other equipment, mobility and co -location, which would
maximize the use of available resources as well as facilitate mandate
implementation. Furthermore, the Commission stands ready to examine with the
United Nations other modalities for enhanced collaboration and cooperation,
including with respect to reporting.
The Commission strongly believes that close collaboration and coordination,
as broadly outlined above, will ensure increased international presence; make it
possible to more effectively support the Burundian stakeholders in the search for a
solution to the challenges confronting their country; and contribute to the creation
of conditions conducive to the early holding of the inclusive dialogue called for by
the African Union and the United Nations and to be conducted under the auspices of
the East African Community. More generally, the proposed collaboration and
coordination are in line with the conclusions of the report of the High -level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see A/70/95-S/2015/446), which called for
a deeper and more collaborative partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union.

16-06232

13/14

S/2016/352

The Commission looks forward to regular updates by the United Nations on
the follow-up to the request made by the Security Council in its resolution 2279
(2016). The Commission reiterates its commitment, should the Council agree on a
United Nations police presence in Burundi, to identify further practical steps
through which the two organizations can enhance their collaboration, including with
respect to the generation of police personnel, as part of th e promotion of a political
solution to the crisis and support to the East African Community-led mediation.

14/14

16-06232
