United Nations

S/PV.6108

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6108th meeting
Tuesday, 21 April 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Heller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Tiendrébéogo
Mr. La Yifan
Mr. Guillermet
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Gouider
Mr. Churkin
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Mugoya
Sir John Sawers
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Mediation and settlement of disputes
Report of the Secretary-General on enhancing mediation and its support
activities (S/2009/189)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-30825 (E)

*0930825*

S/PV.6108

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Mediation and settlement of disputes
Report of the Secretary-General on enhancing
mediation and its support activities (S/2009/189)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Algeria, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Canada, Cuba,
the Czech Republic, Egypt, Finland, Indonesia, Kenya,
Liechtenstein, Morocco, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Senegal, South Africa,
Switzerland, the United Republic of Tanzania and
Uruguay, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/189, which contains the report of the

2

Secretary-General on enhancing mediation and its
support activities.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Pascoe: Last September, the Security
Council met under the leadership of the President of
the Republic of Burkina Faso for a high-level debate
on mediation (see S/PV.5979). During that debate, the
Security Council identified many of the key issues and
challenges facing the international community in
resolving disputes peacefully. In its presidential
statement (S/PRST/2008/36), the Council invited the
Secretary-General to provide a report on
“mediation and its support activities, which takes
into account experiences of the United Nations
and other key actors, and makes recommendations
for enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations
mediation”.
The report before members responds to that and
benefited from a broad consultation process. In
addition to internal consultations, the report drew on
the experiences and views of Security Council
members, individual Member States, all those acting as
mediators, regional and subregional organizations, and
non-governmental organizations. It attempts to
synthesize many years of United Nations experience in
mediating conflict both between and within States.
The report provides an opportunity to take stock
of efforts under way in the Secretariat, under the lead
of the Department of Political Affairs (DPA), to bolster
and professionalize the mediation capabilities of the
United Nations. The Secretary-General has called for a
more proactive use of preventive diplomacy by the
United Nations, and our ability to support and carry out
mediation is central to that vision. The release of the
report also coincides with critically important efforts
by Member States and the Secretariat to examine the
present and the future of United Nations peacekeeping.
These issues are, of course, closely related. A
United Nations that is more effective in the practice of
mediation will be more adept both at heading off
conflicts before they become full-blown crises and at
bringing such crises to a peaceful and lasting end
before it is necessary to resort to peacekeeping.
Effective mediation can help us to arrive at sound
agreements that can be successfully implemented, and

09-30825

S/PV.6108

then assist the facilitation and dialogue needed
throughout the later phases of the effort.
Mediation must continue as a central part of the
process of peacekeeping and peacebuilding. For
example, the head of the United Nations peacebuilding
mission in Sierra Leone, Michael von der Schulenburg,
has been busy in recent weeks encouraging dialogue to
defuse the most recent political tensions there. We
might also witness the efforts of Special Representative
Doss in the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and former
President Obasanjo to bring peace to the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Strengthening
mediation capacity is also an important objective to
keep in mind, therefore, as we strive collectively at the
United Nations to do a better job in the area of
peacebuilding.
I would like to turn to some of our key initiatives
and recent efforts in the mediation field. These are part
of a conscious effort to reshape the Department of
Political Affairs into a more action- and field-oriented
operation that can move more quickly and at an earlier
stage to help prevent conflicts from spreading and to
deliver faster and more reliable support to peace
processes. As directed by the Secretary-General, we are
working to put in place the expertise, financial
resources, partnerships and knowledge base to attain
those objectives. We deeply appreciate the support we
have received from members of the Council and other
Member States for those efforts.
The political support and financial resources that
Member States have provided through the regular
budget and voluntary contributions have enabled us to
strengthen our regional divisions and to establish the
Mediation Support Unit (MSU). The Unit has been
further complemented with a standby team of
mediation experts able to deploy to negotiations around
the world on short notice and to provide advice and
assistance to mediators on such themes as peace
process design, security arrangements, power-sharing,
wealth-sharing, natural resources management and
constitution-making.
In the past year, DPA has provided mediation
support to more than 20 peace processes, with the
MSU exerting a multiplier effect on those efforts. We
have striven to take a flexible and innovative approach
to peacemaking. We have made our technical advisory
services available to United Nations envoys and

09-30825

representatives, of course, but also to Member States,
regional organizations and others that may be leading a
mediation effort. We also try to provide high-quality
technical support in a timely manner. Experts can now
be dispatched to a mediation scene in days, not weeks.
Those innovations are already making a difference in
our ability to provide real support to peace processes.
Let me provide some concrete examples.
In Somalia, Special Representative Ould
Abdallah has spearheaded a mediation effort that many
observers see as the most promising effort in years
aimed at bringing about political reconciliation in that
country. We provided close support to those efforts in
working with the parties to develop the 26 October
2008 Djibouti Agreement.
If I might digress for a moment, I would like to
mention to Council members and to others in the
audience that, on Thursday, 23 April, we are holding a
donors conference in Brussels to follow through on
resolution 1863 (2009) on support for Somalia. As
Council members know, the conference aims to raise
funds for the Somali security forces and for the African
Union Mission in Somalia. I hope members will urge
their Governments to attend at a high level and to
provide generous support.
In the Central African Republic, our political
mission on the ground played a key role in carrying out
an all-inclusive national political dialogue. DPA’s
training to the preparatory committee contributed to the
success of that dialogue.
In Cyprus, we deployed facilitators to the
technical working groups during the preparatory phase
of the talks and continue to work closely with
Alexander Downer, Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral, including technical support on power-sharing
and property issues.
In Nepal, we continue to support Karin Landgren,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, with
mediation and facilitation assistance in the
implementation phases of the peace agreement.
In Iraq, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral De Mistura is leading an increasingly visible
role in fostering political reconciliation, supported
from New York by a variety of expertise on issues
relating to the disputed internal boundaries, Kirkuk,
water-sharing and the constitution.

3

S/PV.6108

We also have supported missions led by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations in Darfur,
Kosovo and the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
work either to reach peace agreements or to move
through the incredibly difficult task of implementing
peace accords. It is important to note that United
Nations political mediation efforts are being carried out
not only in classic peacemaking situations, such as in
Cyprus or the Western Sahara, but also through the
day-to-day work of the political missions in the field.
These missions spend much of their time trying to
broker dialogues and to use preventive diplomacy to
put out the fires that arise.
Our services have also been put at the disposal of
regional organizations that are in the lead of political
processes. In Kenya, for example, where former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan led the effort, our team
assisted him in preparing the mediation effort and on
elections, security and constitutional issues. Since
September 2008, in the Comoros we have been
supporting African Union efforts on an inter-Comorian
dialogue.
We have also found that a regional presence can
be an effective way to mediate disputes. Through the
United Nations Office for West Africa, we have been
able to work with the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union on
such issues as Mauritania and Guinea, without the
deployment of a stand-alone mission. Most recently,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Djinnit has undertaken a preventive mission to Togo to
consult with authorities there on recent developments
in the country. That is part of our ongoing work with
ECOWAS and regional leaders to prevent conflicts in
the region.
Our Central Asian office in Ashgabat is leading
an effort to help the five countries resolve tensions
over water issues, among other issues of regional
concern. A key role is being played by a specialist on
natural resource management from the MSU standby
team. The effectiveness of these regional efforts has
encouraged our suggestion to establish a regional
presence in the Central African region, as requested by
members of the African Group.
It is important that our ability to move quickly to
mediate disputes has been improved by the
establishment of a small mediation start-up budget,

4

funded by donors. DPA’s modest travel budget cannot
sustain the emergency dispatch of crisis prevention
teams. We were able to deploy and sustain a small team
in Madagascar to mediate the current crisis in the
country; send envoys such as Assistant SecretaryGeneral Menkerios to support regional efforts on
Zimbabwe; or get former President Obasanjo’s mission
to the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo up
and running in the midst of the fighting with those
extrabudgetary funds. Advance planning and ready
resources are key to effective early mediation when
trouble develops.
The kinds of mediation activities I have described
today are now routinely expected by our envoys and
representatives. Our Department has traditionally
worked hard to meet these demands. However, the
creation of the Mediation Support Unit and its standby
team of mediation experts has given a tremendous
boost to those efforts by providing readily available,
in-house mediation expertise. Presently, most of our
funding comes from the generosity of donors, which
continues to be of critical importance.
Our challenges in the mediation of conflicts are
shared by the entire international community and it is
the responsibility of all of us to act in concert to solve
them. To do this, it is essential that we have
partnerships
with
Member
States,
regional
organizations and non-governmental organizations.
Regional organizations are often best placed to
take the lead in mediation efforts, and some have a
wealth of mediation expertise in their own right. Where
requested, we have assisted in their mediation efforts
and in strengthening the mediation capacity of regional
organizations. In Africa, we have benefited from the
cooperation of the African Union, ECOWAS and the
Southern African Development Community (SADC) in
mediation efforts in Darfur, Zimbabwe, Kenya,
Madagascar, Guinea, Burundi and other areas.
I would like in particular to recognize the
outstanding efforts in extraordinarily difficult
circumstances of Djibril Bassolé, Joint African Union/
United Nations Chief Mediator for Darfur. We also
continue working closely with SADC, the African
Union and the Economic Community of Central
African States to build mediation capacity.
As one sign of our strong partnership with the
African Union, a couple of days ago we concluded a
joint assessment of our cooperation in two cases:

09-30825

S/PV.6108

Darfur and Kenya. That was a very productive meeting
and we are planning to follow up on our work together
on Somalia.
In Europe, we have made significant strides in
enhancing our mediation partnership with the European
Union (EU), including the Commission. We welcome
the recent discussions in the EU on developing its own
mediation capacity. We look forward to working with
all relevant regional actors, sharing expertise and
lessons
learned,
developing
joint
training
opportunities, and working together on the
establishment of a geographically diverse roster of
mediation experts.
We certainly recognize that many areas require
improvement. Mediation requires skill and knowledge,
but it can be a complex operation with its own
logistics, staffing and technical requirements. If envoys
are to succeed, they need more than just their
individual talents and experience. We are making a
systematic effort to support them in the planning and
management of peace processes.
Working with other parts of the United Nations
system, Member States, regional organizations and
non-governmental organizations, we are putting a
system in place that will include five levels of support
for envoys: mediation planning, which would include
assessment of requirements and mobilizing to meet
them; the development of a small pool of operationallevel on-call mediators to manage the day-to-day
functions of a mediation effort; the standby team of
mediation experts, which will continue for the next
year; the development of a small but reliable roster of
internal and external experts; and establishing a small
team of geographically diverse experienced senior
envoys to provide mediation advice.
We will also combine this specialized response
capability with a rigorous training curriculum for our
regional specialists. All political officers should have
basic training on aspects of mediation. United Nations
mediation capacities, its lessons learned and tools are
not proprietary information; they are available to all
who need them. Working together, we should promote
an understanding among Member States that United
Nations mediation, including good offices, facilitation
and dialogue, is a service offered by the SecretaryGeneral at all phases of a conflict. All Member States
should be comfortable requesting and utilizing this
service when required. We need to combine our

09-30825

capacity-building with confidence-building, that is,
confidence that United Nations mediation is an
impartial and effective tool for conflict resolution.
Reticence to involve outside actors has at times
translated into lost opportunities by Member States to
make use of what the United Nations has to offer. We
are here to help, but only if we allowed to do so.
The report makes it clear that the United Nations
does not have a monopoly on mediation. This also
applies to the accumulation of knowledge and best
practices on mediation. We have provided leadership in
developing a Web-based repository of information on
mediation, called the United Nations Peacemaker, but
we will need to work closely with our partners to
consolidate and disseminate this knowledge. This
online support tool for international peacemaking
professionals has over 800 documents, with more than
300 peace agreements, and 15 operational guidance
notes, with another 22 in development. United Nations
Peacemaker was developed on a limited budget and
will now need to be more properly maintained and
upgraded.
To be successful in our collective mediation
effort, we need to be constantly learning new lessons
and applying them. For this reason, we have put in
place a debriefing programme for senior envoys, which
allows us to capture the experiences that they have had.
We are also working on a peace agreement evaluation
project, which will look at factors in peace processes
and agreements that contribute to the sustainability of
peace. We are considering other innovative
programmes to take stock of lessons learned from
successful mediations and mediators. Again, I want to
note that these initiatives would not have been possible
without the support of Member State donors, and we
deeply appreciate their generosity.
In conclusion, I want to say that we have very
clearly heard the call of the Security Council and the
instruction of the Secretary-General to develop a more
rigorous and effective approach to mediation.
Mediation is a Charter activity of the United Nations
and must be carried out with the highest degree of
professionalism, transparency and preparation to
promote peace and security. We are deeply grateful for
the Council’s support to date and hope to continue to
earn it in the future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Pascoe for his briefing.

5

S/PV.6108

In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome this meeting of the Security
Council to address so topical an issue as that of
mediation and settlement of disputes. Mediation, quite
clearly, is a very cost-effective political method for the
international community to respond to conflict
situations. We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
having presented his first report on this topic
(S/2009/189), and of course to Under-SecretaryGeneral Pascoe for today’s comprehensive briefing and
for his efforts to enhance United Nations mediation
activities.
The description in the Secretary-General’s report
of the situation of United Nations mediation assistance
to parties to a conflict requires study and analysis, and
all the more so as a number of its provisions raise
several questions. Inter alia, it sets out the rather
overreaching objective of having a standing rapidresponse mediation capacity. There is a reference to the
formulation by the Department of Political Affairs of a
long-term programme to assist mediation efforts. We
believe that this aspect of the Secretariat’s plan
requires additional clarification, first and foremost as
regards sources of financing. We expect this long-term
programme not to involve allocating to the Department
additional resources from the regular budget in
addition to those provided by the relevant General
Assembly decisions.
The report legitimately notes that the United
Nations does not have a monopoly on mediation. The
use of regional agencies and arrangements is an
important mechanism provided for in Article 33 of the
United Nations Charter. In turn, Chapter VIII of the
Charter indicates to Member States the priority to be
given to resolving local disputes using those agencies
and arrangements before referring them to the Security
Council. A number of regional organizations have
accumulated significant mediation experience. The
United Nations should utilize this in its activities and
approach issues of mediation on the basis of the

6

principle of a judicious division of labour with regional
and subregional structures.
In addition to cooperation with the recognized
partners in this field, including the African Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the European Union, cooperation with
organizations actively accumulating experience, such
as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, is promising.
The work of a mediator requires great
craftsmanship and finesse. It is the result of
commitment, tact and knowledge of the historical,
cultural and other specificities of conflicts. We note
here the importance of a careful selection of United
Nations mediators on the basis of objective, universally
accepted criteria. One should approach this in a
balanced way, avoiding any excessive bias towards a
particular political or regional group. Quite clearly,
mediators’ activities should be carried out transparently
via the Security Council, and, when the Council has
provided them with a mandate, they should be
accountable to it.
In mediation, one cannot impose unilateral
decisions or provide any grounds to suspect the
mediator of any prejudice or bias in favour of one side
or the other. Failure by the mediator to fulfil even one
of those conditions unavoidably leads to the emergence
of problems. It is enough to recall the situation of the
settlement around Kosovo.
Experience in conflict prevention and resolution
clearly shows that only mediation, which does not use
force or the imposition of conditions to resolve a
conflict but rather aligns the parties’ positions and
searches for areas of agreement and mutually
acceptable solutions, stands any chance of success. On
the basis of these fundamental principles, the Russian
Federation participates in mediation activities and
actively supports such efforts by the United Nations
and other international and regional organizations.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): The
Vietnamese delegation thanks you, Sir, and the
Mexican presidency for taking the initiative of holding
this debate of the Council on the important topic of
mediation and the settlement of disputes. I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
comprehensive briefing.

09-30825

S/PV.6108

We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Cuba on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
The fact that this issue is enshrined in the Charter
testifies to the importance that the United Nations
attaches to the peaceful settlement of disputes and
conflicts, including through mediation. The increase in
the number of conflicts and their negative impact on
international peace, security and development, together
with the increase in the United Nations budget for
peacekeeping, makes conflict prevention and resolution
through mediation and the role of the United Nations in
this connection more necessary and urgent than ever.
We welcome the publication of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on mediation (S/2009/189), which we
believe will constitute a major step forward in
promoting mediation as an effective tool in resolving
disputes and conflicts. The Mediation Support Unit
had, by late 2008, supported 18 peace processes in the
world and, within the short period since its
establishment in 2006, has become a very important
tool for supporting the good offices and mediation
efforts conducted not only by the United Nations but
also by regional organizations. These efforts manifest
the increasingly prominent role that the United Nations
is assuming in mediation activities. Reaffirming our
support for the mediation activities of the United
Nations, we are of the view that, for those activities to
be effective, the following principles must be observed.
First, mediators’ in-depth knowledge and
understanding of the disputes and conflicts taking place
in their own regions and of the parties concerned,
including the parties’ interests and demands, both
legitimate and illegitimate or controversial, put them in
a better position to accurately analyse the situation and
come up with objective and realistic proposals that
may bring the sides together. To that end, regional and
subregional organizations and personalities should be
allowed and encouraged to participate and contribute.
We share the Secretary-General’s observation that
more attention should be paid to national and local
capacity-building with a view to enhancing local
actors’ mediating skills and abilities.
We commend the assistance extended by the
United Nations Mediation Support Unit to the African
Union (AU), the Southern African Development
Community, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the European Union in

09-30825

strengthening their mediation capacities. The United
Nation’s two-year work plan with the AU to build the
latter’s mediation capacity is an exemplary tool for
such cooperation, which should be further enhanced.
Secondly, coordination between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
mediation activities should be ensured with a view to
both enhancing effectiveness and avoiding unnecessary
duplication, waste of resources, unhealthy competition
or rivalry that may negate each other’s role and thus
hamper the common search for solutions to disputes
and conflicts. The history of mediating recent disputes
and conflicts in all major continents, from Africa to
Asia, America and Europe, further proves that,
whenever such coordination exists, success is achieved
and vice versa.
Thirdly, mediation efforts should focus on
addressing the root causes of conflicts with due
attention paid to the need to help the country or
countries concerned overcome the conditions of
absolute poverty and the lack of socio-economic
development that rank high among the root causes of
disputes and conflicts. In the view of my delegation,
this approach not only helps find appropriate solutions
for each specific dispute or conflict, but also avoids its
hasty dramatization, which could lead to the
unnecessary application of measures of last resort, such
as those invoked under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations, which many States Members have
pointed to as a cause for concern.
Last but not least, mediation, as a means of
peacefully settling disputes, must be in conformity
with the fundamental principles of objectivity, fairness,
respect for national independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity, and equality in international
relations.
As the highest organ of the United Nations
entrusted with the primary responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security, the
Security Council has a vital role in promoting the
peaceful settlement of disputes and conflicts, including
and especially by means of mediation. The Security
Council’s active engagement, such as its endorsement
of mediators and support for the Secretary-General in
dispatching his envoys and mediators to help resolve
disputes and conflicts, has highlighted the increasing
importance the Council attaches to mediation activities.

7

S/PV.6108

Viet Nam supports strongly the consolidation of
cooperation and coordination between the Security
Council and the Secretary-General, the Secretariat and
United Nations missions in carrying out mediation
activities to peacefully resolve disputes and conflicts.
At the same time, we hold that, to preserve its integrity
and ensure that it enjoys the necessary acceptance and
support for its activities, the Security Council should
avoid unjustified and counterproductive involvement in
the work that falls under the purview of the mandates
of other United Nations organs, as defined in the
Charter.
Mr. Guillermet (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you on
organizing this open debate. We would also like to
thank Mr. Pascoe for having presented the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/189). The report of the
Secretary-General on enhancing mediation and its
support activities is an open invitation to a joint
discussion that will bear fruit and strengthen the work
of the United Nations. We would also like to thank the
leadership of Burkina Faso in this area.
Costa Rica has always been a major ally of
peaceful dispute settlement processes. Our history has
led us to value this dynamic as a factor for peace and
stability. We have been witnesses to and actors in
peacemaking in our region. In this Organization and in
other international and regional forums, we have
defended and supported mediation processes and
dispute settlement not only as effective mechanisms to
resolve conflicts, but also as a preventive way of
avoiding them. The importance and value that the
international community places on mediation will
reflect its commitment to peace and its attachment to
stability.
Costa Rica welcomes and fully endorses the
report of the Secretary-General. It is a report of very
high quality, with robust and specific recommendations
that indicate the path to follow. It not only
encompasses the lessons learned, but also raises the
challenges that we must overcome in order to
strengthen the Organization’s mediation capacities.
Furthermore, it accurately points to important strategic
actions for moving forward in strengthening mediation
as a valuable dispute settlement instrument in this
Organization.
My delegation agrees that no peace agreement
endorsed by the Organization can promise amnesty for

8

crimes of genocide, crimes of war, crimes against
humanity or serious human rights violations. Neither
the United Nations nor the international community
can shirk their collective responsibilities. Some people
say that when it comes to serious crimes, the
intervention of international justice could be
considered an obstacle to the mediation process and, to
a certain extent, could compromise its results. But can
we ignore justice in the name of peace? Would we not
be promoting a culture of impunity if we ignored
international justice?
My country believes that there is no room for
these questions because there can be no sustainable
peace in such circumstances. Mediation, the instrument
that we are promoting here, complements international
justice and does not oppose it.
Local and national capacities are not only
directed towards mediation in the conflict, but are also
agents that ensure sustainability and contribute
significantly to strengthening democratic institutions
and the rule of law in post-conflict situations. They are
agents of change that become agents of stability. In that
respect, cooperation with regional organizations is
crucial to having a greater impact and greater
effectiveness, and also to taking advantage of the
successful experiences at the regional level.
Strengthening the mediation efforts of this
Organization is a reliable investment. In that respect,
the Organization has made important progress, which
Mr. Pascoe has explained in detail. It has developed its
structure in response to the request of its Members that
it play a more active role in the area of mediation. It
has strengthened the Department of Political Affairs by
establishing the Mediation Support Unit. But let us
look at this situation clearly: devoting sufficient
resources to preventive action, early warning and
mediation will certainly mean a reduction in the overall
financial costs of the Organization.
More important than that, however, is to move
away from the simple equation by which we determine
that mediation is a more efficient choice in terms of
costs. Rather, we should support the human dimension
of a timely intervention whereby human lives are
saved, human rights are protected, the displacement of
populations is avoided and institutions are preserved.
The premise must be that we strengthen mediation
processes in order to invest more in populations and in
their general well-being and not to promote mediation

09-30825

S/PV.6108

because it is less expensive than any peacekeeping
operation. Without a doubt, we must take those
elements into account in the strategic review of
peacekeeping activities that this Council will soon
undertake.
We endorse and support the measures taken by
the Secretary-General in favour of gender equality in
mediation teams, in accordance with resolution 1325
(2000), and we believe that it is important to continue
to make major efforts in that regard.
Lastly, the basis of mediation is the political will
of the parties to reach an agreement. That political will
must be reflected in absolute respect for the United
Nations Charter and a legitimate and verifiable
commitment to the promotion and protection of human
rights. Those two elements are the axes on which any
mediation process must be based, along with the
confidence of the parties, and on which to build a
sustainable and lasting peace.
Mr. Gouider (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me to extend my sincere thanks to
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for his comprehensive briefing on the
Secretary-General’s report on enhancing mediation and
its support activities (S/2009/189). I would also like to
extend a warm welcome to all participants in this
distinctive session, which is special in terms of its
timing and subject matter.
With regard to its timing, this debate is taking
place in the context of an agreement on a follow-up to
the meeting held last year under the presidency of
Burkina Faso and in the light of presidential statement
S/PRST/2008/36. We hope that our discussions today
will help us move forward and reach a new vision that
clarifies the mediation role played by the Security
Council.
On the subject matter, I do not need to stress the
special importance of mediation as a tool to settle
conflicts peacefully, as specified in our Charter since
last century. It is incumbent on us to enhance
mediation and its support activities as a practical way
to settle disputes. We should focus on positive ideas
that promote dialogue and help avert the deterioration
of any conflict through agreements between the parties
that would end conflicts and strengthen and promote
peace.

09-30825

We support mediation as a peacemaking tool, as
we believe it to be the most cost-effective instrument to
settle conflicts on the African continent. Mediation
takes into account all the important factors of the
various conflicts and can play a significant role in
addressing them, following the cold war and with the
renewed interest in conciliatory agreements. Mediation
inherently
promotes
a
careful
analysis
or
reconsideration of positions in a way that promotes all
efforts for the ultimate peaceful settlement of conflicts.
We believe that the maintenance of international
peace and security requires serious initiatives that
enhance mediation and its support activities,
particularly in Africa. That enhancement should not be
limited to the neutrality and skills of the mediator and
his or her experience, but should include an in-depth
knowledge of the geography, history and culture of
Africa and the root causes of the conflicts there. We
believe that the African Union is the natural body to
assume that task, and that it is capable of achieving
effective mediation with genuine and full international
support and partnership.
Nevertheless, allow me to clearly state that we
have still not fulfilled our commitments. My country’s
experience in the mediation efforts in many African
conflicts, as a member and Chairman of the African
Union, has highlighted the continuing need for a new
international vision for mediation and the Security
Council’s role in it that does not ignore the root causes
of conflicts because of pressures and that effectively
prioritizes the tools provided for in Chapters VI and
VIII of the Charter over those of Chapter VII. It has
shown the need for a vision that provides the tools to
address conflicts before, not after, they deteriorate; that
is based on lessons learned in supporting preventive
diplomacy in Africa that strengthens the African Union
and its partnerships and institutions; and that enables
the Secretariat and the Mediation Support Unit to
provide the necessary momentum for that dynamic
union. In that way, we could put an end to ongoing
human tragedies and support the international system
by upholding the authority and credibility of the
Security Council as a guarantor of international peace
and security.
Finally, we support the Secretary-General’s
recommendations in their entirety and the statement to
be made by the representative of Cuba on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement. We express our hope once
again that our deliberations will go beyond mere

9

S/PV.6108

support for recommendations and will be a practical
step towards planned and organized measures.
I would like to thank the delegation of Burkina
Faso for preparing the draft presidential statement,
which we fully support, and we look forward to its
adoption at the end of our debate.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Austria associates
itself with the statement to be delivered by the
representative of the Czech Republic on behalf of the
European Union later in this meeting. We would also in
particular like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe for his substantive and very comprehensive
briefing.
We are confronted with a large number of crises
and new global dangers with a potential to ignite fully
fledged conflicts posing threats to international peace
and security. The complexity of the issues at stake and
the involvement of a wide range of actors underscore
the need to make use of the entire toolbox available to
the United Nations and the international community. In
recent years, the United Nations has conducted and
supported a series of successful mediation efforts —
for instance in Kenya — but Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe has provided us today with an impressive
complete list of the various efforts of the United
Nations in this field.
Mediation should be one of the first instruments
that we resort to because it has proven to be an
effective tool at all stages of the conflict cycle.
Disputes can, of course, best be resolved through
interventions at an early stage. If such interventions are
successful, we can reconcile potential adversaries
before a crisis erupts.
As the ongoing discussions on the reform of
United Nations peacekeeping have shown, we are
confronted with a growing shortage of human and
financial resources. In this situation, the added value of
conflict prevention and resolution through mediation
becomes ever more apparent. The Secretary-General’s
report (S/2009/189) therefore rightly underlines the
comparative advantage of mediation in terms of costeffectiveness, as opposed to large-scale conflict
intervention and post-conflict reconstruction.
As the Under-Secretary-General’s briefing has
shown, successful mediation efforts must go hand in
hand with other crisis prevention and crisis
management activities, in particular peacekeeping and

10

peacebuilding. We therefore support the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation to make mediation,
facilitation and dialogue expertise available to United
Nations field presences. It is clear that successful
mediation efforts will normally result in compromise
solutions that balance the interests of former
adversaries. That having been said, mediators must
nonetheless make sure that the principles of the rule of
law and the needs of transitional justice are respected.
Resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) urge
Member States and the Secretary-General to ensure
increased representation of women at all levels of
conflict resolution and peace processes. Yet an analysis
by the United Nations Development Fund for Women
shows that, in 13 major comprehensive peace processes
since 2000, not one single woman has been appointed
chief mediator. We hope to see more appointments of
women in the future. For that to happen, it is of course
clear that we, the Member States, must ourselves
nominate more female candidates for such positions.
Also, all mediators need to have adequate expertise in
dealing with gender issues as part of their mandate. In
order to achieve sustainable peace, we must ensure the
availability of adequate resources for gender mediation
expertise in all peace efforts.
Any effective mediator needs to be supported by
the right team, with expertise and thorough knowledge
of the particular situation. We commend the excellent
role that the Mediation Support Unit (MSU) and the
newly established standby team have played over the
past year in preparing and supporting an increasing
number of mediation processes. We would like to see
further consolidation of the MSU’s capacities.
Equipping the United Nations with adequate funds and
human resources remains a prerequisite for successful
dispute settlement, since the right timing, readiness and
quick deployment of mediation teams are crucial.
We fully support efforts to intensify cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, and note
in particular the positive role that organizations such as
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and the Southern Africa Development
Community are playing in this respect. Regional
organizations in many instances have the advantage of
being well acquainted with local and regional
dynamics, but in some cases it must also be said that
proximity and long-standing involvement can work to
the detriment of potential mediators because they are
not seen to be impartial and are therefore not

09-30825

S/PV.6108

acceptable to the conflict parties. Depending on
circumstances, the European Union therefore
contributes to mediation processes either as an actor or
indirectly as a supporter to third-party mediation
efforts.
Mediation also creates local capacity in the target
countries, thereby contributing to sustainable and
locally owned conflict settlement. The United Nations
should strive to strengthen operational partnerships
with regional and subregional arrangements and offer
support to mediation partners through the MSU.
Small and medium-sized States without vested
interests in particular conflicts in a region can play a
positive role. Austria, as a neutral country, has a longstanding tradition of offering and hosting good offices.
In this context, let me also underline the potential of
non-governmental organizations and pay tribute to the
work of such institutions as Sant’Egidio in Italy or
Burg Schlaining in Austria.
In conclusion, let me thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lynn Pascoe once again for his interesting
presentation. We also highly appreciate the efforts of
Burkina Faso in promoting the issue of mediation and
the settlement of disputes in the Council, and fully
support the presidential statement to be adopted later
today. We look forward to future discussions on this
important matter.
Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to thank you, Sir, for
convening this important open debate. We should also
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for
his briefing.
In today’s world, the nature of conflicts and
disputes is undergoing profound changes. Traditional
inter-State conflicts are evolving into hybrids of interState/intra-State conflicts, and the causes of disputes
are becoming increasingly complex and involve
various factors such as history, territory, religion and
tribe. Experience has demonstrated time and again that
if we are unable to take reasonable and legitimate
action at an early stage in a crisis to seek a peaceful
settlement via mediation, we will have to spend
considerably more time and energy after a crisis breaks
out coping with the consequences of its expansion.
Therefore, the peaceful settlement of disputes is an
investment in the future of mankind and will certainly
reap abundant peace dividends.

09-30825

The peaceful settlement of disputes is one of the
fundamental principles of the United Nations, and the
Charter has provided theoretical guidance and bases for
action in mediation and dispute settlement. As the most
authoritative
and
representative
international
organization in the world, the United Nations has every
reason to play a central role in mediation and dispute
settlement. We appreciate the positive role played by
the United Nations in settling hotspot issues in relevant
areas, and expect the Organization to further enhance
its mediation capacity and improve its mediation
expertise so as to play a bigger role in the peaceful
settlement of disputes.
Strengthening the United Nations mediation and
dispute settlement capacity requires full respect for the
will of the parties concerned. The parties to a dispute
are stakeholders in the settlement of the conflict, and
only when they display full political will can United
Nations mediation produce results. If the parties
concerned explicitly reject United Nations mediation,
the Organization will have neither the possibility nor
the grounds to become involved. The United Nations
should therefore try to obtain the cooperation of the
parties concerned and keep the channels of
communication open so as to lay a sound foundation
for mediation.
On the other hand, mediation is a protracted
process with inevitable setbacks and fluctuations. The
international community should speak with one voice
when the United Nations is engaged in mediation to
support the Organization’s efforts and maintain its
input after a peace agreement is reached so that the
results of mediation can be further consolidated.
Strengthening the United Nations mediation and
dispute settlement capacity requires it to facilitate
mutual understanding and accommodation between the
parties concerned while maintaining neutrality and
impartiality. Neutrality and impartiality are the bases of
mediation, and the designation of an appropriate
mediator is the key to the success of mediation.
Mediation should be an inclusive process in which the
mediator hears the views of all sides, has an accurate
understanding of differing views and accommodates
various concerns in a balanced manner. Mediation
should also be a progressive process in which the
mediator should have full understanding of the
background of the issue, effectively coordinate
relations among all parties, maintain patience and
confidence, keep strict confidentiality and a low

11

S/PV.6108

profile, focus on facilitation and avoid assuming the
responsibilities of the parties. Mediation should result
in a win-win situation. The mediator should try to
make the parties concerned realize that there is no such
thing as a winner-takes-all solution and that it is only
through flexibility and compromise that they can
achieve reconciliation and a win-win outcome.
Strengthening the mediation and dispute
settlement capacity of the United Nations requires
addressing the question of impunity on the basis of
building durable peace. Ending impunity and ensuring
fairness and justice are prerequisites for upholding the
good and punishing the evil. Peace can be secure only
when it is based on fairness and justice. In that respect,
the State concerned should play the leading role. At the
same time, it is hard to truly put an end to impunity
without a peaceful and stable environment. When
dealing with impunity, it is necessary to take into full
consideration the overall interests of peace and
stability.
Strengthening the mediation and dispute
settlement capacity of the United Nations requires full
use of the advantages of cooperative partnership on the
basis of mobilizing all relevant mechanisms of the
United Nations. In its mediation efforts the United
Nations should rely on the strength of its moral force
and its neutrality and should work in all dimensions
and at multiple levels. In this connection, it is
necessary to take advantage of both the expertise of the
Mediation Support Unit and the convenience offered
by field agencies such as peacekeeping missions. It is
necessary both to engage in shuttle diplomacy and to
employ the Secretary-General’s good offices in order
to make best use of the Organization’s advantages in
resources to cultivate local mediation capacities.
Strengthening the mediation capacity of the
United Nations is a strategic undertaking which should
be provided with adequate resources. At the same time,
the United Nations should also pay attention to
cooperating with the mediation efforts of its partners
and should actively provide them with political, human
and logistical support when necessary.
The purpose of strengthening the mediation and
dispute settlement capacity of the United Nations is not
to take on all the disputes of the world. We take note of
the unique and important role of relevant regional
organizations in settling disputes in their respective
regions. China always stands for the settlement of

12

disputes through peaceful dialogue, and we support a
greater role for the United Nations and regional
organizations such as the African Union in providing
mediation and good offices for dispute and conflict
settlement. We will continue to work with all others in
making energetic efforts towards that end.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate, which is
timely. We are grateful to Burkina Faso for
championing this issue in the Council and to
Mr. Pascoe and his team for today’s briefing.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/189) and
today’s debate provide an opportunity to put the
spotlight on what can be done to ensure that the
mediation efforts of the international community —
and especially of the United Nations — are more
effective in helping to resolve conflict. It is important.
The failure to generate durable peace agreements will
lead to the continued scourge of conflict, which both
the countries concerned and their neighbours can ill
afford.
The international community’s recent record in
supporting mediation efforts has been mixed. We have
seen some clear successes, such as Kofi Annan’s
leadership of the international community’s efforts in
Kenya and President Obasanjo’s engagement in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. Mr. Pascoe
rightly highlighted Special Representative Ould
Abdallah’s work to bring the political process in
Somalia to a more positive stage, and President
Campaore has played an important personal role in
Togo and Côte d’Ivoire.
But as the Secretary-General’s report makes clear,
there is much more that the United Nations can and
should be doing, and we support that conclusion. The
report’s emphasis on early mediation is critical. Every
effort needs to be made to put an early stop to an
emerging crisis before it can develop into conflict and
humanitarian emergency which places further strain on
already limited peacekeeping resources.
We therefore see it as an important and positive
development that we are now seeing proper investment
in United Nations mediation capacities. We welcome
the General Assembly’s decision to enhance the
capacity in mediation of the Department of Political
Affairs as part of strengthening its overall preventive
diplomacy effort. With these new resources, we shall of
course be looking for improved performance from

09-30825

S/PV.6108

Mr. Pascoe’s department and the United Nations as a
whole. We welcome specifically the establishment of
the Mediation Support Unit and the assistance it has
provided the United Nations and other mediation
efforts. We appreciate the need for flexible resources,
including for the early startup of mediation activities.
But it is not just a question of resources. The
report provides some useful principles for successful
mediation. We need to ensure that every effort is made
and every opportunity taken to improve the speed and
effectiveness of mediation efforts. We need to ask a
number of questions: Are the right mechanisms in
place? Can we trigger the early launch of mediation
efforts? Can we determine who is best placed to lead a
mediation effort? And can we ensure that other actors
support the person in the lead?
My colleagues have talked about the need for
increased numbers of women to be involved in
mediation. The statistics in the report about their
under-representation are striking, and we need to work
much harder to ensure the full involvement of women,
and of civil society generally. This is particularly
important for conflict situations that have been
characterized by widespread sexual violence, and the
United Kingdom looks forward to further discussion of
this issue in the context of the Secretary-General’s
reports on peacebuilding and on women and peace and
security.
Mediation cannot be conducted in a vacuum.
Mediation capacity must be a core part of any
institutional architecture to address conflict, and we
need to ensure that the right links are made between
mediators and those engaged in the planning and
implementation of peace agreements.
In taking forward the report’s recommendations,
as Mr. Pascoe noted, the Secretariat will also need to
take account of the conclusions of the forthcoming
reports of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding and
early recovery, which we hope will be comprehensive
and ambitious. They will also need to take account of
the work being undertaken for a more rigorous and
strategic approach to peacekeeping.
With that in mind, we support the overall effort
and this debate, and we support the conclusions set out
in the draft presidential statement.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this

09-30825

important debate. It will serve as a useful follow-up to
a related meeting organized by the delegation of
Burkina Faso last September (see S/PV.5979). I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/189) and for his commitment to strengthening
United Nations capacity to resolve conflicts peacefully.
My delegation appreciates Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe’s comments today and congratulations him on
the mediation efforts of the Department of Political
Affairs.
Of all the principles in the United Nations
Charter, the peaceful settlement of disputes is among
the most powerful. We all know the human and
material toll of armed conflict. When countries are
looking for ways to resolve their differences without
violence, the international community bears a
responsibility to support them. We also know that
United Nations mediation and good offices missions
have played a crucial role in ending many conflicts
during the past 20 years. From these experiences we
have learned a great deal about how to make mediation
effective and its results enduring.
For its part, the United States is steering a course
that puts a new premium on energetic diplomacy to
resolve some of the toughest issues we face. President
Obama has spoken of a new era of engagement, and we
are serious about listening to and speaking frankly with
those with whom we have substantive differences. We
have also named special envoys to lead our efforts to
help resolve crises across the globe.
We welcome this debate today as an opportunity
to look closely at ways in which the United Nations
can better do its part to provide good offices and
mediation. In this regard, we welcome the
strengthening of the Department of Political Affairs,
including the creation of its mediation support standby
team, which can become one of the most effective tools
of the United Nations for early response to crises.
We also need to recognize and build into our
plans the reality that the need for mediation rarely ends
with a peace agreement or on the day that the Security
Council establishes a United Nations mission. Rather,
we should work to ensure that mediation capabilities
are built into United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations.
In his report, the Secretary-General has raised the
issue of the pursuit of peace and justice. He rightly
states that, when conflicts lead to gross violations of

13

S/PV.6108

human rights and international humanitarian law, peace
and justice are indivisible.
Let me also offer a word on the role of women.
The United States stands firmly committed to
resolution 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), which stress
the need for the active involvement of women in
efforts to promote peace and security. We support the
call of those resolutions to give women a larger
decision-making role in conflict resolution. Mediation
efforts that exclude women’s perspectives and deny
them a seat at the table are likely to neglect issues that
are vital to securing lasting peace. My Government
also welcomes the Secretary-General’s commitment to
increase the number of women among the special
representatives and envoys who pursue good offices on
his behalf.
There are times when the United Nations will be
in the best position to lead third-party efforts to support
resolution of disputes. In some situations, other actors
may be better suited, and we need to support the
mediation capabilities of other institutions or members
of the international community in this regard.
Regional organizations are particularly important
actors in mediation, as we are reminded by Chapter
VIII of the Charter. Regional bodies are often more
familiar with issues in their regions and able to deploy
resources more quickly. We encourage the United
Nations to continue to partner with regional
organizations and other actors to seek timely and
successful resolution of conflicts. We also need to
work to develop national and local mediation
capacities, since disputes are often most productively
resolved at that level.
Smart, principled and skilful mediation can
reduce threats to peace and security, but all parties to
the conflict must participate in good faith to achieve a
truly lasting settlement. The Council has many tools at
its disposal to deal with spoilers, and we need to work
diligently to deploy them to greatest effect when they
are needed to resolve crises and support peace
processes.
The United States will continue to be an advocate
of peaceful means of conflict resolution. We know that
mediation is never easy, but we must work together to
bring the conflicts and crises that trouble us all to a
swift and durable resolution. My delegation also
supports the statement prepared by the delegation of
Burkina Faso and thanks them for that initiative.

14

Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): I wish to start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate on the mediation and settlement of disputes. It
is an important follow-up to the high-level meeting on
mediation and settlement of disputes in September last
year (see S/PV.5979) during the presidency of Burkina
Faso, which reaffirmed the role of the United Nations
in mediation efforts. Therefore I wish to thank the
Under-Secretary-General
for
Political
Affairs,
Mr. Pascoe, for presenting the Secretary-General’s
report on enhancing mediation and its support
activities.
We commend the United Nations for the role it
has played over the years in helping to mediate interand intra-State conflicts around the world. We have
noted from the report the challenges that confront the
United Nations and its partners in providing effective
mediation assistance to parties in the various conflicts.
Uganda considers mediation to be an important
aspect of dispute settlement efforts, one that can and
should be used at different phases of the conflict. We
see mediation as a broad process that supplements
other processes of conflict management. But its
effectiveness in dispute settlement requires an
understanding of how mediation works, the factors that
influence it and how best to utilize it.
It is regrettable that, despite its proven value in
the prevention, management and resolution of
conflicts, mediation has continued to receive
remarkably little attention or support. We have heard
that the ability of the United Nations to carry out
mediation has been severely hampered by the lack of
adequate, dedicated human and financial resources.
The Secretary-General’s report puts it very clear,
saying that
“efforts have been concentrated on the more
costly tasks of dealing with the shattered
remnants of devastated lives, communities and
institutions of State, while the daunting challenge
of reconstruction has absorbed resources that
could have gone into early dispute resolution”
(S/2009/189, para. 8).
It is therefore imperative that mediation efforts be
properly resourced. Early mediation in a preventive
context can, if successful, obviate the need for
peacekeeping missions. More effective mediation at the
peacekeeping stage could result in peace agreements
that are more implementable. Robust mediation

09-30825

S/PV.6108

capacity during implementation could lead to more
rapid and efficient consolidation of peace.
Despite the remarkable efforts by the United
Nations in mediation, as the Secretary-General rightly
states in his report, the United Nations does not have a
monopoly on mediation. Regional and subregional
arrangements have played an important role over the
years, as we have seen in Africa in particular. We
welcome the efforts by the Secretary-General in
working more closely with regional and subregional
partners. We are convinced that a regional approach in
which the challenges are dealt with in a focused and
more coordinated way, such as in the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, concerning
Burundi, is very useful.
Experience has shown that for mediation to
succeed it must be guided by a knowledgeable lead
actor. There is no doubt that there should be careful
consideration in identifying a suitable lead player in
any mediation effort. The complexity of conflicts
requires that mediators have a thorough understanding
of local history, politics, cultures and personalities
before assuming any substantive role. Furthermore,
they should have the perseverance to work with the
parties and the patience to refrain from rushing the
process. An important lesson from recent mediation
experiences is that at critical points it is necessary to
have a mediator who can deal with the main
protagonists at the top, to minimize the influence of
entrenched and hard-line interests.
Furthermore, every effort should be made to
avoid duplication of mediation efforts. Multiple
leadership leads to fragmented responses, reinforcing
fragmentation in the conflict, and complicates
resolution of any dispute.
Mediators require support teams. We welcome the
establishment of a Mediation Support Unit in the
Department of Political Affairs to support the
mediation efforts of relevant United Nations
departments and of the Organization’s partners, such as
regional and subregional organizations, as well as of
Member States. We support the role of the Mediation
Support Unit and call for a more sustainable funding
arrangement to support its activities. We are convinced
that this Unit will further enhance the partnership
arrangements envisaged between the United Nations
and regional organizations.

09-30825

Early warning mechanisms are crucial in the
prevention of conflict and mediation. However, the
challenge is how to transform the information obtained
into a viable response that, by facilitating mediation,
can prevent escalation. An effective early warning
network should be linked at the national, regional and
global levels. This is where the resource-mobilization
capacity of the United Nations is key in facilitating the
establishment of an early warning system that provides
vital input for mediation and early action mechanisms.
Finally, if properly utilized, mediation can do
more than merely achieve a settlement of the conflict;
it can also facilitate in the long run the full
transformation of relations between and within States.
In that regard the Security Council has an important
role to play in support of mediation efforts. It is
therefore our expectation that this debate will generate
greater international support for the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts in mediation. We also thank the
delegation of Burkina Faso for the draft presidential
statement, which we fully support.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Allow me to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate
and by thanking the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Pascoe, for introducing the Secretary-General’s
report, which focused our attention on one aspect of
the Council’s activity that, while frequently present in
our discussions, has thus far received relatively little
attention on its own merits.
Croatia believes this is a topic that deserves the
attention of the Security Council, to be approached in a
coherent and coordinated manner. We are grateful for
the Secretary-General’s report, which extensively
examines the challenges facing the United Nations and
its partners in providing mediation services in both
inter- and intra-State conflicts at all stages of the
conflict cycle.
While we align ourselves with the statement of
the European Union to be delivered later, permit me to
add some further remarks.
As the report notes, the peaceful settlement of
disputes should be seen as one facet of the sovereign
responsibility of States. Mediation has rightly been
recognized as an efficient and strikingly cost-effective
tool that the Security Council has at its disposal in
addressing threats to international peace and security.
As it is often political issues that lie at the heart of
crises, the importance of early engagement in

15

S/PV.6108

preventive diplomacy — including mediation — is
even more significant during this period, in which
United Nations-mandated peacekeeping operations
have experienced unprecedented demand and strain.
We should not forget that Chapter VI of the
Charter of the United Nations offers an array of other
tools for the peaceful settlement of disputes, namely
negotiation, enquiry, conciliation, arbitration, judicial
settlement, resort to regional agencies or arrangements,
or other peaceful means of the parties’ choice. Since
every dispute is different, a differentiated, flexible and
tailor-made approach is preferable.
As a politically oriented tool, mediation has a
strategic place in conflict prevention and resolution.
However, that does not diminish the value of other
instruments, which should be used judiciously,
sometimes in combination with one another, and in a
manner that respects the wider normative standards of
the United Nations and promotes the international rule
of law.
The report highlights a number of factors that
determine the success of mediation, from deciding on
the timing, selecting the right mediator and lead actor,
defining the structure of the mediation and identifying
all relevant interlocutors to issues of gender balance,
managing
the
spoilers
and
monitoring
the
implementation of the negotiated outcome. All those
factors need to be taken into account and, often,
cultivated at the system-wide level.
Croatia
supports
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendations aimed at capacity-building and
addressing the inadequacies that have been identified
regarding the ability of the United Nations to carry out
mediation. The establishment of the Mediation Support
Unit within the Department of Political Affairs (DPA),
in response to a growing demand for United Nations
mediation services, should be the platform on which
we are building in developing capacity at the national,
regional and United Nations levels and in
professionalizing mediation support.
When addressing the role of the Security Council
in that context, we should focus on enhancing
coordination and the strategic leadership of the
Council, particularly in situations involving a
multiplicity of actors and mediation issues. The
Security Council has unique leverage derived from its
international legitimacy and moral authority, which
should be used prudently. The Council is often

16

critically placed to respond during the decisive — and
usually very short — window of opportunity before a
dispute escalates into conflict. It is well placed to
address failures in implementation and the problem of
spoilers.
That being said, we should acknowledge that,
while they are certainly well placed, neither the
Council nor the United Nations has a monopoly on
mediation.
That
is
why
coordination
and
complementarity of efforts are crucial, both at the
system-wide level and in the context of cooperation
with
regional
and
subregional
organizations.
Ultimately, the responsibility for the peaceful
settlement of disputes lies with the parties. That is why
building national and local capacity is crucial and
should be adequately reflected in the mandates defined
by the Security Council.
Finally, at all times, we should remain mindful of
the fact that the very nature of mediation is such that it
commands a degree of discretion and flexibility. A
successful mediation process should be able to strike
the right balance between public and quiet diplomacy.
We believe that the draft text of the presidential
statement we are to adopt today reflects the main
messages of this debate, and it has our support. In that
respect, let me express our gratitude to the delegation
of Burkina Faso for the efforts made in its preparation.
We see efforts to enhance mediation and its support
activities as part and parcel of the wider effort to
strengthen the ability of the United Nations to play its
role to the fullest extent in conflict prevention,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, in an
integrated and coherent manner.
Mr. Tiendrébéogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in
French): I should like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for
having presented the report of the Secretary-General on
enhancing mediation and its support activities
(S/2009/189). We are grateful to the Secretary-General
for having submitted the report, whose main
recommendations we support.
My delegation, which associates itself with the
statement to be made by the representative of Cuba on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, is pleased to be
able to participate in this debate, which continues the
fruitful exchanges that took place in the Security
Council on 23 September 2008 (see S/PV.5979) under
the leadership of President Blaise Compaore. He
presented Burkina Faso’s views on the conditions

09-30825

S/PV.6108

necessary for successful mediation, which must include
resolving the deep-seated causes of conflict if we are to
hope to produce lasting results.
In taking the initiative to organize a high-level
Security Council meeting on this issue, my delegation
intended, in addition to expressing the importance that
Burkina Faso attaches to the quest for peaceful
solutions to conflicts, to encourage experience-sharing
in the specific area of mediation. That is why we are
grateful to you, Mr. President, for having agreed to
organize today’s public debate, which enables all
United Nations Member States to take part in these
exchanges.
The obligation of States to resolve their disputes
by peaceful means is stipulated in the Charter of the
United Nations. Among the techniques provided for in
Article 33, mediation has proved to be one of the most
effective, cost-effective and, what is more, fruitful in
terms of peace and development. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/189), which well describes
the Organization’s activities in that regard, offers still
further proof that mediation has always been at the
heart of United Nations activities.
We are all familiar with the Secretary-General’s
good-offices and mediation missions, whose number
and scale have grown continuously in response to the
increase in the number of conflicts and, in particular, to
their increasing complexity. Thus, the question today is
not whether that role is necessary or useful, but rather
how to further build the capacities of the Secretariat, in
particular the Mediation Support Unit, which is
increasingly being called upon but which is equipped
with limited resources.
As the principal organ entrusted with primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Security Council has a natural
role in promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes,
including through mediation, and in supporting all
relevant and related initiatives. What better way to
guarantee peace and security than to prevent conflicts,
to prevent nascent hotspots of tension from turning into
violent conflicts or, when conflicts erupt — regrettably
and despite all efforts — to help contain and extinguish
them as swiftly as possible, if not once and for all, at
least for the long term?
In other words, just like crisis management,
mediation poses the problem of prevention.
Strengthening our prevention efforts by, inter alia,

09-30825

combating weapons proliferation and strengthening
social cohesion and political and economic governance
within States helps us to better anticipate crisis
situations. A certain balance should therefore be
established among the Council’s functions — all the
more so because the success of mediation initiatives
offers one of the most complete and concrete responses
to the issue of peacekeeping operations, which are
increasingly costly. We thus call on the Security
Council to explore ways and means to further
strengthen its own role in that area, including with
regard to the problem of sanctions.
One cannot stress enough the importance of the
contributions
of
regional
and
subregional
organizations, given their knowledge of the actors and
the stakes involved in conflicts, as well as of the
realities on the ground. It is essential that useful
measures be taken to support their efforts and
strengthen their capacities.
In Africa, the Constitutive Act of the African
Union enshrines the principles of the peaceful
settlement of disputes and the non-use of force. In line
with those principles, the African Union has always
been present from the very onset of crises affecting
some member States, thus averting the deterioration of
those crises into open and violent conflicts, or
supporting the parties in resolving the crises. Burkina
Faso welcomes the cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations and hopes to see it
strengthened in the future.
The Economic Community of West African States
has institutionalized the practice of mediation through
the setting up of a Mediation and Security Council and
a Council of Elders in the framework of its Mechanism
for Conflict Prevention, Management, Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Security.
Because States are and always will be at the front
line of conflicts and efforts to resolve them, they must
strengthen their mediation capacities. Convinced of the
virtues of dialogue and cooperation, Burkina Faso has
placed the promotion of mediation and the peaceful
settlement of disputes at the heart of its diplomacy,
which has enabled it, through the decisive action of
President Blaise Compaore, to accompany certain
brotherly States on the path to peace and reconciliation
on the basis of the philosophy of national ownership by
actors, regional leadership and international support.

17

S/PV.6108

With respect to the number and diversity of
mediators, my delegation deems it timely to stress the
necessity
of
strengthening
cooperation
and
coordination. The need for cooperation, coordination
and consistent action speaks to the need to create joint
databases, decentralize coordination centres and draft
joint practices and approaches.
Finally, my country shares the concerns of the
Secretary-General on the dearth of women mediators,
as well as the low level of their involvement in
technical mediation teams. My delegation reiterates
Council’s appeal to the Secretary-General, the heads of
regional and subregional organizations and the heads
of other organizations to take urgent steps to remedy
that state of affairs.
In conclusion, my delegation thanks all
delegations for their support of the draft presidential
statement that we initiated and hope to see adopted at
the end of our discussion.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I wish
to begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his introduction of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/189). I also wish to thank
you, Sir, for having organized this debate in order to
follow up on the initiative of Burkina Faso in
organizing an initial discussion in the Security Council
last September on the topic of the maintenance of
international peace and security, mediation and the
settlement of disputes.
My delegation fully aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
Czech Republic on behalf of the European Union.
Mediation is an extremely important tool available to
the international community for conflict prevention
and management. It bears repeating that successful
mediation has often interrupted or even averted
tragedy, and public opinion tends too often to forget
that fact.
From its inception, the United Nations has played
a crucial role in that area and must continue to do so,
as the Secretary-General has done by dispatching
President Obasanjo to facilitate the dialogue between
the heads of State of the Great Lakes region on the one
hand, and between the Kivu armed groups and the
Congolese Government, on the other. Mediation was
also apparent in the case of Madagascar, where the
Secretary-General began by sending Mr. Haile
Menkerios and then appointed a special political

18

adviser, Mr. Tiébilé Dramé, whose efforts to promote a
return to constitutional order in that country should
continue. There are, of course, many other examples,
and I wish to reiterate France’s support for the efforts
of Mr. Vijay Nambiar in Sri Lanka. My delegation
hopes that the Council will hear from him soon.
I wish to make one comment on the subject at
hand. The idea of mediation makes perfect sense in the
context of inter-State conflict or well-identified parties.
A broadened range of threats to international peace and
security — I refer in particular to terrorism, organized
crime and other such examples — makes the exercise
even more complex and fully warrants taking the time
to discuss the matter within the Council.
In his report, the Secretary-General draws certain
lessons that reveal the expertise required for successful
mediation, as well as the organizational aspects that
concern the Security Council first and foremost. In
particular, my delegation is referring to the
coordination and consistency of initiatives. The United
Nations has the authority and legitimacy to address that
issue, be it through mediation efforts or to support
those undertaken by others in order best to ensure
success.
From that point of view, there is a paradox in
hearing certain States invoke non-interference when
the Council could intervene before a crisis leads to
violence, and thus before the situation calls for a more
robust intervention on the part of the Council. We have
seen that in recent years and again lately.
Another important lesson is the need to act
quickly. That is crucial. The recommendations of the
Secretary-General, which seek to improve the ability of
the United Nations in supporting rapid intervention, are
apt and should be supported. In particular, my
delegation
welcomes
the
establishment
and
strengthening of the Mediation Support Unit, which
has already proven to be a useful instrument to support
good offices missions and the mediation efforts of the
United Nations and regional organizations.
Support for peace processes also involves
targeted and resolute action against those who would
threaten to derail those processes. Council action in
that area must be flexible and reactive; I am thinking in
particular of the inclusion in resolution 1844 (2008) on
Somalia of provisions on individual sanctions against

09-30825

S/PV.6108

“[entities] that threaten the peace, security or
stability of Somalia, including acts that threaten
the Djibouti Agreement” (resolution 1844 (2008),
para. 8 (a)).
In conclusion, I wish to stress that the strategy for
implementing peace agreements must be outlined early
and be sufficiently inclusive. It is therefore crucial to
include all of the stakeholders in the process, as much
as possible. Here, the role of regional organizations
must be emphasized, including the African Union, the
European Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, all mentioned by Mr. Pascoe.
Those organizations have shown in the past their true
ability to act in close coordination with the United
Nations, and the Security Council in particular, in
order to promote political solutions that have averted
tragedy. We must also not forget the important role
played by civil society actors, non-governmental
organizations, civil society groups, and women.
My delegation welcomes the Secretary-General’s
intention to strengthen the recruitment of women for
mediation activities. Furthermore, the United Nations
mediation and conflict prevention activities and
capacities should be strengthened in coordination with
the discussions under way on post-conflict action,
peacebuilding and, of course, improved peacekeeping.
Mediation, when it can implement true political
process or cooperation, is also a means of reducing the
burden of peacekeeping or of laying the foundation’s
for the deployment of an operation or of a
peacebuilding and state-building strategy.

Mediation should play a more important role in
promoting peace in a cost-effective manner. That is
especially true as the financial and human resources of
conflict management and peace operations have grown
to an unprecedented level. We need to place a higher
priority and focus on mediation activities in the United
Nations.
In the history of United Nations mediation, some
cases — such as El Salvador, Guatemala, Namibia,
Cambodia, Mozambique and many others — were
more successful than other cases. From those
experiences, we may point out that United Nations
mediation is more effective when it is matched with
joint efforts by the various stakeholders. The modality
of mediation needs to be adapted to each circumstance.
The level and type of United Nations engagement vary
from playing a lead role in some places to supporting
the efforts of other parties. It is important, however, to
coordinate and ensure the coherence of mediation
efforts by various actors. The United Nations should
strengthen partnerships with lead countries, groups of
stakeholders such as international contact groups,
regional and subregional organizations and, in some
cases, non-governmental actors.
United Nations mediation activity has a
comparative advantage in terms of its legitimacy,
impartiality and convening power. The United Nations
should focus on the following areas, based on its rich
experience and the diverse tools at its disposal, ranging
from the provision of security to humanitarian and
recovery assistance.

Mr. Takasu (Japan): First of all, I would like to
thank you, Sir, for organizing an open debate on this
important subject. I would also like to express
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/189) and my appreciation to Under-SecretaryGeneral Pascoe for his assessment on what has been
learned from past experiences.

First, in terms of the provision of appropriate
support to mediators, the United Nations needs to
provide professional, technical, administrative and
logistical support to all kinds of mediation efforts by
different actors, including the United Nations itself, of
course,
but
also
regional
and
subregional
organizations.

The peaceful settlement of disputes is a core
function of the United Nations in maintaining peace
and security. In accordance with Chapter VI of the
Charter, the parties to any dispute and the Security
Council are obliged to seek a solution through peaceful
means such as negotiation and mediation. The
Secretary-General also has a special role under the
Charter in promoting the peaceful settlement of
disputes.

Secondly, in terms of the development of future
mediators, the United Nations should help develop the
next generation of mediators at all levels within and
outside of the United Nations. We fully agree with the
Secretary-General that the generation change now
under way and qualified senior mediators and their
experienced support teams are key to successful
mediation. We support the serious efforts that are
needed to train and build United Nations mediation
capacities.

09-30825

19

S/PV.6108

Thirdly, in terms of comprehensive engagement
after peace agreements, the United Nations needs to
provide comprehensive and integrated conflict
resolution support by making full use of field offices
and the United Nations funds and agencies throughout
countries.
We are mindful that mediation is by no means a
simple task, but we hope that the United Nations will
continue to make the utmost effort to strengthen this
activity. In particular, I would like to emphasize three
key questions that the United Nations could address in
pursuit of successful mediation in the coming weeks.
First, in order to lay a solid foundation for
durable peace after a peace agreement is signed, we
should examine in depth how social and economic
stability aspects and peacebuilding aspects can be
incorporated from the beginning of mediation and
conflict resolution processes.
Secondly, in view of the centrality of the political
process in post-conflict situations, it is essential to
continue active mediation activity throughout the
implementation of a peace agreement and the peace
consolidation process. To this end, we need to clarify
the role of United Nations field missions and
representatives of the Secretary-General and their
required conditions and capacities.
Thirdly and lastly, in situations of intra-State
conflicts, the United Nations has been relatively
successful. What will be an effective and realistic role
for the United Nations in supporting mediation efforts
involving non-State actors?
In conclusion, I would like to thank Burkina Faso
for its initiative, and we would like to express our
support for the presidential statement. I would also like
to stress how important it is for the Secretary-General
to pursue active mediation efforts and to keep the
Council informed of his activities. We believe that it
would be useful for the Council to conduct periodic
reviews of the progress in this area.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): First, I wish to thank the
presidency for convening this open debate on an issue
of great importance to the United Nations and the
Member States. Indeed, conflict prevention and crisis
management through mediation are one of the founding
principles of the United Nations, and we cannot
overemphasize its significance to our work in the

20

Council. We therefore welcome the opportunity to
engage in such a comprehensive debate on this issue.
Secondly, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and the Mediation Support Unit for their
diligent work in preparing the report before us today
(S/2009/189). I also express my thanks to UnderSecretary-General Pascoe for his concise presentation
highlighting the important elements of the report and
paving the way for an enlightened discussion today.
Last but not least, I would like to express our
deep appreciation to the Permanent Mission of Burkina
Faso for bringing this issue under closer scrutiny back
in September last year, during its presidency of the
Council.
The report before us today touches upon almost
every single element pertaining to the importance of
mediation and what needs to be done to further
streamline our activities in this particular area.
Therefore, I am not going to repeat those points one by
one. Suffice it to say that successful mediation is by far
the most efficient and cost-effective means for the
peaceful settlement of disputes and that more time,
effort and resources ought to be devoted to such
endeavours.
In this regard, there is no doubt that the United
Nations has a special role to play in leading these
efforts. On most occasions, United Nations
engagement in itself lends credibility and legitimacy to
mediation processes. Moreover, the body of work
developed by the United Nations in any particular
conflict often provides the best starting point, as is the
case with the situation in Cyprus. Thus, we need to do
everything possible to further enhance the professional
mediation capacity of this Organization. The SecretaryGeneral’s report contains useful recommendations to
this end. As one of the leading contributors to the
Mediation Support Unit, Turkey is committed to
playing an active part in this exercise.
That said, in today’s world of multifaceted
challenges to peace and stability, which involve a great
number of different actors and dynamics, the United
Nations cannot always be expected to fulfil this role
alone. Regional organizations, individual Member
States and even non-governmental entities have
important and at times leading contributions to make,
depending on the particular features of the conflicts in
question.

09-30825

S/PV.6108

This is indeed a fact, and it is explicitly
mentioned in the report. The challenge, however, is to
find the right composition and combination of action
so that the different players do not compete with each
other, but rather complement and mutually strengthen
their endeavours. For that, healthy coordination and
cooperation among the interested actors is required at
every step of the mediation process. It is within this
frame of mind that I am looking forward to the
Council’s upcoming mission to Africa, where we will
have our annual meeting with the African Union Peace
and Security Council to discuss existing and possible
future joint efforts.
Of course, this phenomenon is not confined to the
African continent, and it must be seen as a guiding
parameter for all mediation efforts around the world. In
this regard, the United Nations, again, is in a crucial
position to make its cooperation and coordination with
other actors work effectively. Whether through the
provision of professional operational support by the
Secretariat or via the political endorsement and
direction given by the Security Council, the United
Nations can indeed make a positive difference to the
quality, credibility and efficiency of overall mediation
efforts. The groups of friends established within the
United Nations framework can also be conducive to
effective peacemaking, provided that they have the
right membership.
As to the role of the Security Council in
particular, the incentives and disincentives that the
Council may provide at the different phases of the
mediation processes can prove to be an indispensable
enabler in convincing the parties to the conflict to
settle their differences through peaceful means. That
said, we agree with the Secretary-General that:
“While disincentives have been widely
studied and applied, positive incentives have not
received much attention and further work to
refine them is merited” (S/2009/189, para. 29).
In particular, we should be able to make further
and more strategic use of the positive incentives
available across the United Nations system through
different United Nations agencies and funds.
The issue of mediation is particularly relevant to
what Turkey tries to do in its region and beyond.
Indeed, Turkey has lately been engaged in a number of
mediation activities of its own, ranging from

09-30825

Afghanistan to the Caucasus and from the Balkans to
the Middle East.
Based on this experience, we have learned that
mediation is a complicated process involving multiple
actors in a way that requires careful and calibrated
steps undertaken with patience and commitment. We
have
also
observed,
that
compared
to
intergovernmental organizations, State actors may in
some cases have the advantage of flexibility and the
ability to act quickly, quietly and discreetly, which can
be instrumental to the success of a mediation effort.
However, we have also seen that the support of the
United Nations and the international community to the
ongoing processes, as appropriate, can be crucial.
In conclusion, I am convinced that the issue of
mediation and, in particular, the comparative
advantages of different international actors for
mediation merit further discussion in future thematic
settings.
With that, I thank the Secretary-General once
again for the guidance contained in his thoughtprovoking report and express our readiness to actively
engage in future deliberations on this topic.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Putting aside
for a few minutes my functions as President of the
Council, I shall now make a statement in my capacity
as Permanent Representative of Mexico.
I too thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe, for his introduction of the report of the
Secretary-General on mediation and settlement of
disputes (S/2009/189). I would also like to
acknowledge the efforts made by the delegation of
Burkina Faso in promoting awareness with respect to
this very important item on our agenda.
The large number of delegations taking part in
this open debate reflects the importance of mediation
for international peace and security. It also reflects the
great interest that we all share in the peaceful
settlement of disputes and the need to complement our
efforts, from within our own individual contexts, to
strengthen the Organization’s role in mediation and
conflict prevention. Mexico is committed to promoting
compliance with those recommendations that are
relevant to the work of the Security Council as well as
to the fostering commitments that will be adopted after
this debate.

21

S/PV.6108

The introduction of the report of the SecretaryGeneral gives us an opportunity to discuss and propose
strategies for the settlement of disputes through
mediation.
Traditionally, the Organization has always sought
to resolve crises reactively once they have already
broken out, diminishing its capacity for immediate
action and its preventive role. From several points of
view, we must insist today on the great advantages
offered by United Nations prevention activities.
The cost of peace will always be less than that of
war. Several United Nations reports on conflict
prevention point out that the international community
spent roughly $200 billion in the seven largest
operations of the 1990s: Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Somalia, Rwanda, Haiti, the Persian Gulf, Cambodia
and El Salvador. These reports also calculate that by
taking a preventive approach the United Nations would
have saved the international community almost
$130 billion, not even thinking about the number of
victims of all of these conflicts.
Other studies have shown that over the past
15 years so-called military victories have only resolved
less than 8 per cent of conflicts, while negotiations
have prevailed in the remaining 92 per cent of the
cases.
Mexico has always spoken out in favour of the
peaceful settlement of disputes and remains convinced
that the true strengthening of the Organization’s role in
the world depends largely on enhancing the application
of Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations.
Throughout its history, my country has been one of its
most active promoters, resorting to international
tribunals and arbitration and intensively promoting
peaceful dispute settlement through mediation in our
region.
Mediation basically refers to peacebuilding and
creative and coordinated participation in peace
processes with a view to forging agreements and
generating political and social stability through
negotiation and the fostering of dialogue, beyond
scenarios of social and political crisis.
We firmly believe that, to a large extent and
thanks to mediation, the region of Latin America and
the Caribbean has for several decades been one of the
most peaceful regions on the planet. Mediation has

22

favoured the settlement of political, ideological and
territorial conflicts and border disputes.
In 1983, the Contadora Group led mediation
efforts to restore and maintain peace and security in
Central America. Together with Colombia, Panama and
Venezuela, Mexico established a mediation mechanism
to achieve the easing of tension, political
understanding and cooperation in Central America. The
consensus achieved through this group is a clear
example that in a changing reality political dialogue
must be an essential tool for understanding between
States. Contadora laid the foundations for peace in
Central America, which are enshrined in the Esquipulas
Agreements undertaken by the States involved in the
region.
In the case of El Salvador, Mexico’s participation
with the so-called Group of Four facilitated peace
efforts that afterwards made it possible to achieve the
signing of peace agreements in Chapultepec, Mexico,
in 1992. On that occasion, Colombia, Spain, Venezuela
and Mexico made up the so-called Group of Friends of
the Secretary-General, which offered ongoing support
to the negotiation efforts of the United Nations. In that
context, the Organization took part as an intermediary
and subsequently was in charge of verifying the
solution of a non-international armed conflict. This
negotiating process stood out not only for its success in
peacemaking but also for its innovative character and
for the precedent set at the international level.
Similarly, the Group of Friends of Guatemala
contributed to the restoration of constitutional and
democratic order in that country.
These episodes in Latin American diplomacy not
only provide the region of Latin America and the
Caribbean with broad experience in the area of
mediation and the peaceful settlement of disputes, but
have also laid the basis for the establishment of
mechanisms for consultation and political dialogue,
which are important assets in tackling threats to peace
and security in the region.
We should point out that the Contadora Group
and the Contadora Support Group gave rise to the Rio
Group, whose work has been recognized, for example,
in the recent crisis between Ecuador and Colombia in
2008. The work of the Rio Group was decisive in
preserving peace and taking the lead towards a
peaceful solution to the crisis.

09-30825

S/PV.6108

The vocation of the Latin American and
Caribbean region is in favour of the peaceful
settlement of disputes. The settlement of conflicts such
as those of the Beagle Channel between Argentina and
Chile and the border between Ecuador and Peru, as
well as the referral of a number of territorial disputes
and border demarcation to the International Court of
Justice are all clear examples of our vocation.
As Article 33 of the Charter points out, the parties
to any dispute, the continuance of which is likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security, shall, first of all, seek a solution by traditional
peaceful means.
The Security Council must provide ample
opportunity for ongoing reconciliation procedures
before calling for action on the basis of Articles 40 and
41 of the Charter. It is precisely in accordance with
Article 33 that there is an obligation for all parties to a
dispute to seek to resolve them through conventional
means. Obviously, mediation must be consensual and
the ideal of obligations comes up once the actors or
parties to a conflict have agreed to resort to it.
However, both mediation and other peaceful means to
settle disputes must be exhausted before we resort to
actions provided for under Chapter VII.
In our efforts to strengthen mediation activities,
we must acknowledge that due to the diversity and
complexity of current conflicts, those activities must be
adapted to and control the specific context in which
they are to operate. Even though the United Nations
must play an important role in supporting mediation
processes, it does not have a monopoly on these
processes. Rather, we must acknowledge the
effectiveness that can be shown by diverse players,
such as the States concerned, regional and subregional
bodies and humanitarian, civilian and other
organizations, and we must support their work on the
basis of the characteristics of the dispute or conflict.
Examples of this approach can be seen in recent cases,
such as those of Zimbabwe and Kenya and in
resolution 1860 (2009) itself, adopted by the Council
last January.
Mexico believes that the Security Council has the
dual challenge of urging States to settle their disputes
peacefully and also to offer all the support necessary to
strengthen and contribute to mediation exercises that
are under way. For his part, the Secretary-General must
continue to play an important role in preventing

09-30825

conflicts that endanger international peace and
security, offering his good offices to the parties in
conflict. We applaud the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral and welcome the establishment of the
Mediation Support Unit within the Department of
Political Affairs.
In my delegation’s opinion, the Security Council
must be periodically informed on the progress that the
Organization is making in that area. In that regard, my
delegation believes that it is useful for the SecretaryGeneral to present timely and detailed information on
the mediation processes coordinated by the United
Nations.
I thus conclude my statement as the
representative of Mexico, and I now resume my
functions as President of the Council.
We shall now turn to the list of speakers under
rule 37. I first to give the floor to the representative of
Brazil.
Mr. Tarragô (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I am
pleased, Sir, to see you presiding over the Security
Council this month with your usual efficiency.
(spoke in English)
I thank you, Mr. President, for holding an open
debate on mediation and settlement of disputes, which
is rather appropriate and timely. After all, it seems that
we are entering a new era, in which renewed efforts are
being made to settle disputes by peaceful means rather
than by military intervention. This debate reminds us
of a fundamental role of the United Nations that has
not received the attention and support needed. The
debate is also consistent with the current emphasis on
strengthening preventive diplomacy at the United
Nations.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive and stimulating report
(S/2009/189) and Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for
his briefing.
There seems to be widespread agreement on the
merits of mediation and other means of pacific
settlement of disputes referred to in Article 33 of the
Charter. There is equally general support for making
broader use of mediation and for a strong role for the
United Nations in such a domain. That was made clear
at the 2005 World Summit. Our leaders emphasized the
existing obligation to settle disputes by peaceful

23

S/PV.6108

means, in accordance with Chapter VI of the Charter
and with the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. They also recognized the important
role of the good offices of the Secretary-General,
including in the mediation of disputes, and the need to
strengthen the Secretariat’s capacity in that area.
Based on such solid political consensus, Member
States need to address a number of conceptual, political
and practical aspects related to mediation, such as
those addressed by the Secretary-General in his report.
I wish to share my delegation’s perspectives on a few
of them.
Mediation can be a powerful tool to help reach a
solution in various stages of a dispute, but we believe
the sooner it is used, the better. An effective mediation
process can assist opponents to reach a settlement
before the dispute turns into an armed conflict. Once
violence flares, making peace becomes more
challenging and human costs start rising, often
dramatically.
Early mediation will be easier to provide if the
United Nations and other actors develop and keep the
expertise needed for immediate and/or rapid use. In
that regard, we welcome the establishment of the
Mediation Support Unit within the Department of
Political Affairs and its recent strengthening through
the addition of seven posts. Likewise, we support
efforts to help regional organizations to reinforce their
own mechanisms for dispute settlement, as well as to
assist national and local institutions in that respect.
Such cooperation is crucial, since actors other
than the United Nations can be very effective as
mediators and in some cases may stand higher chances
of success. Recent examples of successful regional or
subregional mediation come to mind. In the Americas,
the Organization of American States was able to assist
Colombia and Ecuador, and in Africa the Southern
African Development Community was key to bringing
about national unity in Zimbabwe. Even in cases where
others are better placed to mediate a dispute, the
Organization should still be ready to provide support,
both political and technical, to those taking the lead, if
needed.
The Security Council makes good use of
mediation when, for instance, it decides on the
mandate of some peacekeeping operations, but it could

24

resort more frequently and decisively to the peaceful
settlement of disputes. We know that the Council’s firm
support to mediators strengthens their position and
encourages parties to seriously engage in negotiations.
Other measures could be explored.
Apart from assisting in the settlement of specific
disputes, further recourse to Chapter VI contributes to
the long-term sustainability of action under Chapter
VII. Early efforts to peacefully resolve disputes reduce
threats to peace and security and therefore help to
maintain the demand for peacekeeping operations at
levels that the United Nations and Member States can
manage adequately. From that perspective, greater use
of mediation can be a part of the Council’s overall
response to the increased magnitude and complexity of
peacekeeping.
Therefore, my delegation agrees with the
recommendations submitted by the Secretary-General.
We attach particular importance to strengthening
conflict prevention and resolution through early
engagement, developing close partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations and promoting
national and local capacity in conflict prevention and
resolution.
In conclusion, I wish to stress my delegation’s
continued interest in this debate. We are also willing to
explore how to further integrate innovative means of
peaceful settlement of disputes into the agenda of the
principal organs of the United Nations, including the
Security Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Normandin (Canada) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like, Sir, to thank you and the
Mexican delegation for organizing this important
meeting.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2009/189) and the Under-SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Pascoe. The report is a very useful
document to understand mediation as a key instrument
for the maintenance of peace and security. As the
Secretary-General said, very little attention and few
resources are devoted to mediation. That is all the more
surprising, since that approach is very relevant and
promising as well as cost-effective when seeking a
solution to a conflict.

09-30825

S/PV.6108

Last January, at the Security Council’s open
debate on peacekeeping operations (see S/PV. 6075),
Canada stated that, following the Brahimi report,
special attention should be paid to some existing or
new challenges that the United Nations needed to meet
in the field of peacekeeping. In particular, Canada
underlined the importance of harnessing the preventive
capacity of the United Nations, as prevention remains a
fundamental and joint responsibility of the United
Nations, its senior officers and the Member States. The
unique legitimacy of the United Nations in the field of
mediation and conflict resolution is widely
acknowledged. However, beyond the Secretariat’s good
offices, it is important to recall that Chapter VI of the
United Nations Charter also bestows on this Council
the general responsibility to engage in prevention
activities.
Canada also stressed the importance of the
political dimensions of peace operations. Increasingly,
conflicts are not fully resolved when a peace operation
is deployed, and the regional dimensions or the partial
respect for peace agreements complicate a large
number of operations. In such cases, the political
dimensions of peace operations become vital.
Yet, it must be acknowledged that those political
dimensions are not well integrated within peacekeeping
structures. Continued mediation efforts before, during
and after the deployment of a peacekeeping mission,
whether or not there is a comprehensive peace
agreement, are paramount to the success of United
Nations efforts to re-establish peace and security.
The Secretary-General’s report makes excellent
recommendations. I should like to speak in particular
about four of these.
First, Canada unreservedly supports the need to
build on the progress of the Mediation Support Unit
(MSU) within the Department of Political Affairs.
Canada has provided funding to the MSU to develop its
roster of external experts for rapid deployment.
Canada’s contribution to that project will be
supplemented by a list of Canadian mediation experts.
Secondly, the imbalance between the number of
men and women in senior mediation posts should be
corrected. To date, there have been no women among
chief mediators, and very few in formal mediation
roles of any kind. Canada applauds the SecretaryGeneral’s expressed intentions in that regard and
requests that concerted efforts be made across the

09-30825

United Nations system to turn that commitment into
results.
Thirdly, mediation efforts require dedicated
expertise to ensure that appropriate and inclusive
approaches are applied to all sectors. The nature of
conflict is changing, and our response must adapt
accordingly. Increasingly, sexual violence is used as a
tactic of warfare; ceasefire and other mediated
agreements must acknowledge and address that issue.
Resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) provide
essential guidance on these matters for mediators.
Fourthly, the Secretary-General mentions the
importance of strengthening regional mediation
capacities. Canada fully supports the recommendation
to ensure closer partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations. Let me also add to the list
the important contribution made by the International
Organization of la Francophonie, inter alia, in Chad
and the Central African Republic.
(spoke in English)
With respect to the Americas, Canada is
developing a partnership with the Organization of
American States (OAS) to deploy Canadian mediation
support expertise within the OAS Department of
Democratic Sustainability and Special Missions. Let
me also note that Canada continues to assist in the
effective implementation of the Kenya National
Dialogue and Reconciliation agreements to encourage
the ongoing political dialogue between the coalition
partners through the mediation assistance of the Panel
of Eminent African Personalities.
Successful mediation efforts demand synergies
among the various departments, funds, programmes
and agencies of the United Nations. As different
aspects of peace agreements are addressed, the work of
mediation experts and various United Nations
representatives from other fields can be mutually
reinforcing.
Let me note that Canada is currently undergoing
an internal policy exercise to consider past engagement
in mediation processes and to examine options for
enhancing Canada’s contribution to the prevention and
resolution of conflicts through mediation in the future.
As we begin to see the appearance of new trends in
mediation — including the next generation of
mediators, such as non-governmental organizations —
the Security Council’s work on the maintenance of

25

S/PV.6108

peace and security is going to be affected and it must be
agile and responsive to these changing circumstances.
In conclusion, let me say that Canada looks
forward to engaging with the United Nations in this
area and to supporting the work of the Security Council
in particular.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like to thank you, Sir, for convening this open
debate, and the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/189) on enhancing mediation and its support
activities, submitted pursuant to the presidential
statement of 23 September 2008 (S/PRST/2008/36),
adopted under the presidency of Burkina Faso. We pay
tribute to the report’s objectivity with respect to the
importance of mediation as a means of preventing
armed conflicts or of settling them in their early stages,
before they escalate into armed conflicts threatening
international peace and security. That is why this issue
must be addressed at the international level through the
Security Council.
I should also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lynn Pascoe for presenting the SecretaryGeneral’s report, and to associate myself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of Cuba
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Despite the Secretary-General’s intensive efforts
to enhance the United Nations capacity to assume its
mediation responsibilities, the implementation of the
provisions of the 2005 World Summit Outcome
Document (General Assembly resolution 60/1) as an
informal framework for promoting peaceful settlement
has yet to rise to the level of arbitration among parties.
However, the report perpetuates the confusion between
mediation activities aimed at preventing conflicts
through preventive diplomacy, such as good offices
and the facilitation of dialogue and mediation, and the
settlement of disputes and post-conflict peacebuilding
activities.
It is also important to identify the range of
mediation tasks that the United Nations can undertake
while maintaining clear objectives and a time frame
focused on the phase when a dispute among States or
within a State is still at the stage of a difference of
opinions. Such tasks must be undertaken before a
crisis, if not settled, escalates into an international or

26

internal conflict that threatens international peace and
security and upon the request or the direct approval of
the State or States concerned.
From this perspective, the United Nations and the
Security Council in particular have a major
responsibility in enhancing the trust of Member States
in their capacity to mediate in an objective, transparent
and neutral manner. That responsibility should be
assumed in a way that provides the United Nations
with an exceptional role in this field and in cooperation
and coordination with regional and subregional
organizations and arrangements. That role should
directly influence the sovereign decisions of States,
upon their request and approval, through arguments
and negotiations demonstrating that the parties’
interests can be served through such efforts. Those
efforts must be made in accordance with the principles
of national ownership and in respect for the relevant
provisions of the Charter on sovereignty and regional
security.
This can be achieved not only through the
restructuring of the Department of Political Affairs, the
establishment of the Mediation Support Unit and the
strengthening of its capacity to assume the role for
which it was created, but also by enhancing
international conviction that the Secretary-General and
his seniors assistants, who play the role of mediators,
are starting with a neutral perspective, accurate
information and realistic approaches. They should take
into account all aspects relating to the cultural,
political, religious, ethnic and other causes of
international conflicts, independent of the views and
visions of the Security Council members, in addressing
situations in their early stages. Their work should also
be based on the enhanced independence of the
Secretary-General and his representatives as they
assume their exceptional roles free of all influence.
We in the African Union have accumulated
mature experience in the field of mediation through the
Panel of Eminent African Personalities. The Panel
comprises a number of former leaders known for their
wisdom, impartiality and justice. It meets periodically
to follow up on developments in various African
countries in a manner that allows for an incremental
accumulation of information on disputes that might
arise at different stages, and takes advantage of the
trust that African leaders place in these eminent
personalities. This trust has been built over the course
of years and is founded on the record of achievements

09-30825

S/PV.6108

of every one of its members in their country of origin.
The Panel is also founded on its diversity, representing
all African subregions, on the full independence and
absolute impartiality of its members, and on their
awareness of regional developments.
Without doubt, the ability of the United Nations
to mediate between nations is directly linked to its
ability — particularly that of the Security Council — to
deal effectively with conflicts when they arise. It is not
enough for the United Nations to manage crises
without making any real effort to settle disputes. That
has led to the increase of peacekeeping operations to
their current level, which endangers the chances of
dispatching additional such missions in the near future.
In this regard, Egypt believes that there is an organic
link between deploying peacekeeping missions and
attaining peace agreements. We therefore agree with
the Secretary-General observation in his report on the
work of the organization at the sixty-third session of
the General Assembly: that peacekeeping requires that
there be a peace to keep. Accordingly, all parties
should consider the role of the United Nations in
addressing issues of concern at an early stage, before
these issues evolve into conflicts that require
intervention by the Security Council or the dispatch of
a peacekeeping operation.
From that perspective, Egypt emphasizes the
critical importance of strengthening the organic link
between the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council and of deepening
cooperation between those two organs in the field of
mediation. The successes of the two organs can be
enhanced by strengthening coordination in these
activities between the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the African Union Commissioner. From
the same perspective, we stress the centrality of
enhancing the joint mediation efforts of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States on the one hand
and the Organization of the Islamic Conference on the
other, in order to address issues involving Member
States in the same manner in which the international
community has recently been dealing with the case of
Darfur.
The report’s consideration of lessons learned
highlights the importance of preventing the repeated
failure of mediation processes in a manner that could
negatively affect efforts to reach a settlement. It also
stresses the importance of coordination among various
United Nations bodies, with due regard for gender

09-30825

balance in the appointment of mediators; of appointing
appropriate trustworthy personnel to assume mediation
roles; and of ensuring respect for the rules of
international law in dealing with serious crimes,
especially with respect to the scope of application of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
We accept most of the recommendation set out in
the report, but Egypt observes with increasing concern
the Secretary-General’s attempt to finance all the
mediation and mediation support activities through
voluntary contributions, even though this could affect
the neutrality of these efforts and lead to their failure.
Egypt believes that mediation processes have to be
financed through formal contributions to the United
Nations budget and that such processes should be listed
in the Organization’s budget among the special
political missions. In this regard, we have previously
suggested the establishment of a special account in
order to avoid calculating such activities as extras in
the budget. We will continue to support this proposal
with a view to its adoption by the General Assembly,
which is the principal organ originally mandated to
deal with budgetary issues.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French): At
the outset, Mr. President, I would like to thank you for
organizing this open debate and giving non-members
of the Council the opportunity to state their views on
today’s important and timely topic. I am most grateful
too to Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing,
and in particular for the illustrative examples he
provided.
My statement will address three points: the
concept and significance of mediation; examples of our
cooperation with the United Nations; and some major
challenges.
The concept of mediation has changed
significantly over the past 20 years. From being seen as
an art mainly practiced by elder statesmen, mediation
is now increasingly viewed as a profession demanding
highly specialized personnel. In fact, mediation is a
complex undertaking involving numerous actors. It is
best conducted by integrated teams of mediation
experts of different levels and with diverse
backgrounds. Experience shows that mediation is an
effective instrument to resolve conflict. It increases the
probability of reaching an agreement and of long-term

27

S/PV.6108

reduction of tensions. Research suggests that since
2000, 17 conflicts were ended by the negotiation of a
peace agreement, whereas four ended by the military
success of one side.
To be sure, the effectiveness of mediation
depends on many different factors. Active Security
Council engagement can play an important role in
strengthening and supporting mediation activities. We
therefore welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on enhancing mediation and its support activities
(S/2009/189), and we welcome today’s debate. The
report is a timely, adequate and useful contribution to
further discussions in the Council. At the same time, it
is true as well that mediation efforts need support
beyond the Security Council. The Council bears an
important responsibility of striking the proper balance
between providing support and maintaining the
autonomy of negotiators. It must also pool its own
efforts with those of stakeholders outside the Council
who are able and willing to make contributions.
Finally, it must adapt outside contributions to the needs
of local and regional actors. Rightly, the report touches
upon some of these issues.
Switzerland commends the Secretary-General’s
approach to mediation, as described in his report, and
supports United Nations activities based on this
concept in many ways. Let me mention two examples.
Swiss mediation specialists have been deployed to
United Nations mediation processes, as in the case of
the former head of the group of legal experts for the
Cyprus peace process. In other cases, these mediators
have worked closely with the United Nations. In Sudan
for instance, we are cooperating with the joint African
Union-United Nations mediation team for Darfur by
providing assistance and training for various parties to
the conflict. In Nepal, Swiss experts have been
working in close cooperation with the United Nations
in facilitating dialogue between the parties.
Switzerland has also supported the Mediation
Support Unit, financially and through training and
conceptual knowledge on best practices, including
guidance notes on federalism and mediation in peace
processes and on dealing with the past and mediation
in peace processes.
The Secretary-General’s report addresses many
important issues that reflect in some ways our own
national experience. Let me give three examples.

28

First, to be successful, mediation has to address
the root causes of a conflict and requires a thorough
understanding of the local situation and its cultural,
political and ethnic dimensions. In this regard, close
cooperation with local mediators and civil society is
important. Such cooperation also strengthens local
ownership of the process.
Secondly, implementation of the provisions of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) on women
and peace and security remains a major challenge. We
therefore strongly support the commitment of the
Secretary-General to increase the proportion of women
included in mediation teams and in particular to
strengthen the gender-related expertise of senior
mediators and their teams.
Thirdly, meaningful mediation has to involve all
parties involved. This can lead to the dilemma of how
to address both the imperatives of justice and those of
peace. The standards and guidelines that have been
formulated in this area are a good example of how
mediation has been professionalized. However, there
still is need for better cooperation among all actors
involved if we want to be able to implement these
standards.
In conclusion, let me stress how important it is
for the Council to develop a collective vision of its role
in international mediation efforts, taking into account
the synergies and linkages among mediation,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. It is also very
important for the Council to continue the dialogue with
non-members on this topic. We consider the report of
the Secretary-General and today’s meeting to be
important first steps.
With respect to the follow-up, it will be necessary
to formulate more specifically the ideas contained in
the report and further develop the general framework
that the Secretary-General has proposed today.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina):
Mr. President, at the outset I wish to thank you for
convening this important debate. I am sure that this
meeting, under your able guidance, will be very
fruitful.
Bosnia and Herzegovina aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
Czech Republic on behalf of the European Union.

09-30825

S/PV.6108

I also would like to express my appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his skilfully crafted report on
enhancing mediation and its support activities.
The modern world is going to face new
challenges. There are some prognoses that predict a
number of possible future drivers of conflicts, such as
severe economic and social problems, oil, some
strategic minerals and climate change and, in that
connection, the depletion of resources.
We have learned from modern history that the
vast majority of conflicts cannot be solved by the use
of force. There is no need to mention that war takes a
nation’s valuable economic and financial resources and
its most precious resource: human lives. My intention
is not to stress that armed conflicts are expensive but
rather that they are meaningless. At the end, all parties
involved in a conflict arrive, by themselves or through
other players in international relations, at a solution by
which to end the conflict. My statement concludes that
the peaceful settlement of disputes through mediation
is and will be an indispensable tool in resolving
contemporary and possible future conflicts.
Theoretically speaking, mediation as a method of
peaceful settlement of disputes can be traced to the
ancient world. This proactive method means that the
mediator is active and takes part in negotiations,
suggesting terms of settlement to the parties, and sets
preliminary arrangements based on areas in which the
parties can agree. Also, a mediator has to enjoy the
confidence of the parties to a dispute and must be
impartial. This definition provides basic elements of
the notion of mediation, which is a truly sensitive and
very delicate matter. But when this method comes to
life with its complexity, many questions arise and have
to be answered.
In that regard the report of Secretary-General,
with its sophisticated methodology and precise
analysis, is a real masterpiece in this matter. It should
be included in the literature for any future mediators,
and publishing it in a handbook edition should be
considered.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has its own painful
experience. Unfortunately, Bosnia and Herzegovina has
experienced mediation in all three stages of conflict. It
is unnecessary to say that mediation at the first stage,
when the conflict still had not escalated into armed
conflict, failed. Because of our “street smart”

09-30825

experience, my delegation would like to underline
some points from the report.
First, disputes should be resolved at an early
stage, before they turn into violent conflict, and the
process should be as inclusive as possible. The United
Nations, with all its capacity, should be engaged in the
process as soon as possible. Every avenue — I repeat,
every — must be explored to persuade actors to engage
in negotiations at a very early stage of conflict.
Secondly, the mediator should possess good
listening and problem-solving skills and should be
supported by a highly skilled professional team. In that
regard, women should be appropriately represented at
decision-making levels.
Thirdly, leverage in mediation is very useful tool,
but it must be used delicately or it can cause resistance.
It this connection, managing spoilers is crucial,
especially if powerful international actors are in play to
control them. Sometimes it is very useful when some
neighbouring countries or regional powers that are in
close relationship with actors exert pressure on them in
order to persuade them to sit at the table.
Fourthly, the United Nations should continue to
build closer partnerships with regional, subregional and
non-governmental organizations in mediation capacitybuilding. Acting in synergy, all those organizations
may be considerably helpful in the field of conflict
prevention.
Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the
establishment of the Mediation Support Unit in the
Department of Political Affairs and supports the
recommendation by Secretary-General that the United
Nations develop the next generation of mediators who
will have the skills to manage any future challenges.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that only
strengthening the capacity of the United Nations to
prevent conflict in its every phase — the first stage,
before it escalates into armed conflict; the second
stage, after the outbreak of violence; and the third
stage, the implementation of peace agreements — can
guarantee that the future world will be a much safer
and better place to live.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on

29

S/PV.6108

your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of April and to thank you for
organizing this meeting devoted to mediation and
settlement of disputes, in extension of the timely
initiative of the delegation of Burkina Faso during its
Council presidency in September 2008. The choice of
this topic demonstrates yet again the continuity and
steadfastness of the commitment of Mexico in the
service of peace and security throughout the world.
I also wish to convey my gratitude to Mr. Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General, for his comprehensive
briefing.
Today’s debate, the framework for which has
been provided by the report of the Secretary-General
on enhancing mediation and its support activities,
provides an opportunity to underscore our support for
the United Nations role in finding solutions to
problems through negotiation.
The peaceful settlement of disputes, in addition to
being a guiding principle in international relations, is a
common objective at the very heart of our
Organization’s activity. The promotion of this type of
dispute settlement, excluding the use of force, is a
fundamental principle in Article 2 of the Charter, and
all of Chapter VI is devoted to it. Mediation, which is
part of peaceful settlement, is rightly considered to be
the most cost-effective and efficient way to find
constructive solutions to disputes.
Since its creation the United Nations has, through
the good offices and mediation of its SecretariesGeneral and of eminent personalities, undertaken
significant efforts to peacefully resolve conflicts in the
world, and its actions have often been crowned with
success. However, sometimes those actions were
considered failures because of a lack of a good
understanding of the dynamic of conflicts and of the
stakes involved, which in hindsight masked a lack of
preparation or an imperfect command of the use of
time, if not an intentional lack of will to uphold the
authority of the United Nations and the Charter
principles.
To mitigate those shortcomings, the proposal of
the Secretary-General to create, as part of the
comprehensive restructuring of the Organization, a
Mediation Support Unit composed of a pool of welltrained experts has been welcomed by all Member
States. From our point of view, it is the institutional
anchor for an activity that we need to support by

30

promoting improvement of the quality of operational
support to mediators, a good connection of United
Nations interventions with regional and subregional
pillars and, finally, greater involvement of the Security
Council and its support for the mandate entrusted to
mediators.
Experience has shown that to be genuinely
effective, mediation, far from falling within the
exclusive remit of the United Nations, benefits from
association with a multiplicity of actors pooling their
efforts and whose skills are brought to bear at different
stages of the process, according to their specific
contribution and taking account of the comparative
advantage that their actions represent, in terms of both
political and material costs.
Moreover, we are of the view that improving the
method of financing special political missions will
make it possible to identify ways to optimize the use of
the Organization’s resources over the medium and long
terms.
Africa has long cultivated a tradition of
negotiation and dialogue to resolve disputes by
peaceful means. That culture of dialogue already
existed when the Organization of African Unity was
established in 1963, through the Commission of
Mediation, Conciliation and Arbitration. Its activities
were intended to facilitate the goal of continental
development, which at the time was constantly being
hampered by the proliferation of conflicts.
With its transformation into the African Union in
2002, its member States undertook the substantive
renewal of a number of its organs, taking care to
include in its new institutional architecture a similar
conflict management and resolution mechanism, based
on a Panel of the Wise responsible for supporting its
efforts in order to prevent the eruption of conflicts and
to create favourable conditions for conflict
management and resolution. That mechanism, which
was a first on both the African international scenes, has
not only enabled African countries to give concrete
content to the culture of peace — which represents a
strong aspiration of all African peoples — but, also,
and in particular, has given Africa the opportunity to
capitalize on considerable experience in its quest for
lasting solutions to conflicts.
At a time when we are witnessing an
unprecedented increase in the number and scale of
United Nations peacekeeping operations, which have

09-30825

S/PV.6108

revealed the objective limits of the Organization’s
capacity to meet these needs, it is becoming imperative
to make the too-long-awaited change of moving the
Organization from a culture of reaction to a culture of
prevention. The international community as a whole
and the Security Council in particular must now
commit themselves to a resolute approach aimed at
supporting, consolidating and broadening the
momentum launched on the African continent by the
African Union, from which the United Nations will
only stand to benefit.
Finally, I should like to stress that Algeria, which
has always advocated the peaceful settlement of
disputes, has often been called upon to mediate in
situations as varied as the 1974 territorial dispute
between Iran and Iraq, in which conflict was avoided;
the 1979 hostage crisis between the United States and
Iran; the civil war in Lebanon, leading to the
conclusion of the Taif Accords; the open conflict
between Ethiopia and Eritrea, which ended with the
2000 Algiers Agreement; and the ongoing efforts
regarding issues of a sensitive and internal nature in
the immediate regional environment on its southern
border. From those situations, we have learned that any
successful mediation effort must be carried out with
respect for Charter principles and depends on the
unequivocal political will of the parties to a dispute,
the mediator’s deep sensitivity to the environment and,
above all, the parties’ confidence in the mediator.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over the
Security Council on behalf of Mexico for the month of
April, at a time when the Council is considering the
issue of mediation in the light of the clear and
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/189), presented today by Under-SecretaryGeneral Lynn Pascoe.
The enshrining in the Charter of the United
Nations of the customary principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes gave legitimacy to mediation as
the preferred and effective means to resolve disputes
and conflicts. Since then, mediation has proved its
effectiveness and usefulness in many situations in the
quest for solutions to crises. It is becoming
increasingly important in a world torn by the
proliferation of various kinds of conflicts and by the

09-30825

fragility of post-conflict situations. Here, we can only
be pleased that various forms of mediation are tending
to take on a preventive character and to cover postconflict situations.
In the practice of mediation, it has been amply
demonstrated that the success of any such effort
continues to depend on the commitment of the parties
to cooperate positively with the mediator’s efforts. The
success of such an undertaking involves a certain
number of principles: first, the consent of the parties to
resort to the mediator’s services; secondly, the
genuine — and not just apparent — political will of the
parties to commit themselves to the settlement process,
and their adoption of positions that support, rather than
obstruct, a settlement; and thirdly, the objectivity and
impartiality of the mediator in his understanding of the
dispute and his commitment to safeguarding and
consolidating the gains achieved. That requires, above
all, knowledge about the history of the situation,
awareness of its realities and an ability to maintain an
ongoing, substantive, realistic and future-oriented
dialogue with the parties to the dispute.
As mediation is simply a catalyst and a modus
operandi designed to influence the conduct of the
parties and to bring their points of view closer together,
the difficulty, as the Secretary-General indicates in his
report, lies in transforming “this adversarial process
into one of problem-solving”, in nudging “reluctant
parties towards accommodation” and in “moving away
from entrenched positions to explore innovative
options” (S/2009/189, para. 25).
On their own with the mediators, the parties
cannot make progress without the support of the
Security Council, the efforts of the Secretary-General
and the encouragement of Member States. Indeed, the
role that the Council can play in the area of mediation
is essential and has a positive and immediate impact on
the conflict. Through its support for the good-offices
efforts of the Secretary-General and his envoys and
representatives, the Council promotes mediation and
provides ample opportunities for conflict settlement
through peaceful means, over and above any other
alternative.
At the same time, and by virtue of its
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Council can use its authority
vis-à-vis the parties to a conflict in order to maximize
the gains and advantages offered by mediation and can

31

S/PV.6108

encourage the parties to adopt a constructive attitude to
United Nations efforts and to consider the impact on
the region’s peoples and on the objective of
international peace and security.
The Secretary-General, for his part, plays a
valuable complementary role and enjoys prestige that
enables him to intervene effectively to overcome an
impasse in or re-launch the settlement of a dispute or
conflict. That role should be politically and materially
supported, including through assistance for the
Mediation Support Unit, the establishment of a
database of potential candidates for mediation,
facilitation and negotiation and, finally, the promotion
of training in the area of mediation.
Furthermore, while the observation made in the
Secretary-General’s report about the role played by
States in conflict reduction and resolution applies to
Security Council member States and other influential
States, it applies equally — if not more — to the States
that are neighbours to the zone of conflict or dispute.
Indeed, the emphasis placed in the report on the
imperative need to understand conflicts in their
regional or subregional context underscores that fact,
which requires States in the region to conduct
themselves in a positive manner with regard to settling
the dispute or conflict.
However, the results of mediation, when it
succeeds, can be incomplete or can easily be reversed

32

if peacebuilding efforts do not follow — if the
international community disengages itself from the
conflict and does not help the parties to strengthen the
rule of law and democracy, to re-launch their
economies and to better manage the post-conflict
phase.
In its thinking and in its actions, Morocco has
always favoured the peaceful settlement of disputes
and conflicts. It has always been committed to
fostering dialogue and bringing together points of view
in different regions of the world, in particular in the
Middle East and in Africa, including in the Mano River
region. My country’s commitment to the peaceful
settlement of disputes strengthened its early
commitment to the United Nations in peacekeeping
operations, a commitment which continues and is
growing stronger.
Finally, Morocco is ready to associate itself with
the efforts of the United Nations and to support it in its
quest to acquire a mediation support structure that
would be efficient and effective within the framework
of strengthening United Nations-preventive diplomacy.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are still
some 20 speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. I intend, with the concurrence of members of
the Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.

09-30825
