UNITED NATIONS

C
AL REC
THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR
th
MEETING:

8 JUNE

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Pap

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2376) . . . . .,..*,,.....,,..*.**.............

1

Adoption of the agenda , , , , , . . . . . . . . . ,.,.,*.,...........,,.............

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162) . . . . . , , . . *...*.*,....*,,...........*....*......~..*......

I

SlPV.2376

---

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfJicial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement
in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 196.5, became fully operative
on that date.

2374th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 8 June 1982, at 12.15 p.m.
Mr, Luc de La BARRE
(France).

Pwsidem:

de NANTEUIL

report relating
(1982).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China,
France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama,
Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional

3.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (5115162)

Council

resolution

509

I now call on the Secretary-General.

4. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Members of the
Council will have received my report relating to
resolution 509 (1982), which contains the replies of
the Governments of Israel, Lebanon and the PLO.

agenda (SlAgendaI2376)

1.

to Security

5. Information received from the area indicates that
extensive hostilities are still in progress.

of the agenda
6. On the coastal road, after three days of intensive fighting, including ground and naval artillery
fire as well as air strikes, fires have broken out in
several parts of Tyre town and there is extensive
damage. Inhabitants had earlier evacuated the town,
most of them seeking refuge on the beach. The United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
has
dispatched ambulances and doctors to the area. The
International
Committee
of the Red Cross has requested UNIFIL
to try and send food, water and
medical supplies, Attempts are being made to assist
to this effect.

Adoption of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162)

‘7. In the central sector, logistical support units have
joined the Israeli forces near Nabatiyah.
8. In the eastern sector, after partially destroying
the Nepalese position, blocking access to the Khardala
bridge, more than 100 tanks of the Israeli Defence
Forces (IDF) have gone through in an overwhelming
use of force.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation fiorn French):
In accordance
with decisions taken at previous
meetings [237&/l and 2375th mretings], I invite the
representatives
of Lebanon and lsrael to take a place
at the Council table. I invite the representative of the
Palestine
Liberation
Organization (PLO) to take a
place at the Council table. I invite the representative
of Egypt to take the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council Chamber.

9. Throughout the night of 7/8 June, heavy clashes,
as well as artillery exchanges, were observed in the
vicinity of Hasbaya. In this area alone, Israeli forces
are estimated to exceed two mechanized brigades. It
has been reported that intensive military activity also
continues north of the Litani, including air strikes in
a number of locations. In a further serious development this morning, there were two air strikes by
Syrian aircraft in the vicinity of Dibil and Deir Mimess,
both in the enclave.
10. In the UNIFIL
area itself, despite the difficult,
dangerous and provocative situation at present prevailing, UNIFIL
troops and United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization
(UNTSO)
observers have
remained in all their positions. They were instructed
to block advancing forces, take defence measures

2. The PRESIDENT
(intcrprctrrtion jiwrn Frcnck):
Members of the Council have before them document
S/15 178, which contains the Secretary-General’s
I

I

and stay in their positions until their safety was seriously imperilled. Contingents have acted accordingly
despite the overwhelming strength of the IDF movements, The following are some of the examples reported by the Force Commander.

21. The situation is too serious to allow for speeches
and rhetoric. I would therefore make only two very
brief points. The first is that what is at stak:e now in
the invasion of Lebanon is the future of Lebanon itselk
its territorial integrity, its independence and its sovereignty. This must be preserved. It is the responsibility of the Council and of the Charter to prevent a
Member State from being literally murdered. We make
this appeal in the most urgent terms to the members
of the Council collectively
and individually
to take
all the measures that are in their power, within the
Charter and within the Council’s field of action. to
stop the war immediately-and
I say immediatelyand to enforce immediately resolutions 508 (1982) and
509 (1982). My second point is the followimg. Israel
has not only violated my country’s integrity; it is also
savagely violating the fourth Geneva Convention of
1949’ and all the rules of international morality and
human rights. It is attacking civilians and civilian
targets with great ferocity. Ancient cities., such as
Tyre and Sidon, and small villages and to’wns have
become the targets of ferocious action.

I 1, In the morning of 6 June, Dutch soldiers planted
obstacles before advancing Israeli tank columns.
One Israeli tank was damaged. The obstacles however were pushed aside as was the Dutch guard house.
Tank barrels were pointed at the UNIFIL
soldiers.
12. Likewise, in the other battalion areas, obstacles
were forcibly removed and bulldozed.
13. At the Khardala bridge, a small Nepalese position stood its ground for two days, despite harassment
and threats. Their position has been partially destroyed and some 100 Israeli tanks have crossed the
bridge in the morning of 8 June.
14. United Nations soldiers and observers have
also maintained
their positions in Tyre barracks,
Chateau de Beaufort and in the enclave, despite
constant danger to their lives.

22. The Lebanese Red Cross, affiliated with the
International Red Cross, is issuing an appeal stating
unequivocally that its ambulances, its automobiles and
its volunteer workers have been the targets of savage
attacks by Israelis and that they have been Iprevented
from fulfilling their duty to evacuate the ciwlians and
the wounded and to transport medicines, blood and
food supplies to the distressed.

15. Throughout
the present hostilities,
General
Callaghan has repeatedly and most strenuously protested the violation of Lebanese territory by the IDF,
and of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
Since the start of the operation, UNIFIL
headquarters
at Naquora has been cut off from all UNIFIL
battalions and supply routes have been closed. Communications have become difficult and the Iogistical situation
is grave.

23. This in itself gives the Council an idea of the
sort of war that Israel is waging and of the sort of
peace it claims to want.

16. I need hardly add that the continuing spread and
escalation of the hostilities is a matter of the most
profound concern.

24. The PRESIDENT
(interprettrtion
fiorn Fwrrt.hl:
The next speaker is the representative of Israel. on
whom I now call.

17. The PRESIDENT
(interpretcrtion
.fiom French):
I now call on the representative of Lebanon.

25. Mr. BLUM (Israel): At a time like this, it behoves
us all to speak with honesty and with candour:
it
behoves us all to refrain from making empty accusations: it behoves us all to forgo the habit, which many
of us seem to have acquired here in this building and
in this chamber, of engaging in hollow pontification.
This is a serious time for all of us. It is a serious time
for the peoples of Israel and Lebanon. And, as we all
know, the origins of this serious situation go back for
some time. They go back for at least a decade: ever
since, Lebanon’s sovereignty has been systematically
eroded and undermined by a variety of elements--and
I do not have to mention them because the members
of the Council are familiar with them, despite the fact
that the situation in Lebanon has never in all these
years been placed on the agenda of the Council. There
is not the slightest doubt in my mind that the origins
of this situation are also well known to Mr. TuCni.

18. Mr. TUENI
(Lebanon): My Government
has
asked for this urgent meeting because the situation
in Lebanon is becoming increasingly grave and serious.
19. First, I take note of the Secretary-General’s
report [S//5/78] and in this context I reiterate my Government’s position. I would ask the Council also to
take due note of Israel’s flat non-compliance with both
Council resolution 508 (1982) and resolution 509 (1982).
20. I thank the Secretary-General for his verbal report
this morning and I also thank his colleagues. I take
note of the flagrant attacks by the invading forces
against UNIFIL,
and of the threats and attempts to
prevent UNIFIL
from fulfilling its mandate, which
indeed constitute flagrant defiance of the authority of
the Council and OF the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.

26. As far as Israel is concerned, for the past dccade and more, Lebanese territory has become the
launching-pad and the staging-ground for iindiscrim2

inate terrorist attacks on the civilian population of
Israel. There have been hundreds of such outrages,
the targets of which, deliberately,
have been the children of Israel, the women of Israel, the civilians of
Israel, as well as the diplomats of Israel.

underlying
country.

the predicament

of that

unfortunate

International terrorism has converted Lebanon
one of its major centres-indeed,
into its world
headquarters. The terrorist PLO, which has systematically undermined and subverted Lebanese sovereignty ever since the early 197Os, has welcomed to
Lebanon its terrorist guests from other parts of the
war-Id.

32. I cannot and will not hide from you, Mr. President, and the other members of the Council the feeling
of the people of Israel that the Council has for all these
years treated with callousness and indifference all our
complaints with regard to PLO barbarism originating
from Lebanon against Israeli civilians. In these circumstances, it is the right and the duty of the Government of Israel to take the necessary measures to
protect the lives of Israel’s citizens and to ensure their
safety.

28. But to come back to the major preoccupation of
my country: Lebanon has become the staging ground
for every terrorist outrage perpetrated against Israelis
in Israel and abroad, as well as against Jews around
the world. For IO years and more Israel has been
regularly reporting these outrages to the Council.
There have been hundreds of complaints submitted by
LIS to the Council. All of them have gone unheeded.
The Council has remained unmoved. It has not seen fit
to act with a view to curbing the criminal activities of
the PLO.

33. Israel has no territorial ambitions whatsoever
in Lebanon. We do not covet even one single square
inch of Lebanese territory. We do not want to stay in
Lebanon, or in any part thereof. But we are entitled
to demand that proper arrangements be made so that
Lebanon should no longer serve as a staging ground
for terrorist attacks against Israel’s civilian population, We are entitled to demand that concrete arrangements be made that would permanently and reliably
preclude hostile action against Israel’s citizens from
Lebanese soil.

29. Has the Council ever pronounced itself against
the harassment by the PLO of Israel’s civilian population, especially in the northern part of the country
-our
civilian population
in the Galilee, which has
been repeatedly subjected to massive bombardment,
to shelling and to rocket attacks by the PLO, which
has been provided with long-range artillery pieces
and Katyusha rocket launchers by the Soviet Union
and its other protectors? The Council has not evinced
the slightest interest in these Israeli complaints.

34. Let me make it very clear: We fully support the
restoration of Lebanese sovereignty-Lebanese
SOVereignty that has been eroded over the past IO years,
first by the PLO and subsequently by the Syrian army
of occupation. We stand for the full restoration of
Lebanese sovereignty, of Lebanese independence,
of Lebanese territorial integrity, of the unity of Lebanon within its internationally
recognized boundaries and for the restoration of the local authority of
the Government of Lebanon within that country.

30. When is the Council galvanized into action? When
Israel, after years of unparalleled
restraint, finally
resorts to the exercise of its natural, fundamental and
inherent right of self-defence, which is the inalienable right of any State and which is also recognized
by the Charter of the United Nations. In order to save
a terrorist organization from well-deserved and longoverdue retribution, the Council is then convened in
emergency meetings, urgent meetings and every
conceivable form of extraordinary session.

35. We have stated our position in this regard many
times in the Council over the years. We abide by this
policy. But we insist, on the basis of reciprocity, that
Lebanon equally acknowledge the right of Israel’s
people to live in peace and security without the threat
of harassment and terrorist attacks from across the
Lebanese border.

27.

into

31. Let me just briefly recall that this is the same
Council which over all these years has not found the
time to devote even one such meeting to a debate on
the situation in Lebanon as a whole and to the causes

NOTE

3

HOW

TO

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

SE PROCURER

LES

Les publications
dcs Nations
Unies
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup&
des ventrs,
New York ou Gen&e.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations.

New

York

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

sont en vente dam les librairics
de votre libraire
ou adresser-vous

PUELICACIONES

LAS publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained
I‘rom bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations.
Sales Section.
New York or Geneva.

DE

LAS

NAClONES

Unidas
e&n
en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Nacioncs

00300

UNlES

et Its agences
9 : Nations

depositaires
du
U&s,
Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Seccidn
de Ventas,

8X-609RY-June

IYXY-2.050

.
