s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/25859
28 May 1993
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, en behalf of the Council,
at its 3225th meeting, on 28 May 1993, in connection with the Council's
consideration of the itero entitled "An agenda fer peace: preventive diplomacy,
peacemaking and peace-keeping":
"In accordance with its statement of 29 October 1992 (S/24728), the
Security Council held a special meeting devoted to the Secretary-General's
report entitled 'An Agenda for Peace• (S/24111). This meeting concluded
the present stage of the examination of this report by the Council. On
this occasion, the Council wishes to express once again its gratitude to
the Secretary-General for this report.
"The Security Council recommends that all States make participation in
and support fer international peace-keeping a part of their foreign and
national security policy.
It considers that United Nations peace-keeping
operations should be conducted in accordance with the following operational
principles consistent with the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations:
a clear political goal with a precise mandate subject to periodic
review and to change in its character or duration only by the Council
itself; the consent of the government and, where appropriate, the parties
concerned, save in exceptional cases; support for a political process or
for the peaceful settlement of the dispute; impartiality in implementing
Security Council decisions; readiness of the Security Council to take
appropriate measures against parties which do not observe its decisions;
the right of the Security Council to authorize all means necessary far
United Nations forces to carry out their mandate and the inherent right of
United Nations forces to take appropriate measures far self-defence.
In
this context, the Security Council emphasizes the need for the full
cooperation of the parties concerned in implementing the mandates of peacekeeping operations as well as relevant decisions of the Security Council
and stresses that peace-keeping operations should not be a substitute for a
political settlement nor should they be expected to continue in perpetuity.
"The Security Council has studied thoroughly the recommendations of
the Secretary-General contained in 'An Agenda fer Peace'.
It pays tribute

93-31499 (E)

/ ...

280593

310593

S/25859
English
Page 2

to the valuable contributions made by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and other relevant bodies of the General Assembly.
These discussions and consultations make it possible to formulate more
clearly the common priorities of the Member States.
"In the context of the rapid growth in and new approaches to peacekeeping operations, the Security Council commends the initial measures
taken by the Secretary-General to improve the capacity of the United
Nations in this field.
It believes that bold new steps are required and
invites all Member States to make their views known to the
Secretary-General and the Secretary-General to submit by september 1993 a
further report addressed to all the Members of the United Nations
containing specific new proposals for further enhancing these capabilities
including:
the strengthening and consolidation of the peace-keeping and
military structure of the Secretariat, including creation of a plans and
current operations directorate reporting to the Under-Secretary-General for
Peace-keeping Operations to facilitate planning and to enhance
coordination;
notification by Member States of specific forces or capabilities
which, with the approval of their national authorities, they could make
available on a case-by-case basis to the United Nations for the full
spectrum of peace-keeping or humanitarian operations; in this context the
Council welcomes the Secretary-General's effort to ascertain the readiness
and availability of Member States' forces or capabilities for peace-keeping
operations and encourages Member states to cooperate in this effort;
the feasibility of maintaining a limited revolving reserve of
equipment commonly used in peace-keeping or humanitarian operations;
elements far inclusion in national military or police training
programmes far peace-keeping operations to prepare personnel for a United
Nations peace-keeping role, including suggestions concerning the
feasibility of conducting multinational peace-keeping exercises;
refinement of standardized procedures to enable forces to work
together more effectively;
developing the non-military elements of peace-keeping operations.
"In view of the mounting cost and complexity of peace-keeping
operations, the Security Council also requests the Secretary-General in his
report to address measures designed to place them on a more salid and
durable financial basis, taking into account where appropriate the VolckerOgata report and addressing the necessary financial and managerial reforms,
diversification of funding, and the need to ensure adequate resources for
peace-keeping operations and maximum transparency and accountability in the
use of resources.
In this context the Council recalls that, in accordance
with the Charter and the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
financing of peace-keeping operations is the collective responsibility of
all Member States.
It calls upan all Member States to pay their assessed

S/25859

English
Page 3

contributions in full and on time and encourages those States which can do
so to make voluntary contributions.
"The Security Council expresses gratitude to the soldiers and
civilians who have served orare serving in United Nations peace-keeping
operations.
It paya tribute to the courageous nationals of dozens of
States who were killed or wounded while fulfilling their duty to the United
Nations.
It also strongly condemns attacks on United Nations peace-keepers
and declares its determination to undertake more decisive efforts to ensure
the security of United Nations personnel in the course of fulfilling their
duties.
"In accordance with Chapter VI of the Charter, the Security Council
notes the necessity to strengthen the United Nations potential far
preventive diplomacy.
It welcomes General Assembly resolution 47/120.
It
notes with satisfaction the increased use of fact-finding missions.
It
invites Member States to provide the Secretary-General with relevant
detailed information on situations of tension and potential crisis.
It
invites the Secretary-General to consider appropriate measures far
strengthening the Secretariat capacity to collect and analyse information.
The Security Council recognizes the importance of new approaches to
prevention of conflicts, and supports preventive deployment, on a case-bycase basis, in zones of instability and potential crisis the continuance of
which is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security.
"The Security Council underlines the clase link which may exist, in
many cases, between humanitarian assistance and peace-keeping operations
and highly appreciates recent efforts by the Secretary-General aimed at
further improvement of coordination among Member States and relevant
agencies and organizations, including non-governmental organizations.
It
reiterates, in this context, its concern that humanitarian personnel should
have unimpeded access to those in need.
"The Security Council reaffirms the importance it attaches to the role
of regional arrangements and organizations and to coordination between
their efforts and those of the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. The Council welcomes the readiness of
Member States, acting nationally or through regional organizations or
arrangements, to cooperate with the United Nations and other Member States
by providing their particular resources and capabilities far peace-keeping
purposes.
The Security Council, acting within the framework of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, calla upan regional
organizations and arrangements to consider ways and means of enhancing
their contributions to the ma~ntenance of peace and security.
Far its part
the Security Council expresses its readiness to support and facilitate,
taking into account specific circumstances, peace-keeping efforts
undertaken in the framework of regional organizations and arrangements in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter. The Security Council looks
forward to the report of the Secretary-General on cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations.

/ ...

S/25859

English
Page 4

"The Security Council draws attention to the increasing significance
of post-conflict peace-building. The Council is convinced that in present
circumstances peace-building is inseparably linked with the maintenance of
peace.
"The Security Council stresses the value of high-level meetings of the
Security Council and expresses ita intention to convene such a meeting on
the subject of peace-keeping in the near future."
