327th

United Nations

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING
Thursday, 1 February 1951, at 10.45 a.m.

FIFTH SESSION
Lake Success, New York

OlJicial Records

CONTENTS
Page

Intervention of the Central People's Goverrament of the People's Republic of
China in Korea: report of the First Committee (A/1770)
689
Budget estimates for the financial yecLr 1951: statement by the President ..... 696
p.yesident: Mr. Nasrollah ENTEZAM (Ira!~),

Intervention of the Central People's Government
of the People's Republic of China in Korea:
report of the First COh'Ullittee (A/1770)
[Agenda item 76]
1. The PRESIDENT (wanslated from French):
Before asking Mr. Thors, Rapporteur of the First Committee, to present his report on the only item on the
agenda of this meeting, I should like to ask the Assembly whether it wishes to !~ave a debate on the report
of the First Committee.
It was decided, by 32 'Votes to 5, not to discuss the
report.
Mr. Thors (Iceland), Rappo.yCeur, presented the report of the First Committee and the accompanying
draft resolution (A/1770).
2. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Before calling on those members who wish to explain
their votes, I should like to draw your attention to the
letter [A/1379/Add.l] which the Secretary-General
has addressed to me as President of the General Assembly, and in which he informs me that the Security
Counc'~ has decided to remove the item, "Complaint
of aggression against the Republic of Korea", from the
list of matters of which it is seized.
3. General ROMULO (Philippines): The views of
the Philippine Government on the draft resolution before us were set forth during the debates in the ~irst
Committee1 and I do not wish to repeat them here.
4. I fe~l, however, that we cannot allow to pass unanswered, in explaining our vote, the invidious claim
of any delegation that it alone, together with those that
share its views, was dedicated to the cause of peace,
while the others which did not share those views were,
by implication, committed to the disastrous course of
war. For our part, we are ready to allow that our
1 See Official Recoyds of the IGeneral Assembly, Fifth
Session, First Committee, 408th to 438th meetings inclusive.

colleagues from Asia and the Middle East are equally
sincere in their devotion to peace. Though our approach
has differed from theirs, our gor.ti retl1ains the same.
5. We shall vote in favour of this draft resolution, as
we did in Committee, because we are convinced, more
than ever, that of the two paths that werf~ shown to us,
this is the surer way to peace. It is the surer way to
peace to the extent that it is based on the recognition,
not the avoidance, of truth and on the affirmation, not
the denial, of right principles. The Philippine delegation will vote, as it did in Committee, for the draft
resolution.
6. Mr. TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian) : The discussion
in the First Committee of the so-called question of th~
intervention of the Central People's Government of the
People's Republic of China in Korea has sbmvn the
whole world that the United States never intended to
arrive at a peaceful settlement of the Korean question
by means of negotiation.
7. Everyone knows of the exchange of telegrams whicl1
took place with the Central People's Government of the
People's Republic of China on the conditions for a
peaceful settlement of Far Eastern questions. An analysis of these telegrams shows how, step. by step, the
Government of the People's Republic of China, in its
desire for a peaceful settlement of the Korean question
and other Far Eastern problems, submitted proposals
which might well have led to successful negotiations for
the peaceful settlement of these questions and which
offered a sound basis rDr general agreement.
.
8. The USSR delegation supported those proposals
of the People's Republic of China as being most likely
to ensure a rapid and peaceful settlement of the Korean
question and of questions affecting the People's Republic of China and the Far East. Furthermore, it pointed
out in the First Committee that such questions could
not be discussed without the participation of representatives of the Korean and Chinese peoples.
J

689
A/PV.327

690

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

9. But it is obvious that the proposals which were
submitted to the Central People's Government of the
People's Republic of China from Lake Success were
deliberately so worded as to be unacceptable to that
governmen1:. The real purpose of those so-called proposals was to give the United States an opportunity to
prolong the intervention of foreign troops in Kore.q" to
gain time cmd tu renew their attack in more favourable
circums'£ances. This is particularly clear from the socalled iive principles laid down in the supplemflntary
report which was submitted by the Group on CeaseFire in Korea on 11 January 1951, and which was subsequently transmitted to the Government of the People's
Republic of China.
10. These so-called five principles took into full account the intention of the United States to prevent at
any cost any possible agreement with the Government
of the People's Republic of China. They were obviously
unacceptable to the People's Republic of China, and
the United States delegation, in voting for this proposal, counted on that fact.
11. These tactics of the United States were exposed
in the American Press itself, as was pointed out before
during the discassion in the First Committee. All this
was fully confirmed by subsequent events. When the
proposals of the Central People's Government of the
People's Republic of China and the supplementary explanations supplied by it had created a favourable
atmosphere in the First Committee, and when there
arose a real opportunity of adopting a unanimous deciston on this question, so vital to the promotion of
world peace, the delegation of the United States, faced
hy such a "threat" to the aggressive plans of the United
States in the Far East, was forced to cast aside its
mask. On 20 January it submitted a draft resolution,
the whole purpose of which was to prevent agreement
on the conditions for a peaceful settlement of the
Korean question and other Far Eastern problems.
12. The kernel of that draft resolution was its third
paragraph, which falsely and without any foundation
accused the Government of the People's Republic of
China of aggression. The United States needed that
accusation as a springboard for the further extension
of its aggression in Korea. The United States draft
resolution contained a whole plan for the extension of
United States aggression in Korea and against the
People's Republic of China.
13. By submitting that draft resolution, the United
States finally revealed itself to the whole world as
opposed to a Peaceful settlement of the Korean and
other Far Eastern questions by means of negotiation.
14. Having committed an act of aggression in Korea,
the United States used all possible means of pressure,
blackmail and threats to force the Security Council to
adopt, ez post facto, an illegal decision designed to cover
up its criminal ag~rression against the Korean people.
In submitting its latest draft resolution, the United
States was resorting to the same manreuvre. Having
committed acts of aggression against the People's Republic of China, the United States has used every possible form of blackmail and threats in its attempt to
ensure the adoption of that draft resolution, so as to
cover up, ex post facto, its aggression against the
People's Re1JlUblic 01 China.

15. As has been pointed out, the United States submitted its draft resolution just when it had become
possible to reach agreement on the possible conditions
and procedure for a settlement of the Korean and other
Far Eastern questions by means of negotiation. Alarmed
at the possibility of such agreement, which, as is now
clear to all, did not fall in with the plans of the United
States ruling circles, the United States brought all sorts
of means of pressure to bear on the United Nations and
on individual Members of the Organization, so as to
force them to follow the lead of the United States delegation in the First Committee and to support the
United States draft resolution.
16. In order to facilitate the position of the United
States delegation in the First Committee and the General Assembly, the United States House of Representatives and Senate came to kts aid by adopting special
resolutions. Those resolutions can be regarded only as
an attempt by United States organs of government to
exert heavy pressure on the United Nations so as to
force the Organization to endorse the aggressive policy
of the United States in this matter.
17. As is known, this pressure and these threats by
the United States have had the desired effect on certain
Members of the Udted Nations, and the voting machine, which seemed to have broken down, again began
to work in favour of the United States, albeit so~ewhat
creakily.
18. The discussion in the First Committee showed
that there was definite opposition to the aggressive
policy of the ruling circles of the United States, and
this fact cannot be ignored, whatever the results of the
vote on the United States draft resolution.
19. In this connexion, attention should be drawn to
the efforts made by the delegations of twelve countries
to find some measure of agreflment for the peaceful
settlement of the Korean question and other Far Eastern problems by means of negotiation; these attempts
were unsuccessful, owing to the crude and flagrant
pressure, blackmail and threats used by the United
States against the countries which intended to support
the efforts of those twelve countries. As a result of that
pressure, many countries which are economically and
otherwbe dep'~ndent on the United States were obliged
to fall into line a~d obey the orders of the United States
delegation.
20. In conclusion, th~ USSR delegation feels oblig/ed
to PQint out once again that the purpose of the United
States draft resolution, whici~ has now been submitted
to the General Assembly by the First Committee, is to
extend the aggression ~rpetrated by the United States
in Korea and against the People':, Republic of China.
By submitting that text, the United States has finally
shown itself to be opposed to the ~aceful settlement of
the Korean and other Far Eastern questions by negotiation; by means of this draft resolution the United States
is trying to mask its 'continued aggression in Korea and
its aggression against the People's Republic of China.
21. It is for these reasons that the delegation of the
Soviet Union will vote against the draft resolution submitted to the General Assembly.
22. Mr. TSIANG (China): Before the vote is taken
I should like to state that, in the opinion of my delega-

327th Meeting-I February 1951
don, the draft resolution sUb~tted by the First Cornmitt~e is only a half measure. Jt was regrettably weakened by the amendment of the d~!e~tioll o~ Lebanc:>n.
Nevertheless, as the draft resolut\on IS c0!1slste1?-t with·
the principles of the Charter, my de1egration Will vote
for it.
23. Mr. SHVETSOV (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic) ( translated. from Russian) : I. should like to
make a brief explanation of the vote which the d\~ega­
don of the Bye10russian SSR is going to cast.
24. Th" General Assembly has to consider, at this
meeting a draft resolution which the United States
delegati~n succeeded in foisting on the First Committee
by means of dip!omatic .pressure, threa:ts 811d .oth~r
fonns of persuasIOn. This draft resolutiOl"., w}nch is
directed against the People's Republic of Chj!1~, is the
logical outcome of the aggressive policy pursued by the
United States in the Far East and its dictatorial and
arbitrary policy in the United Nations.
25. The United States acted in the same way when,
after preparing and provoking the attack launched by
the Syngman Rhee armies against North Korea, and
after embarking on open aggression against Korea, it
accused the Government of North Korea of aggression
and made the SeCtlrlty Council, at a time when the
Council was illegally constituted, adopt a resolution to
that effect, thus a~sociating other nations in its crime.
26. Now, having committed a number of open acts of
aggression a~inst the People's ~epublic of China, al;ld
still engaged In a cruel war agc\tnst the Korean peopl!e,
who are fighting for their freedom, the United States
is trying to accuse the People's Republic of China of
aggression, and to make the General Assembly adopt
a draft resolution designed to mask its further aggression in Korea and against the People's Republic
of China. In submitting this draft resolution, the United
States has finally shown itself to be opposed to the
peaceful settlement of the Korean and other Far Eastern questions by means of negotiation.
27. The whole course of the discussion of this question in the First Committee has shown that the United
States~ in keeping with its poH<:y - the natu~e.~f which
is only i:oo clear from the vast programme Imtiated by
the ruling circles of the United States in order to promote a war psychosis and to prepare and car9' out
other acts of agg-:\~ssion - not only does not Wish for
a peaceful s\~ttll;me'1t of the Korean conflict, but is
seeking to p':olon~~ ;'LIld extend its aggression in Korea
and against ;~he People's Republic of China.
28. That is why the 'United States delegation did all
it could to prevent the p'~aceft!! settlement of the Korean
question all.d of all othej~ Far East~m problems and to
nullify all attempts to negotiate on such matters. That
is why the': United States delegr~tion rejected all the
proposals of the Central Peopl~/s Government of the
People's F.',epublic of China for the rapid ;t..nd pp..Jl(:eful
settlement .of the Korean question a:nd of all questions
affecting th(" People's Republic of t1tina and the Far
East. That is why the delegation ,of the United St?tes
submitted its draft ~e~olilti0n, the purpose of which was
to prolong and extend Unit~d States aggression in
Korea and against the People's Republic of China.
29. By foisting this draft resolution on the United
Nations, the United States is using the OrganiZAtion

691

both as a smoke-screen for its aggressive policy and as
a tool of that policy.
.
.
30. The delegation of the Bye10russlan SSR, wh!ch
expresses, in this Assembly, the will of the Bye10russlan
peGple, a people who aspire to peace and w~o are
actively promoting peace. and c~mbating war, Wlll.vote
against the draft resolution which has been submttted
to the Assembly. For the purport and the con~en~s of
that draft are contrary to the purposes and .prl?C1plee
of the United Nations Charter and to the aspirations of
hundreds of millions of people throughout the world,
who yearn for peace and do not want war.
.
31. Mr. NOSEK (Czechoslovakia): The Czechoslovak delegation stated in the course of the debate in the
First Committee its reasons for supporting the peace
proposals sub.mitted by the Central People's Government of the People's Repr~lic of China 8Ild its o~po­
sition to the draft resolutio11 proposed by the Untted
States.
32. The proposals submitted by the. Central ?eopl~'s
Government oJ the People's Republic of China give
expression to the sincere and insistent desire ?f the
Chinese people for peace. They are an expression of
a desire for a peaceful settlement of the Korean qu~­
tion and all Far Eastern problems and for collaboration
with all peace-loving nations so that peace may be
secured and maintained.
.
33. The draft resolution submitted by the Unitoo
States and approved by the so-called maJority of the
First Committee has noting in common with peace or
with the maintenance, strengthening and securing of
oeace. That draft resolution is but an expression of the
War hyzteria of the ruling circles of ltne United Stat~
and their lust for Yv"ar, which they wer'e already waging
in June 1950.
3~ . During the debate in the Fii"st Committee, many
phras~s about peace, open doors, :l1?-d w~l~~~ess. tt.!
negotiate were uttered by the delegatio:: 0.1. the Untted
States. What sh" 1low, false and hypocritical phrases
they were was re. ea!ed by the methods used by the
ruling circles of the United States, both within the
United Nations and outside, to secure the adoption of
the draft resolution.
35. The statement made to the First Committee by
the delegation of the United Sta~~ to the effect that it
would vote against the twelve-Po~rer draft resolution
regardless of any amendments, provides, in my opinion,
further proof that the ruling drc1es of the United States
never wan.tOO and do not now want to negotiate a peaceful settlement of the Korean question and other Far
Eastern p::oblems.
36. The methods used by the United States ruling
circles outside the United Nations to bring about the
adoption of their draft resolution are w~ll. illustrated
by examples such as that of the two million tons of
grain requested by India. May I be allowed to quote
in this conn~.xion an article by David Lawrence in
today's New ..YOt·.~ Herald Tribune, in which he writes:
"The vote in the UN on the aggression resolution
is in a proper sense a v1dory for the diplomacy of the
United States and particularly for the ambassadors
and ministers abroad who have heen labouring so
zealously in' the last few weeks tu explain to the
different foreign offices of the world th~ tru,e meaning of the American viewpoint in world. aflairs today.';

692

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

37. And how the United States ambassadors and
ministers abroad ~lained "the true meaning of the
American viewpoint in world affairs" was divulged by
the Foreign Minister of the Philippines, who, according
to today's New York Herald Tribune, "told a Boston
University audience he hoped· that the Unitet. States
would not discriminate in material assistance to Asian
countries simply because most of them opposed the
American UN resolution condemning Red China as an
aggressor".
38. I said that the United States war drr{t resolution
was approved by a so-called majority in the First Committee. And it is a fact that it was merely a so-called
majority. When comparing the majority in th?I,t Committee with the number of people for whom it speaks,
we arrive at the following conclusion: the 44 votes of
the majority represent a mere third of the world popula+.ion.
39. Two days ago, ~peaking on behalf of the Czechoslovak delegation before the First Committee, I stated
that the United Nations faced two alternatives: either
to yield to the pressure of the United States and follow
the war policy of the United States luling circles, thus
becoming involved in a possible catastrlJphe, or to
decide to take the road of peace. The draft resolution
submitted by the First Committee to the General Assembly, under unprecedented pressure on the part of
the United Stat(:>s, is a draft resolution of the United
States ~:armongers, the purpose of which is to enable
the United States ruling circles to attain their aggressive
and imperialist aims, to expand the war and to spread
disaster and death. War, not peace, is the substance of
the United States draft resolution.
40. The Czechoslovak delegation opposed the United
States war draft resolution when it was voted on in the
First Committee and whole-heartedly supported the
peace proposals of the Central People's Government of
the People's Republic of China. The Central People's
Government of th,~ People's Repuhlic of China desires
peace; the Unitec, States ruling cildes desire war. The
Central People's Government of the People's Republic
of China wishes an end to the war; the United States
ruling circles wish to spread the war. The Central
People's Goyernment of 'i.:he People"s Republic of China
wishes to work in peace for the rehabilitation of its
country and thus contribute to the maintenance of
peace in the whole world; the United States ruling
circles want to destroy the world with atomic bombs.
41. The Czechoslovak delegation states again that the
people of Czechoslovakia sincerely desire peace. The
1)eople of Czechoslovakia reject war. Therefore the
Czechoslovak delegation will vote against the war draft
re~lution which is now before the General Assembly.
42. Sir Gladwyn JEBB (Uruted Kingdom): I have
already, in Committee, given a full explanation of His
Majesty's Govemment's views on the present draft
resolution, and 1 now wish to give only a short explanation of the understandings which have enabled my
government to instruct me to vote in favour ef the draft.
43. In the first place, a.; you know, we attach primary
importance to the work of the gootl offices committee,
provision for wIDch is made in the last paragrapq of
the draft resolution. My government has the utmost

confidence that the President will lose no time in appointing the two other members of the group, so that it
may be able to start work forthwith and begin the task
which, as we are only too well aware, is bound to be a
Vi~ry difficult one.
44. My government hopes that the first task of the
group will be to study the various communications that
have been received, through one channel or another,
from the Peking Government, and see what light they
throw on the possibilities of peaceful negotiation and
what further clarifications seem to be required. This is
obviously a most urgent and important task.
45. Secondly, as I have already made clear in Committee, my government attaches great importance to the
ideas contained in the programme outlined to us in
Committee by the Canadian Secretary of State for External Affairs. This programme seems to us to contain
many valuable ideas and, in the opinion of my government, might well form the basis of an eventual settlement
46. It will not have escaped the President's notice that
there are many points in thin programme which seem
to require urgent discussion ~ for instance, the composition of the conference which has been suggested and
the manner in which it shmlld proceed to organize the
arrangements for a cease-fire iif there appears to be any
possibility of doing so - with due regard, of course, to
the principles which we have already accepted. These
questions clearly merit the urgent attention of the good
offices committee.
47. I am sure that the President has fully in mind all
these suggestions which have been made in the course
of our debate, and, if I emphasize them at this moment,
it is because of the confidence my government feels in
the ability of'the President and the other members of
his committe~ to pursue these negotiations with the
utmost devotion. It is only for that reason that my
government has felt it possible to instruct me to vote
in favour of the draft resolution as a whole.
48, Finally, now that we have established our moral
position by condemning the Central People's Government of the People's Republic of China for engaging in
aggression, the most important thing, as my deiegatioiul
sees it, is to concentrate on the problem of a peaceful
settlement - or, as I myself should prefer to say, of an
agreed solution of the Korean question - rather than
on the question of potential sanctions.
49. Apart from the fact that the consideration of sanctions should not even be started by the General Assembly for a long time yet, so as not to prejudice any
hope of an agreed solution that may remain, my government quite frankly has the gravest doubts whether any
punitive measures can be discovered which are not
dange.mus, double-edged, or merely useless, or any
which will materially assist our brave troops now fighting in Korea. The group to be set up under the sixth
paragraph of the operative part to study the question
may well report in this sense, or it may report that
cel ~ain minor 'nlc.~sures could profitably be taken. But
it is obviously doubtful how far its report, whether
negative or mildly positive, can assist in the attainment
of any agreed solution, on the Ci.1e hand, or any imposed
solution, on the other hand.

327th Meeting-l February 1951
50. That is why my delegation, at any rate, would
deprecate any haste in the presentation of the report of
that group and, more particularly, any attempt on its
part to force the hand of our own good offices committee.
51. Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): My delegation
will vote against the United States draft resolution
which the First Committee has submitted today to the
General Assembly. Our decision is motivated by the
principles of the Charter, for we believe that the adoption of this draft resolution would, in the first place,
constitute a defeat of the basic and fundamental principles of the Charter.
52. This draft resolution shows clearly that the United
States has no intention of reaching a peaceful solution
of the problem but that, on the contrary, it is minded
to spread the war beyond Korea, to China and the whole
continent of Asia, as part of a plan for United States
world domination. This draft resolution establishes an
immoral position in which it is made to appear that
the United States aggressor is supported by a certain
number of other nations. This draft resolution is the
result of an enormous pressure campaign involving
United States embassies in foreign capitals, as well as
the United State!; Senate and House of Representatives.
53. • Its adoption would mean a violation of the sovereignty of many nations which, through various means,
have been forced to support it. This draft resolution
would mean extending the war. Today, even before this
draft resolution has been adopted, the Press is full of
reports that the United States delegation has already
prepared measures for further sanctions, the aim of
which is only to clear the way for United States militarists in a war with the People's Republic of China.
54. The adoption of this draft resolution would not
mean t~le defeat of any political tendencies which my
delegation, or any other delegation which is against it,
represents. It would not mean the defeat of China because, even though that great and courageous nation
has been accused of aggression by the United States,
China cannot be defeated, since no one can defeat a
great nation which stands in the midst of the struggle
for peace and security in the Asian continent and which
today, after a victorious revolution, has attained, for
the first time in its long history, full sovereignty and a
government which represents the national interests of
its people.
55. My delegation, in voting against the draft resolution, fully adheres to the principles of the Charter, according to which this Organization is the appointed
guardian of pea~e. At the same time, our vote against it
represents the peaceful tendencies of my country, which
today is among those which strive for international
peace. The adoption of this draft resolution would constitute a step towards the spread of war rather than
towards any peaceful settlement.
56. The United States delegation, during the long
hours of debate which },)receded the climax, when its
draft resolution was approved - a climax arrived at by
exercising various kinds of pressure - made it clear
that the part t:oncerning negotiations was included solely
for the purpo~e of creating unity among those countries which had some hesitations. At the same time,

693

that part provides an excuse for many governments
which recognize the Central People's Government of
the People's Republic of China, and which also recognize this draft resolution as unjustified, an excuse which
they can present to the peoples they claim to represent.
57. I am sure that this draft resolution will be received by the whole world with indignation and protest.
It will serve the cause of war, and the millions of
persons of the peace-loving nations which signed the
Stockholm Appeal, as we I} as those who supported the
Warsaw Congress of the Partisans of Peace, will only
increase their s'cruggle fo:r the defeat of the aggressive
designs of thos'e who wish to plunge the world into a
new war. My delegation will continue to fight against
everything that this draft resolution stands for.
58. Mr. DEMCHENKO (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from Russian) : The delegation
of the Ukrainian SSR feels obliged to explain the principles which will guide it in voting on the draft resolution submitted by the First Committee on the initiative
of the delegation of the United State~.
59. It is well known that during this session of the
General Assembly, the United States delegation has
made many attempts to use the United Nations in order
to conceal and extend United States aggression in the
Far East. That was the purpose of the slanderous
acu sation made by the United States in the General
Assembly concerning the so-called intervention of Ule
Central People's Government of the People's Republic
of China in Korea, and also of the resolution of the
Group on Cease-Fire in Korea which was foisted on the
First Committee. That is also the purpose of the draft
resolution which the Unit:~d States delegation succeeded
in forcing upon the First Committee by means of pressure, threats and blackmail, and which is now submitted
to the General Assembly.
60. In demanding the adoption of this draft resolution,
the United States has finally revealed itself as· opposed
to the peaceful settlement of the Korean and other Far
Eastern questions by means of negotiation, the intention
being to conceal its further aggression in Korea and
against the People's Republic of China.
61. The draft resolution calls upon the General Assembly to accuse the Central People's Government of
China of commItting an act of aggression ag'd.inst Korea.
The whole world knows, however, that the Central
People's Government of China has not committed pond
is not now committing any act of aggression, either
against Korea, or against any other State.
62. l"'he Central People's Government of China, like
the Cninese people to a man, is seeking a peaceful
settlement of the Korean question. Proof of this lies in
the peace proposals submitted repeatedly by the representatives of the People's Republic of China to the
United Nations. All these proposals of the Central
People's Government of the People's Republic of China
were aimed at securing a rapid and peaceful settlement
of the Korean question and of other questions affecting
the People's Republic of China and the Far East.
63. By calling on the General Assembly to ~(r'~use the
Central People's Go-v-ernment of China of not wishing
to settl~ the Kor~an question by peaceful means and
by making other accusations, th~ United States is'once

l&_&:=1..5e LWa

694

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

again attempting to mislead world public opinion and
to distract its a\.tention from the real armed aggression,
the aggression perpetrated by the United States in
Korea and against China. The 1Jnited States ruling
circles need these lying accusatio'.lH against the People's
Republic of China in order to [/r( !vent the admission of
the People's Republic of China to tnt: United Nations,
to mask and to justify the United States occupation of
the Chinese island of Ta!wan~ and to justify the bombing of Chinese territo:;:y, the militarj support afforded
Chiang Kai-shek and the other acts of aggression committed by the Unite-d States against the People's Republic of China.
64. There is nothing new in this move of United States
diplomacy. The United States is acting today just as it
did in July 1950. At that time, the United States Goven:.ment falsely ~.ccused the People's Denlocratic Republic of Korea of committing aggression and thus
cover~d up its ovv-:;' aggression against the Korean
people; it is now trying to conceal its aggression against
the Chinese people in the same way.
65. Thus the text before us is intended to secure not
the peaceful settlement of the Korean and other Far
Eastern questions, but the extension of United States
aggression in the Far East under the aegis of the
United Nations.
66. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR therefore
protests against the adoption of this draft resolution
by the Gener~.1 Assembly. In the interests of the maintenance of international peace and security, the United
Nations should reject the United States draft resolution which has been submitted by the First Committee
and should take steps to secure a peaceful settlement of
the Korean ant' other Far Eastern questions.
67. Mr. LACOSTE (Frc:mce) (translated from
French): The French delegation has already said all
it has to say concerning the circumstances in which I might be tempted to say the conditions under which
-it decided to support the United States draft resolution. I do not think it is nece~sary for me to mention
them again. In the statement I made on 29 Janua ry,
I gave all the necessary explanations. At that ti- .; I
also explained why my delegation considered thaL the
Assembly should first take a decision along the lines of
the United States drnft resolution, and in particular of
the first paragraph (If the operative part of that text,
which described the intenention of Communist China
in Korea, and that only then would it be possible to
begin negotiations for pea(~e.
~. I think it is even less necessary to reaffirm the
fact that in this matter my delegation has no other
object than peace. As to the choice of the path to follow,
we have certainly not been in agreement ....; ith the view
of some delegations here present, which procla~m their
desire for peace, but our goal is the sanle - peace. And
it it: with the firmest hopes for success that we shall
deploy all our efforts to that end.
,
69. Faris EL-KHOURI Bey (Syria): My government believes that the means for achieving a peaceful
settIem€~ It have not been exhausted. It has participated
in the e1r.orts at conciliation made by the Asian and
Arab nations since the be~i1ning of thi~ probkm. It
still enter~ains good and well-founded hopes that there

is a strong chance of arranging for a cease-fire, even at
the first meeting of the seven-Power conference proposed by us in the draft resolution submitted by the
Arab and Asian nations in the First Committee, thus
putting a speedy end to the bloodshed in Korea. It is
convinced that the draft resolution of the United States,
approved by the First Committee, witl not end war but
will be more likely to extend it, and it notes that most
of those who voted in favour of that draft are not
willing to contribute substantial and mat.erial aid to the
forces fighting in Korea, where the heaviest burden
falls upon the shoulders of the United States. It fears
that, in the case of an extension of the war, the United
Nations would have to fight against a population of
about 800 million.
70. In view, therefore, of the heRvy responsibilities
entailed in carrying out the provisions of this resolution,
my government prefers to abstain so that it will remain
able to continue its conciliatory efforts. However, in
the First Committee, the draft resolution obtained 44
votes, while only 16 vDtes were cast against it. It is to
be noted here that our abstention does not at all mean
that we approve of the behaviour of the Central People's
Government of China or that we oppose the draft resolution. We consider only that the draft resolution of
the Asian and Arab nations ought to have taken precedence over the United States draft resolution so that
the peaceful means could have been exhausted before
condemnatory action was taken.
71. ;:;ir Benegal RAU (India): I should like to explain very briefly the vote which my delegation is about
to cast on this draft resoluthn. The draft was discussed
at such length in :he First Committee that no detailed
explanation is necessary, and I shall therefore be very
brief. My delegation will vote against this resolution
for reasons which I shall enumerate.
72. First, in the opinion of my government, it will
prolong hostilities in Korea indefinitely and may extend
the area of conflict, and may even lead ultimately to
global war.
73. Secondly, to combine a proposal for negotiations
through the good offices of the President with a previous
condemnation of the governm~.lt with which the negotiations are to be conducted creates the impression that
the United N~.tions is not serious about either. By this
combination, the resolution deprives the condemnation
of any moral force and, at the same time, deprives the
negotiations of their best chances of success.
74. Thirdly, so many mistakes have been made against
the Central People's Government of China during the
last twelve months that the resolution does not seem to
us to be q'~dte fair in its condemnation.
75. Fourthly, as I explained in the First Committee,
the issue of a~~gression is not so simple as it looks. One
difficulty I ha",ve already mentioned. According to high
authorities, condemnation of the Central People's Government as an aggTessor implies the previous recognition of t':1at government, and, since there has been no
such recognition, there can be no such condemnation.
A~in, according to high authorities, the General Assembly, while it can make various recommendations
under Articles 10 or 11 of the Charter, cannot make a
finding or a determination as to an act of aggression.

327th &Ieeting-l February 1951
This function, according to Professor Kelsen,:' belongs
to the Security Council, and only to the Security Council, under Article 39 of the Charter.
76. Finally, the draft resolution submitted by twelve
Asian Powers in the First Committee would, had it
been adopted, have produced a cease-fire, within perhaps
a week, and a definite programme for the removal of
various misunderstandings and for the solution of all
Far Eastern problems. The present draft resolution
does not appear to us to offer any prospect of an early
end of hostilities, nor does it hold out any prospect of
a solution of any of these other problems.
77. Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt): On general
principle, and, since it is my intention to take as little
of the General Assembly's time as possible, I shall continue to resi~t .;.11 temptation to answer the - fortunately
few - falladous irrelevancies of some of those who
have spoken befc,'re me, either today or previously.
78. Although I may know some of the good words and
many of the bad ones, I shall also continue to resist
the even more luscious temptatior.. of commenting 'upon
the equally few - and fortunately..so -"- impatient gestures which occasionally flared cp in the Committee. In
doing this, I keep in mind that we are dealing here
exclusively with opinions and that an impatient gesture
is nQt an opinion. I take leave, however, to make an
exception for the remark which was made this morning
by my colleague and friend, General R6mulo, who referred to twelve of the Asian Powers in a rather impatient manner, which we are not accustomed to hearing
from him.
79. I note that f'xeneral R6mulo said that he could not
4'allow to pass unanswered . . . the invidious claim
of any delegation that it alone . . . was dedicated to the
cause of peace" and that the rest of them u were, by
implication, comn~itted to the disastrous course of war",
and that he was - and, for my part, I add the word
"generously" - willing to allow that his colleagues
from Asia and the Middle East were "equally sincere
in their devption to peace".
80. I am trying to refresh my memory very carefully
in this connexion, but I fail to find that any representative of the twelve Asian Powers to which General
R6mulo referred accused anyone of insincerity or
claimed for himself or his group a monopoly of sincerity or good intentions.
81. May I, in this connexion, refer to what I told the
First Committee on 29 January, at which time I ~,aid
that those who differed with us, though we considered
them dangerously wrong, were sincere. Before that, on
25 January, I told the First Committee - I am reading
from my statement and not quoting from memory:
"There has been a great area of ag£eement among
all of us as to the basic nature of these questions,
while there has been a lesser area of agreement as to
the best approach to their solution ... [Nevertheless]
it remains true that we all - without exception, I
submit _. realize the seriousness and the hugeness of
the questions we are facing, and we are quite conJl See Kelsen, Hans, The Law of the United Nations, New
York, Frederick A. Praeger Inc., 1950.
I

695

scious of the great moral, political and survival issues
involved in these questions."s
82. I now submit that nothing in those words, and
nothing that was said by the representatives of any of
the eleven other countries which co-sponsored the draft
resolution submitted to the First Committee, indicated
anything of the kind to which General R6mulo so
impatiently referred today.
83. I would have prefen'ed not to go into this seemingly unnecessary digression, but I considered it inevitable in view of the serious accusation levelled at us by
our friend, General R6mulo.
84. As to the position of my country with regard to
the draft resolution approved by the First Committee,
which is now before the General Assembly for consideration, I shall not weary the Assembly with any
long explanation of my vote. I shall merely refer to
the statemtnts I had the honour to make previously on
behalf of my delegation and country. I would sum up
our position in the following way, and this is part of
the statement I made on 29 January :
"No one here or elsewhere did or can validly argue
against the duty of the United Nations to set up and
maintain, and even put into action, the system of
collective security as envisaged by the Charter. This
is no reason, however, why anyone should overlook
the other very essential concepts of the Charter,
namely, that peaceful means of resolving questions
must be resorted to and completely exhausted first."·
85. My government considered and still considers that
the peaceful means envisaged by the Charter, which the
twelve Powers - of :which my country was one tried to formulate in their joint draft resolution, have
not been exhausted and that it is in accordance neither
with the Charter nor with the dictates of wisdom to set
out upon a road which leads elsewhere before completely exhausting the peaceful means stipulated in the
Charter of the United Nations.
86. This has been and remains the position of Egypt
on the matter.
87. Mr. CARIAS (Honduras): I do not wish to explain my vote. I merely wish to ask for a roll-C?Jl vote.
88. The PRESIDENT (trran,slated from French):
The Israel delegation has requested that the 5ix"th paragraph of the operative part of the draft resolution of
.the First Committee [A/1770] should be put to the
vote separately. If there are no objections, I shall first
put that paragraph to the vote, and then the remainder
of the draft resolution. Finally, we shall take a roll-caU
vote on the draft resolution as a whole.
The sixth paragraph of the operati'Ve part was
adopted by 43 'Votes to 7, with 8 abstentions.
The remainder of the draft resolution was adopted
by 44 'Vofes to 7, with 8 abstentions.
89. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
shall now put the draft resolution to the vote as a whole.
A roll-call vote has been requested.
8 For the summary of this statement, see Official Records
of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, First Com'mittee,
431st meeting.
" For the summary of this statement, see ibid., 435th meeting.

696

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

A 'Vote 'was taken by roll-call.
The Dominican Republic, having been drawn by lot
by the President, was called upon to 'Vote first.
In favour: Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ethiopia, France, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, Liberia,
Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Thailand, Turkey, Union of South Africa, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Denmark.
Against.' India, Poland, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Burma,
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia.
Abstaining: Egypt, Indonesia, Pakistan, Saudi
Arabia, Sweden, Syria, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan.
When the nu-m:: of Saudi Arabia was called} the
t'ollo'Wing exchange of remarks took place:
90. Mr. HALIQ (Saudi Arabia): I am not participating in the; vote.
91. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
There is no such thing as non-participation in a vote.
If a delt:gation does not participate in a vote, it thereby
abstains.
92. Mr. HALIQ (Saudi Arabia) : I repeat that my
delegation is not participating in the vote.
93. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
am sorry, but the rules of procedure make no provision
for non-participation. The ruling of the Chair is that
Saudi Arabia a.bstained from the vote. It will be indicated in the record, however, that the representative of
Saudi Arabia stated that he was not participating in
the vote.
The draft resolution was adopted by 44 'Votes to 7}
with 9 abstentions.
94. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Despite the condemnation of the aggressor and of the
act of aggression, it appears both from the final paragraph of the resolution which the Assembly has just

Printed in U.S.A.

approved and from the debate in the First Committee
that the United Nations does not wish to close the door
to negotiations or to a settlement of Far Eastern problems by peaceful means. Such, moreover, was the purport of the amendment submitted by the delegation of
Lebanon in the First Committee and accepted by the
delegation of the United States. I shall, in accordance
with your decision, hasten to establish the good offices
committee. It is now for the other party to the dispute
to demonstrate its willingness to negotiate with the
United Nations. I am certain that I express the feelings
of all the representatives when I say that I hope these
negotiations will be successful.

Budget estimates for the financial year 1951:
statement by the President
[Agenda item 39]
95. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Before adjourning the meeting, I have a brief statement
to make. I wish to call the attention of the members of
the General Assembly to document A/1734/Add.l,
which was circulated on 21 December 1950. This document contains the text of the draft resolution on the
emoluments of the judges and the registrar of the
InteInational Court of Justice, as proposed by the
Fifth Committee. It is an integral part of the budget
estimates for the financial year 1951 prepared by the
Fifth Committee [A/1734]. On 15 December 1950
[326th meeting], when the General Assembly adopted
the Fifth Committee's recommendations on this item
of the agenda, the te.'-t uf addendum 1 had not been
circulated to the members of the Assembly. However, as
it was obviously the intention of the Assembly on that
date to approve the recommendations of the Fifth
Committee in their entirety, I have decided that the
draft resolution contained in the addendum should be
considered, for the record, as having been adopted on
the same date as the other draft resolutions contained
in document A/1734.
96. If there are no objections, I shall consider that
the Assembly approves my decision.
I t was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

A-40464-Apri11951-3,6PO
