S/PRST/2009/32

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 December 2009
English
Original: English/French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6233rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 8 December 2009, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Peace and security
in Africa”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations.
“The Security Council notes with concern the serious threats posed in
some cases by drug trafficking and related transnational organized crime to
international security in different regions of the world, including in Africa. The
increasing link, in some cases, between drug trafficking and the financing of
terrorism, is also a source of growing concern.
“The Security Council stresses the importance of strengthening
transregional and international cooperation on the basis of a common and
shared responsibility to counter the world drug problem and related criminal
activities, and in support of relevant national, subregional and regional
organizations and mechanisms, including with the view to strengthening the
rule of law.
“The Security Council recognizes the importance of the actions
undertaken by the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
(ECOSOC), the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and other relevant United Nations organs and
agencies in facing numerous security risks caused by drug trafficking in many
countries and regions, including in Africa. The Council encourages them to
undertake further actions in this regard.
“The Security Council stresses the need to reinforce the coordination of
United Nations actions, including cooperation with Interpol, in order to
enhance the effectiveness of international efforts in the fight against drug
trafficking at the national, regional and international levels to tackle this global
challenge in a more comprehensive manner in accordance with the principle of
common and shared responsibility.
“The Security Council reaffirms and commends in that regard the
important work of the UNODC in collaboration with the United Nations

09-63855 (E) 081209

*0963855*

S/PRST/2009/32

relevant entities and emphasizes the need for adequate capacities to support
national efforts.
“The Security Council invites the Secretary-General to consider
mainstreaming the issue of drug trafficking as a factor in conflict prevention
strategies, conflict analysis, integrated missions’ assessment and planning and
peacebuilding support.
“The Security Council encourages States to comply with their obligations
to combat drug trafficking and other forms of transnational organized crime, to
consider acceding to relevant international conventions, in particular the three
United Nations drug conventions and to investigate and prosecute, as
appropriate, persons and entities responsible for drug trafficking and related
crimes consistent with international human rights and due process standards.
“The Security Council recognizes the important contribution of States,
regional and subregional organizations in tackling drug trafficking in all its
aspects, and encourages them to share best practices, as well as information
about illicit drug trafficking networks.
“The Security Council also recognizes the important contribution of civil
society and other stakeholders in tackling drug trafficking in a comprehensive
manner.
“The Security Council calls on the international community and the
United Nations system to strengthen their cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, in the fight against drug trafficking including in
Africa.
“The Security Council calls on the Secretary-General to provide, as
appropriate, more information on drug trafficking and related issues where it
risks threatening or exacerbating an existing threat to international peace and
security.”

2

09-63855
