S/PV.9270

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9270th meeting

Monday, 27 February 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Frazier. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malta)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-05965 (E)
*2305965*

S/PV.9270

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Abdoulaye
Bathily, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Libya and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Bathily.
Mr. Bathily: On 17 February, Libya celebrated the
twelfth anniversary of the 2011 revolution. Libyans
commemorated it by voicing their determination to
achieve a better future. They renewed their demands
for peace, long-term stability and prosperity. Yet the
political process remains protracted and falls short of
the aspirations of the Libyan people, who seek to elect
their leaders and reinvigorate their political institutions.
In short, Libyans are impatient. They question the will
and desire of the current interim political actors to hold
inclusive and transparent elections in 2023.
Since my most recent briefing, on 16 December
2022 (see S/PV.9223), I have continued my extensive
consultations with Libyans throughout the country,
with all the stakeholders from different segments of
society, as well as regional and international partners
on the way to overcome the current political impasse.
My consultations in Libya included all key political
and security figures, civil society representatives,
including women and youth, representatives of cultural
components and tribal leaders, as well as senior
government officials and members of the House of
Representatives and the High State Council. I have also
received and reviewed many oral and written proposals
from Libyans on ways to address the political impasse.
Before traveling to New York, I engaged with the
President of the Presidential Council, Prime Minister
Al Dabiba, the Speaker of the House of Representatives,
the President of the High State Council and Field
Marshal Haftar.
2/18

27/02/2023

In an effort to expand the scope of my
consultations, I undertook, after my first visit to the
region on 2 December 2022, a new tour of the region
and of European capitals and met with partners in
Algiers, Tunis, Brazzaville, Rabat, Rome, Cairo, Paris,
London, Berlin, Moscow and Washington, D.C., and
I consulted with the Permanent Representative of the
People’s Republic of China. I shared my concerns about
the current state of the political process and stressed
the need to put an end to the repeated transitional
arrangements, which only serve the interests of the
proponents of the status quo. I encouraged all my
interlocutors to speak with one voice and recalled that
their respective interests could only be met through a
peaceful, stable and prosperous Libya. I am pleased to
report that, by and large, all regional and international
partners agreed on the necessity to hold inclusive and
transparent elections in 2023.
On 8 February, the House of Representatives
adopted the thirteenth constitutional amendment to the
2011 Constitutional Declaration, which was published
in the official gazette. This amendment is yet to be
endorsed by the High State Council. Despite repeated
attempts by the Speaker of the House of Representatives
and the President of the High State Council and
their delegations to agree on a constitutional basis
for elections, disagreements persist. The thirteenth
constitutional amendment, which has been signed
and was published in the official gazette a few days
ago, is controversial within the Libyan political class
and general citizenry. Moreover, it does not address
key contentious issues, such as the eligibility criteria
for presidential candidates, does not stipulate a clear
road map and timelines to realize inclusive elections in
2023, and adds additional contentious issues such as the
regional representation in the Senate.
Libya’s political class is going through a major
legitimacy crisis. Indeed, we could say that most
institutions lost their legitimacy years ago. Resolving
the legitimacy crisis should therefore be a priority for all
political actors willing to change the status quo. To date,
the House of Representatives and the High State Council
have been unable to agree on a consensus constitutional
basis for elections. Meanwhile, the realization of
presidential and legislative elections requires a broader
national consensus, which involves the buy-in and
participation of a wider range of stakeholders, including
national institutions, political figures, security actors,
tribal forces and other stakeholders.
23-05965

27/02/2023

The situation in Libya

Based on article 64 of the 2015 Libyan Political
Agreement, and building on agreements previously
reached among Libyan stakeholders, I have therefore
decided to launch an initiative aimed at enabling
presidential and legislative elections to be organized and
held in 2023. In that regard, I plan to establish a highlevel steering panel for Libya. The proposed mechanism
will bring together all the relevant Libyan stakeholders,
including representatives of political institutions,
major political figures, tribal leaders, civil-society
organizations, security actors and representatives of
women and young people. In addition to facilitating the
adoption of a legal framework and time-bound road map
for the holding of elections in 2023, the proposed panel
will also provide a platform for advancing consensus
on related matters, such as election security and the
adoption of a code of conduct for all candidates.
On 12 January, I was pleased to participate in the
closing session of the preparatory meeting for a national
reconciliation conference to be convened by the African
Union and Libya’s Presidential Council in Tripoli
later this year. The meeting brought together more
than 100 participants, including prominent political,
tribal and religious figures and representatives from
across the country’s political spectrum. I commend
the Presidential Council and the African Union for
their efforts. Reconciliation is a long-term process that
should be inclusive, victim-centred, rights-based and
grounded in transitional justice principles. I encourage
the Presidential Council, with the support of the
African Union, to implement the necessary steps for an
inclusive national reconciliation conference in Libya,
and I emphasize the continuing United Nations support
for Libyan partners and the African Union.
The 5+5 Joint Military Commission (JMC) has
continued to make progress in implementing the
ceasefire agreement. I am pleased to report that the
ceasefire has continued to hold and there have been
no violations recorded since my previous briefing.
The security situation, however, remains fragile. On
15 and 16 January, I chaired a two-day meeting with the
Military Commission in Sirte with Libyan and United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) ceasefire
monitors. I am pleased to report that the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission endorsed the terms of reference
for its disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
joint technical subcommittee, which will be mandated
with the categorization of armed groups, pursuant
to the fourth provision of the ceasefire agreement.

S/PV.9270

Encouraging steps were also taken to set the conditions
for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process once the political environment is conducive
to that. The Commission decided to launch a dialogue
with representatives of armed groups to discuss ways
to secure a conducive environment for elections, among
other issues. UNSMIL, jointly with the 5+5 JMC
and at its request, plans to facilitate a dialogue with
representatives of armed groups in the coming weeks.
On 7 and 8 February, I chaired a two-day meeting
in Cairo bringing together the 5+5 JMC and the liaison
committees of Libya, the Sudan and the Niger. With
the support of UNSMIL advisers, the participants
developed and endorsed an integrated mechanism for
joint coordination and information-sharing among
the three countries to facilitate the process of the
withdrawal of mercenaries and foreign fighters. I am
planning to conduct visits to those two neighbouring
countries and Chad, whose representatives were unable
to attend the previous meeting, to discuss and encourage
their authorities to further support the implementation
of the action plan for the withdrawal of foreign fighters
and mercenaries.
With regard to the economic track, the management
of the country’s resources remains a serious concern for
all Libyans. The use of Libya’s resources, particularly
the prioritization of expenditures, the continued lack
of basic services, the absence of accountability and
demands for the equitable distribution of resources
must be fully addressed. I reiterate the importance and
urgency of establishing a Libyan-led mechanism that
brings together stakeholders from across the country to
agree on spending priorities and ensure that oil and gas
revenues are managed in a transparent and equitable
manner, in line with resolution 2656 (2022). Reunifying
and reforming the Central Bank are also key to
maintaining accountability and promoting the economic
welfare of the country. To that end, the co-Chairs of the
Economic Working Group of the Berlin International
Follow-up Committee on Libya have continued to
engage with Libyan institutions to advance discussions
on an agreement for a temporary expenditure and
oversight mechanism. In order to achieve sustainable
progress, advancing the economic track must remain
an integral part of the political dialogue with Libyan
stakeholders and the Libyan people.
Regrettably, the already limited civic space in Libya
continues to be further restricted, silencing the voices of
civil-society groups and activists. I have been alarmed

23-059653/18

S/PV.9270

The situation in Libya

by the wave of arrests of women human rights defenders
accused of offending Libya’s traditions, following the
activation of the anti-cybercrime law on 17 February.
February also marks more than a year since four civilsociety actors were arbitrarily arrested and detained,
while peacefully exercising their fundamental right
to freedom of expression, on a pretext of protecting
Libyan culture and values. In late December 2022
they were sentenced to three years’ imprisonment. I
reiterate my calls on the Libyan authorities to end their
crackdown on civil society, protect and promote the
civic space and cease interfering in the work of civilsociety organizations.
In all my consultations with women and civilsociety organizations, they continue to call for a
greater role in the ongoing political and reconciliation
processes. They demand to have their voices heard and
for full representation in all institutions. I reiterate that
women must be meaningfully represented in all political
and reconciliation processes, as well as in civil society,
cultural components and groups and communities of
young people and vulnerable people. On a more positive
note, on 6 February, a draft law on combating violence
against women was officially submitted to the House
of Representatives. I acknowledge the tireless efforts
of the Libyan experts who developed the bill, which is
essential to ensuring women’s fundamental right to live
free from violence.
In conclusion, and as Libyans have just been
celebrating the twelfth anniversary of the 17 February
revolution, it is our mandate to support them in their
aspirations to realize their goals for a stable country
led by authorities dedicated to the people’s welfare.
Inclusive and transparent national elections to be held
in 2023 are a key step in that direction. I reiterate my
request that the Council express its support for my
suggested way forward to fulfil the aspirations of the
Libyan people.
The President: I thank Mr. Bathily for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
Let me start by thanking Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Bathily for his briefing, as well as
his extensive consultations on the situation in Libya
and for outlining his plan for the political process. And
in response to his remarks today, I would like to tell
him that United Kingdom supports the establishment
4/18

27/02/2023

of a high-level steering panel for Libya. I welcome his
commitment to reinvigorating the political process to
deliver elections for Libya and its people.
To deliver parliamentary and presidential elections,
Libyan power holders must compromise and agree on
the conditions for elections. Potential spoilers must also
be brought into an agreement in order to ensure that
elections results are respected. The United Kingdom
thanks Egypt for its efforts to support discussions
between the House of Representatives and the High
State Council. It is now time to build on those efforts
and broaden the political negotiations in order to deliver
sustainable progress towards elections. Elections
will not mean the end of the political process. The
groundwork must also be laid for long-term stability,
including the finalization of a Constitution facilitated
by the elected Government, and a continued cycle of
future elections that respect term lengths.
Political developments must also be supported by
effective security and economic tracks. Transparent
and accountable economic processes and public
institutions that serve all Libyan people through the
fair distribution of resources and the provision of
and investment in public services are required. I call
on all Libyan parties to enact those elements of good
governance. As co-Chair of the Security Working Group
of the International Follow-up Committee on Libya, the
United Kingdom will continue to support efforts for
the joint working and eventual unification of Libya’s
militaries into one State military that is accountable to
an elected Government and able to comprehensively
tackle Libya’s security challenges. Libya must also see
the full implementation of the October 2020 ceasefire
and the withdrawal of all foreign forces and mercenaries
as soon as possible.
This is a seminal moment for Libya. We have a
clear opportunity to advance long-term stability and
meet the expectations of the country. I urge all Libyans,
as well as the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya and the Security Council, to grasp it. Through
inclusive dialogue and compromise, Libyan actors
have an opportunity to finally deliver the security and
prosperity that the Libyan people deserve.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I thank Special Representative Abdoulaye Bathily
for his briefing and welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representative of Libya in today’s meeting.
As this is the first time that Switzerland is taking the
23-05965

27/02/2023

The situation in Libya

floor on this topic, I would like to express our full
support for the efforts of the Special Representative
and the United Nations to support a resumption of the
intra-Libyan dialogue.
Switzerland is committed to peace and stability in
Libya, both in the Security Council and as co-Chair of
the Working Group on International Humanitarian Law
and Human Rights of the Berlin process. That is why
in December we supported the Special Representative
in a digital human rights dialogue that included more
than 300 participants from all over Libya. We have also
hosted several United Nations meetings on Libya in
the past and remain available to act as a host State. I
would now like to make three points about the current
situation in Libya.
First, more than a year after the postponement of
the elections, it is essential to restore the legitimacy
of Libya’s institutions. In that regard, Switzerland
welcomes the Special Representative’s presentation
of an alternative mechanism to lead the country to
free and fair elections. We call on all Libyan actors to
engage constructively in the implementation of that
plan. We believe firmly that a coherent international
approach, including by relaunching the Berlin process,
is essential. We would also like to point out that the
Security Council recognized the role of the process in
adopting resolution 2510 (2020), in which it endorses
the conclusions of the 2020 Berlin Conference.
Secondly, every effort must be made to create an
environment conducive to ensuring that the members of
Libyan society in all their diversity can fully exercise
their political and civil rights in future elections.
Increasing the number of women who run for political
office will be an important factor in achieving that. In
that regard, we are concerned about the acts of violence
committed against women participating in public life
and political processes. It is essential for women who
are candidates for political office, as well as elected
representatives, to be able to contribute to political
processes at all levels without threats or reprisals.
Thirdly, Switzerland wishes to express its concern
about the restrictions that have been imposed on
civil society, including bureaucratic restrictions. In
particular, we are concerned about the reports of
arrests carried out recently under the new cybercrime
law. Those new developments are taking place against
the backdrop of a shrinking civil-society space,
specifically as a result of increased surveillance by

S/PV.9270

security agencies. We also welcome the efforts to
reunify the Civil Society Commission, which is an
essential condition for establishing a safe, democratic
and unrestricted space for Libyan civil society and
international organizations operating in Libya.
Last October, the Security Council unanimously
renewed the mandate of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (see S/PV.9173). We will need to
show the same unity to support the implementation
of the new proposals of the Special Representative
with regard to the upcoming elections in Libya. Let us
preserve this unity and coherence in order to ensure
the much-needed support for the Libyan people on their
path to peace and democracy.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Bathily for his briefing.
Japan fully supports the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and Special Representative
Bathily in their tireless efforts to engage with a diverse
range of Libyan interlocutors from all regions and
segments of society, including the political, military
and economic sectors as well as civil society, in
particular women’s and youth groups. We also express
our wholehearted support for United Nations efforts to
bring together all partners, including regional actors,
and all concerned across the international community.
To overcome the present and long-standing political
stalemate in Libya, it is of foremost importance that the
Security Council be united in calling upon all Libyan
parties to join Mr. Bathily’s efforts — above all, his
new initiative to set up a the high-level steering panel to
facilitate elections in 2023, which Japan welcomes. This
is a matter of great urgency. The risk of destabilization
will be higher if more time passes without progress.
The Council should not allow the political actors to
waste time for their own profit.
Japan echoes UNSMIL’s statement of 5 January,
which encourages Libyan political leaders to swiftly
agree on complete, final and time-bound arrangements
for the holding of elections in Libya in 2023. It is
critically important for the people of Libya to unite
under a Government that they can trust and take back
the future into their own hands.
We welcome recent positive developments on the
security track, including the resumption of the 5+5 Joint
Military Committee’s activities. We strongly hope that
this will advance the implementation of the ceasefire

23-059655/18

S/PV.9270

The situation in Libya

agreement, in particular the joint work between the
international ceasefire monitoring team and Libyan
monitors launched on 15 January. At the same time, Japan
encourages Libyans and the international community
to continue working together to further implement the
ceasefire agreement in order to bring stability to the
country. Areas requiring sustained attention include
the withdrawal of mercenaries, foreign forces and
foreign fighters; disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration; and security sector reform.
The continued efforts to unify key governance
institutions in Libya, including the Central Bank of
Libya, are also critical. Japan highly appreciates and
expresses support for UNSMIL as it plays its role in
advancing these efforts. This process is an essential step
to ensure the fair distribution of revenues from Libya’s
natural resources. These resources should serve as the
wealth of the whole Libyan nation, contributing to the
country’s national budget in a transparent manner.
To conclude, let me reiterate Japan’s firm
commitment to making continued efforts to bring
all Libyans together to stabilize Libya. As a Council
member, and in my capacity as the Chair of the Security
Council Sanctions committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, I am looking
forward to cooperating with all partners.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bathily for
his briefing, and I welcome the Libyan delegation to
today’s meeting.
We appreciate the information provided by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
his recent engagement with Member States as part of
his consultations on the Libyan file. We recognize the
importance of input from regional actors. However, we
recall that the Security Council remains the appropriate
forum for discussing amendments to the mandate of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
if needed, and for providing guidance to the Special
Representative on its implementation. As set out in
resolution 2542 (2020), that mandate, with regard to
the political track, continues to be that of mediating
between the Libyan parties and offering them the
Mission’s good offices. This should ensure a Libyanled and Libyan-owned political transition.
Brazil therefore trusts that the Special
Representative’s proposal for a road map towards
elections in 2023 is primarily the outcome of his
6/18

27/02/2023

engagement with the Libyan parties. Given the
seriousness of the fragmentation of Government
structures, as well as the increasing challenges to
the authority of the different Libyan political actors
following the expiration of the transitional period in
2022, we hope that the Special Representative’s road
map will pave the way for the Libyan people to agree
on a way forward as soon as possible. The road map
should contribute to an environment where Libyan
actors, without foreign interference, can set aside their
differences and move towards elections, in order to
unify the Government and restore the legitimacy of
Libyan institutions.
We commend the Special Representative’s idea
of fostering a new intra-Libyan dialogue involving all
Libyan stakeholders, with the objective of overcoming
the political deadlock between the High Council of State
and the House of Representatives. It is our expectation
that new formulas proposed to address the crisis in
Libya take into account the legitimate interests of all
relevant Libyan parties.
I would like to draw the Security Council’s
attention to one of the conclusions drawn by the Panel
of Experts that assists the Council in implementing the
Libya sanctions regime. In its most recent report, the
Panel stated that,
“The arms embargo remains totally ineffective.
Member States supporting parties to the conflict
control the logistics flow and supply chains to those
parties and continue to violate the arms embargo
with impunity”.
Brazil has repeatedly emphasized the need for both
respect and enforcement of the arms embargo on Libya,
in a transparent and non-discriminatory manner. We
reiterate our calls upon Member States to respect their
obligation to prevent the direct or indirect supply, sale
or transfer of weapons and related material to Libya.
Ultimately, the repeated violations of the arms embargo
embolden political adversaries within Libya.
The lack of clarity about the precise organizational
structure of the official security apparatus in Libya
contributes to the difficulties in enforcing the arms
embargo. We urge the Libyan authorities to comply
with the relevant Security Council resolutions and
provide the sanctions committee with updated and
detailed information on the organization of their
security institutions.
23-05965

27/02/2023

The situation in Libya

Knowing the affiliations of armed branches
under Government authority is important to ensure
appropriate accountability mechanisms for violations
of human rights, humanitarian law and refugee law.
Private and public actors responsible for such violations
must be held accountable.
Finally, Brazil reiterates the need for the immediate
withdrawal of all foreign forces and mercenaries from
Libya, as well as for strategies for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of local armed
militias into Libyan society. We commend the work of
the 5+5 Joint Military Committee to that effect, hoping
for the implementation of the several agreements
recently announced.
To conclude, Brazil recalls the role that the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) can play, upon Libyan
request, to convene all relevant actors, particularly
neighbouring countries, and help to promote in Libya
an integrated, strategic and coherent approach to
security sector reform and institution-building more
broadly. The Security Council expressly acknowledged
this case-specific role for the PBC when it adopted
resolution 2647 (2022), which is the basis of UNSMIL’s
current mandate, last year. As a United Nations
intergovernmental advisory body with the ability to
support political dialogue in post-conflict situations,
the PBC can channel towards Libya the support of
other countries, whose only vested interest in Libyan
affairs is to build and sustain peace, with full respect
for Libyan sovereignty and peacebuilding priorities.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, we thank the Special
Representative, Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, for his
informative briefing and welcome Ambassador Elsonni
to today’s meeting.
We would also like to stress the support of the
United Arab Emirates for the proposal of the Special
Representative in relation to the High Level Steering
Group for Libya. We hope that the panel will achieve
the desired goals and consensus to which the Libyans
aspire. In order for those steps to succeed and be reflected
on the ground, they need collective support from the
international community free from geopolitical effects.
They also require unlimited Libyan cooperation. In that
regard, we emphasize the importance of consulting and
coordinating with Libyans on the proposal.
Twelve years have passed since the 17 February
anniversary that was an opportunity for transformation

S/PV.9270

to a new phase in Libya. Regrettably, it has been met
with complex divisions and alliances as well as intense
civil strife among Libyans. Therefore, the anniversary
offers an important opportunity to remember the
suffering and difficulties endured by that brotherly
Arab country and to learn lessons from the past, turn
the page on it and put national interests above all
other considerations.
Libya was only a few steps away from holding
elections. For reasons that are known to all, the date
of the elections was postponed. Since then, the parties
concerned have carried out successive consultations to
reach consensus on a constitutional basis. That has not
only prolonged the process and made it repetitive, but
it has also taken a turn that does not serve the national
interests of the Libyan people. Therefore, we do not see
a way out of that political impasse other than coming
together in support of Mr. Bathily’s efforts towards
enabling Libyans to reaching a Libyan-owned political
settlement leading to the holding of simultaneous
parliamentary and presidential elections this year that
are accepted by all Libyan parties and that result in the
establishment of a unified Government.
We commend the important role played by Libya’s
neighbouring countries, particularly Egypt, in bringing
diverging views closer together with the support of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
We also stress the need to promote the full, equal
and meaningful participation of Libyan women in the
political process, including in the transitional process
leading to the elections and beyond. We also emphasize
the need to ensure the protection of women and girls
against violence, including online.
We further stress the importance of involving
youth in the political process, considering their pivotal
role in establishing and sustaining peace. We therefore
welcome the inclusiveness of the mechanism proposed
by the Special Representative to strengthen the
participation of women and youth.
In conjunction with the efforts made to reach
a comprehensive political settlement that ends the
transitional period, we must continue advancing
along the path of comprehensive and just national
reconciliation to ensure sustainable peace and stability
in Libya.
Accordingly, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms
its support for the efforts of the Libyan Presidential
Council, the African Union and UNSMIL through

23-059657/18

S/PV.9270

The situation in Libya

27/02/2023

the preparatory forum for the National Reconciliation
Conference. We look forward to the next steps in the
implementation of the national reconciliation strategy
with the participation of all parties.

reference in his report (S/2023/76) to the exploitation
by terrorist groups, such as Da’esh, of the current
situation on the ground to generate revenue through the
smuggling of oil.

Continuing to respect the ceasefire agreement
is essential for maintaining stability throughout
Libya. It is encouraging that the meetings of the 5+5
Joint Military Commission are continuing with the
participation of representatives from neighbouring
countries, as well as local and international ceasefire
monitors, under the auspices of UNSMIL. Their efforts
must be accompanied by the implementation of the
remaining elements of the ceasefire agreement and by
taking serious steps on the ground towards unifying the
military institutions in Libya.

In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates underscores
its solidarity with the Libyan people and supports their
endeavours to live in a safe and prosperous country
that is full of opportunities and ensures a peaceful and
prosperous future.

We support the efforts aimed at creating a joint
military force as a base for achieving unity. The
United Arab Emirates also reiterates its request for a
simultaneous, phased, gradual and balanced withdrawal
of foreign forces, foreign fighters and mercenaries
in order to achieve peace and stability in Libya. We
welcome the establishment of a joint coordination
mechanism for collecting and exchanging data on
the matter.
To ensure security throughout Libya, combating
terrorism and maintaining the gains made in countering
extremism must remain a priority. Furthermore, the
measures and tools adopted by the Council should not
impede the national efforts of Libyan forces to address
security threats, especially in southern Libya.
We also note that restoring stability in Libya will
support the security and stability of all countries in
the region, especially of neighbouring countries. As
such, we support regional efforts aimed at addressing
irregular migration, while taking into account Libyan
and African concerns. The international community
must provide support to origin and transit countries
alike to address the root causes of migration.
Despite the many challenges facing Libya and the
efforts made by the relevant authorities to keep pace
and address those challenges, more steps must be taken
to improve the programme of disclosure, transparency
and governance, especially with regard to expenditure.
That will ensure the equitable distribution of resources,
the preservation of vital institutions and the protection
of the wealth of the Libyan people to ensure that it is
preserved for future generations. That is particularly
important in the context of the Secretary-General’s
8/18

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bathily for his
briefing, mediation efforts and especially his inclusive
approach towards lasting peace in Libya. We are
encouraged by the vision he shared today, welcome it
and believe that a sustainable Libyan-owned political
process, under United Nations auspices, is the right
path for the Libyan people, the country and the entire
region. That initiative is a very timely and long-awaited
opportunity to help the country break the current
deadlock, abandon hopeless power rivalry and put
an end to zero-sum political games. The status quo,
otherwise a protracted political stalemate, is not an
option nor is it sustainable.
Libyans want change, and change starts with
elections, through the expression of free will to put an
end to a decade-long crisis and bring back legitimacy to
the Libyan institutions. It is our duty to support Libyans
in their aspirations and expectations for a future in
security, with national reconciliation and respect for
human rights, prosperity and democracy. It is therefore
essential for the Security Council and the international
community to show unity and speak to the Libyan
people and all stakeholders there with one voice.
On the security front, we hope that the United
Nations can soon fully deploy the operational ceasefire
monitoring team in Sirte to underpin better security
prospects. We welcome the recent meeting of the 5+5
Joint Military Commission and the liaison committees
from neighbouring countries with the participation of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
While we fully reiterate our full support for the
implementation of the October 2020 ceasefire, we
believe that the immediate withdrawal of all foreign
forces, foreign fighters and mercenaries remains crucial
to peace and security in Libya.
Albania remains deeply worried about the
systematic human rights violations in Libya and the
23-05965

27/02/2023

The situation in Libya

continued reduction of civic space. We deeply regret
that, during its most recent visit, the United Nations
Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya did not
have full access in the country. We echo its call on the
Libyan authorities to take decisive steps to provide
justice and redress to the vast number of victims
suffering from long-standing violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law.
Addressing impunity and strengthening accountability remain crucial to the future of the country. Every
step backwards or evidence of unwillingness to achieve
justice and put an end to impunity is a step backwards
in the national reconciliation process and premonitory
to serious future challenges.
A new Libya needs the contribution of everyone,
including women and young people.
Libyans sit on an immense national wealth. If
properly and responsibly managed, they can put the
country on the path to rapid development and welfare.
It is therefore up to the Libyans to make it a blessing,
not a curse. A fair and transparent management of the
country’s wealth is rightfully a main concern for the
people, and it is an imperative to have everyone benefit
equally from it.
Albania supports the ongoing efforts aimed at
ensuring financial transparency and managing the
country’s resources in an equitable manner. It is crucial
to overcome the current critical issues concerning the
distribution of oil resources in the country.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate Albania’s full
support for the proposal of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and our full commitment in
support of this renewed momentum for the future Libya
and its people.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of
the three African members of the Security Council (A3),
namely, Gabon, Ghana and my country, Mozambique.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, for
his briefing, and we welcome the participation of
Ambassador Taher Elsonni, Permanent Representative
of Libya, in today’s meeting. We commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Bathily,
for his tireless efforts to find a lasting solution to the
political and security crisis in Libya.

S/PV.9270

The A3 statement will focus on the following
areas: the reconciliation process, the political process,
the role of foreign forces, combatants and interests,
the arms embargo and the humanitarian situation.
The A3 welcomes the communiqué of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union (AU), adopted
on 1 February, on the situation in Libya, through which
the AU has once again demonstrated its commitment to
a stable and prosperous Libya, in particular with regard
to the national reconciliation process in coordination
with the Presidential Council.
(spoke in English)
The A3 wishes to reaffirm its position that the
peace process in Libya must be Libyan-led and Libyanowned, guided by an inclusive dialogue conducive to
national reconciliation. We urge the various segments of
Libyan society to engage in the talks in good faith, and
we look forward to the establishment of the country’s
constitution and electoral framework required for the
prompt holding of elections so that the Libyan people
can freely choose their leaders. In that regard, we
commend Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Bathily for seeking the views of Libyans from
all segments of society, regional actors and international
partners towards developing a possible way out of the
impasse, including by considering possible innovative
alternatives in order to move forward while preserving
the spirit of the process.
In commending the efforts of Special Representative
Bathily, the A3 wishes to draw attention to the fact that
he cannot succeed if Libyan political actors do not place
the interests of Libyans above all other considerations.
The people of Libya deserve better, and they are calling
for elections as a way out. However, we are cognizant of
the fact that elections are not a means to an end, but can
be a catalyst towards sustainable peace and security
in Libya.
We are in favour of any alternative solution proposed
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
with the greater involvement of the African Union and
the Presidential Council so as to get the country out of
the political impasse and organize elections during the
year 2023, as ardently desired by the Libyan people.
In that regard, we pledge our support for Special
Representative Bathily’s plan to set up a high-level
panel for the elections that is aimed at bringing all
the relevant Libyan stakeholder together and to enable
them to reach consensus on the election process for the

23-059659/18

S/PV.9270

The situation in Libya

presidential and parliamentary elections before the end
of 2023.
We note in particular that the high-level panel for
the elections will seek to address some of the gaps that
have been lingered in the past by, first, finalizing the
constitutional and legal basis for the elections, taking
into account the work already done by the House of
Representatives and the High State Council through
trust-building among the relevant stakeholders;
secondly, creating a road map with clear steps towards
the elections; thirdly, agreeing on the parameters for
ensuring the security of the electoral process; and
fourthly and finally, promoting the adoption of a
code of conduct for all actors in the political process,
among others.
The A3 would also like to call on foreign interests
in Libya to consider the interests of Libyans first by
stopping their support to various factions in this
conflict, which exacerbates the situation. The Libyan
people are saying “enough is enough” and that we
should give peace a chance. That clarion call should be
a matter of the utmost urgency.
We would like to recall the Secretary-General’s
statement at the African Union Summit, held on
18 and 19 February in Addis Ababa, in which he
stated his priority for both the United Nations and the
African Union: “There is no alternative to elections.
They remain the only credible pathway to legitimate,
unified governance.” We want to pledge our support
to the Secretary-General’s vision in that regard. Libya
is an African country, and the populations of the
continent are the most affected by its instability. It is
therefore legitimate for the African Union to be fully
engaged at all stages of the resolution of the Libyan
crisis. As the A3, we reiterate our call for African
solutions to African problems. In that regard, we urge
the involvement of the African Union and encourage
its active engagement in all aspects of the process in
Libya, especially with regard to reconciliation and the
electoral and political processes. In that context, the A3
commends the support and facilitation efforts being
made by Libya’s neighbours and by regional economic
communities and regional mechanisms, as well as the
African Union High-Level Committee for Libya, with
the aim of sustaining a Libyan-owned and Libyan-led
political process.
We are encouraged by the recent meeting of the 5+5
Joint Military Commission and the liaison committees
10/18

27/02/2023

of the integrated mechanism for joint coordination
and data exchange to facilitate the full withdrawal
of mercenaries and foreign forces, as well as foreign
fighters, from Libya. The presence of those foreign
forces on Libyan soil undermines Libya’s territorial
integrity and ownership of the peace process. Their
departure is essential to a favourable environment
conducive to the advancement of the ongoing political
process and leading to the holding of elections in the
course of this year.
We want to point to the catalytic effect of the
Libyan conflict on the Sahel and its consequences
for the security situation in the wider region, which
continues to deteriorate as terrorism spreads in West
African countries and beyond. We must remember
that the peace process in Libya is inextricably linked
to the stability of the region. Consultations with
neighbouring States and the region are therefore
essential. International support should also be extended
to cross-border cooperation in the fight against arms
trafficking, smuggling and trafficking in persons,
among other issues. We further urge that disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) efforts be
focused not only on Libya but also undertaken through
a collaborative approach with neighbouring States and
regional organizations.
Cross-border cooperation must also take into
account the enabling environment that the conflict
offers for the development of terrorism. There is a need
for an inclusive attitude to security-sector reform and
the DDR efforts in Libya by taking a regional approach,
as well as by integrating the capacity-building and
counter-terrorism support extended to countries in the
region. We note the relatively stable security situation
in Libya and call on all the parties to continue showing
restraint by fully complying with the 2020 ceasefire
agreement in order to preserve the current relative
peace and security.
(spoke in French)
The A3 is deeply concerned by the continued
violations of the arms embargo, which threaten to
undo the significant progress achieved so far in the
transition process in Libya. In that regard, we call on
the international community to respect resolution 1970
(2011) of 26 February 2011.
The humanitarian situation in Libya is also a matter
of deep concern to the A3. In our view, the situation
of internally displaced persons, asylum seekers,
23-05965

27/02/2023

The situation in Libya

migrants and refugees is disastrous. Gabon, Ghana and
Mozambique urgently call for all migrants, refugees and
asylum seekers to be treated with dignity throughout
the country, especially along the Libyan coast. We also
call for thorough investigations into the mistreatment
of migrants and refugees and for those responsible for
that inhumane treatment to be identified, tried and
convicted. The Libyan authorities and international
humanitarian actors must take the necessary measures
to ensure the safety and protection of populations in
need, in accordance with international humanitarian
and human rights law.
We should not conclude without reaffirming that all
measures regarding Libya’s frozen assets must be taken
in consultation with the Libyan authorities in order to
ensure the safekeeping of those assets until they are
returned to the Libyan people. We reiterate our call
for full respect for the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and national unity of Libya, in accordance with
resolution 2656 (2022). Those are the basic conditions
necessary for the holding of free and fair elections,
which will bring order, peace and stability to Libya.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Bathily, for his briefing and welcome
the Permanent Representative of Libya, Ambassador
Elsonni, to today’s meeting.
We regret that more than a year has passed since
the postponement of presidential and legislative
elections in Libya. We welcome the resumption of talks
between the Speaker of the House of Representatives
and the President of the High State Council on
5 January. We recognize the rapprochement brought
about thanks to Mr. Bathily’s efforts since his
appointment — in particular his engagement with a
wide range of stakeholders, including members of
Libyan civil society, women and young people.
Those consultation processes drive the political
process forward and allow for a better understanding of
the Libyan people’s aspirations for peace and stability
in their country. It is a priority for the parties to agree,
as soon as possible, on the constitutional basis for
holding transparent and inclusive national elections
that will satisfy the Libyan people’s desire to return to
democracy and lay the foundations for the country’s
development and reconstruction.
On security, Ecuador supports the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission in its work on the maintenance

S/PV.9270

of the October 2020 ceasefire agreement, as well as in
the implementation of the October 2021 action plan.
The removal of the foreign military presence in Libya
is paramount. The recent approval and establishment
of an integrated coordination and data-sharing
mechanism by the 5+5 Joint Military Commission and
the liaison committees of Libya, the Sudan and the
Niger to facilitate the total withdrawal of mercenaries
and foreign fighters from the country is commendable.
Such an achievement — namely, the total withdrawal of
mercenaries — constitutes an important step towards
achieving peace and stability in Libya, as well as
contributing to the creation of a favourable environment
for the political process and the holding of elections
this year.
Ecuador condemns the deterioration of civic space
in Libya. Reports of abuses against civil society,
including the arbitrary arrest of activists and human
rights defenders, are a matter of concern. The right
of individuals to exercise their freedom of expression
and to carry out their activities without hindrance must
be guaranteed.
The humanitarian and human rights situation of
migrants and refugees in Libya is also of concern. We
call on the Libyan authorities to take effective measures
to address the plight of migrants and refugees and to
dismantle criminal and human trafficking networks.
Likewise, it is imperative to ensure that the perpetrators
of violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law be brought to justice.
We reject violence against women. We deeply
regret that the agreement between the United Nations
and the Libyan Ministry of Women’s Affairs that
sought to ensure the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) has been annulled. We call for the strengthening
of women’s participation in the political arena, as
their involvement in all peace processes is proven to
be indispensable.
Justice cannot be neglected if true peace is what
we seek. We are encouraged by the actions being
taken towards the creation of a law on transitional
justice and national reconciliation and hope that it can
be implemented as soon as possible. We call on the
Government of Libya to fulfil its obligation to cooperate
with the International Criminal Court and the Office
of the Prosecutor in accordance with resolution 1970
(2011). The cooperation of the Libyan Government is
an essential condition for the successful prosecution of

23-0596511/18

S/PV.9270

The situation in Libya

those responsible for crimes against humanity and war
crimes committed on its territory since February 2011.
My delegation echoes the Security Council’s
press release of 20 December reiterating the call on
the international community to support the work of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Bathily, in his consultations with the various
Libyan stakeholders and international partners.
In conclusion, we express our respect for Libya’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity and urge the
Libyan parties to work constructively with Special
Representative Bathily to find a solution to break the
political deadlock.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative Bathily for his briefing and
welcome the Permanent Representative of Libya,
Ambassador Elsonni, to today’s meeting.
In connection to Mr. Bathily’s briefing and recent
developments in Libya, I would like to emphasize the
following points.
First, we must support efforts aimed at achieving
progress in the political process in Libya. The
momentum of dialogue and consultations among the
various parties in the country has recently picked up
speed. The House of Representatives and the High
State Council held multiple rounds of dialogue, while
Egypt and other countries in the region have played an
active role in mediation. At the same time, however,
the parties in Libya have yet to reach agreement on
key issues such as the constitutional basis for elections
and the political deadlock continues. All parties in
Libya must truly proceed from the interests of the
country and its people and bridge the current political
divide as soon as possible in order to create a political
environment conducive to the reconstruction and
development of the Libyan State. The top priority now
is to step up consultations on the basis of previous
dialogue outcomes and swiftly come to an agreement
on outstanding points of divergence so that elections
can be held as soon as possible.
Secondly, we must support the good offices and
mediation efforts of Special Representative Bathily.
China commends him for his extensive and in-depth
engagement with all parties in Libya after taking office.
While attending a meeting of the African Union (AU) a
few days ago, Secretary-General Guterres underscored
12/18

27/02/2023

that the United Nations remains committed to promoting
Libyan-led and Libyan-owned solutions. The Security
Council should support Special Representative Bathily
in delivering on that commitment and scaling up his
mediation efforts. The international community must
support Libya’s political process, promote Libya’s
political settlement and earnestly safeguard Libya’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. The concerns of
all parties in Libya must be taken into account and any
externally imposed solutions that could complicate the
situation in the country should be avoided.
Thirdly, we must support the Libyan national
reconciliation process. It is the only path along which
the country’s wounds can be healed and consensus on
reconstruction and development built. A high-level
meeting on Libya was held during the recent AU summit
where the decision was taken to support Libya in holding
a national reconciliation conference. China highly
appreciates the efforts of the African Union High-Level
Committee on Libya, led by President Sassou-Nguesso
of the Republic of the Congo. We look forward to the
holding of a successful conference, which will inject
new impetus into Libya’s political transition, as well as
its security, stability, reconstruction and development.
China supports the AU in playing a greater role and
sharing its best practices in national reconciliation.
Fourthly, we should fully support efforts to silence
the guns in Libya. We welcome the fact that, under
the auspices of Mr. Bathily, the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission has held several meetings in order to
promote ongoing efforts, including with regard to the
implementation of the ceasefire agreement and the
unification of the security agencies. All parties in the
countries should remain engaged with the Commission
in order to resolve differences and avoid actions that may
escalate the situation. Foreign fighters and mercenaries
are major challenges to Libya’s security. China welcomes
the establishment of relevant coordination mechanisms
between Libya and neighbouring countries and supports
a swift withdrawal, in a balanced and orderly manner,
so as to avoid increased regional security risks.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): We thank
Special Representative Bathily for his briefing on the
situation in Libya. We welcome his strong leadership
and fully support the proposed elections-enabling
mechanism, as outlined in his remarks. The United
States is 100 per cent committed to helping him
to succeed.
23-05965

27/02/2023

The situation in Libya

The status quo in Libya is not stable, with heightened
risks of partition, energy disruptions, further political
strife and violence. The only viable path to a durable
peace in Libya is enabling the Libyan people to choose
their own leaders in national elections. We welcome
the progress Libyans have made in the Egypt-hosted
constitutional track, in which Libyan leaders resolved
many issues needed to hold elections. We thank the
Government of Egypt for its efforts and important
contributions to realizing our shared goal of holding
presidential and parliamentary elections.
Now it is time to build on those achievements
and move forward with the United Nations-facilitated
effort to secure broad political consensus and enable
successful elections in Libya. Full unified support from
the Council and other international stakeholders will
be critical as Special Representative Bathily works to
implement an elections-enabling mechanism. Building
political will among all Libya’s leaders to make the
hard decisions and move elections forward remains a
challenge. Now is the time to restore momentum.
The United States endorses action by Special
Representative Bathily and the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) to directly address the
electoral process via a United Nations-facilitated
elections-enabling mechanism that will secure
resolution of the issues that stand in the way of elections
in Libya. The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral outlined an inclusive process that keeps key
institutions and leaders at the table. However, there
is no room for spoilers seeking to thwart the will of
the Libyan people. The United States will continue
to support the professional and impartial work of the
High National Elections Commission. We welcome
UNSMIL’s technical assistance to the Commission
and call on all Libyans to back it and conform to
its directives.
Progress on the political track must be
accompanied by progress on the economic and security
tracks. We believe that cooperation and compromise
on one track will reinforce progress on the others
through confidence-building and transparency. The
development of a revenue-management mechanism and
progress in reunifying Libya’s Central Bank will provide
transparency and accountability so that the people of
Libya can see how Libya’s wealth is being spent.
The commitment to east-west security cooperation,
perhaps through a joint unit, would be a welcome signal

S/PV.9270

of progress and confirmation that the Libyan people can
manage their own security. Libyans are calling for the
departure of foreign fighters and mercenaries. Those
forces must withdraw from Libya immediately. Wagner
Group mercenaries are particularly problematic and
must withdraw.
As we aim to make progress on those fronts at the
same time, the United States is deeply concerned by
the plight of migrants in Libya. We are saddened by
the continued loss of life on the Mediterranean Sea and
appalled by the inhumane treatment of migrants detained
in official and unofficial detention centres. We call for
respect for the human rights of migrants. We support
the continued work of the International Commission
of Inquiry on Libya and call on Libyan leaders to
cooperate fully with it and humanitarian organizations.
It is long past time for elections and an end to
politics by force, graft and coercion. Libyans deserve
to choose their own leaders in a Government that leads
to peace, stability and prosperity. The United States
stands ready to support the United Nations leadership
of Special Representative Bathily in order to help Libya
achieve those goals.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank the Special Representative for his
briefing and welcome the presence here of the Libyan
Permanent Representative.
Libya and its people deserve better than the
impasse to which their political class has condemned
them. They deserve better than a country where foreign
forces, mercenaries and militias are entrenching their
presence and tightening their grip in defiance of Libyan
sovereignty, integrity, stability and unity. Twelve
years after the February 2011 revolution, they deserve
better than a society in which democratic space and
fundamental freedoms are under threat.
Libyans also deserve better than a country in which
access to power and public funds is an end in itself
rather than a means to serve economic development and
the public interest. The population expects a fair and
transparent redistribution of oil revenues for the benefit
of all Libyan regions.
Libya deserves better than to be the scene of
repeated and unpunished crimes and human rights
violations, the first victims of which are migrants and
refugees, who are abandoned to human trafficking and
militias. France’s priorities remain unchanged in that

23-0596513/18

S/PV.9270

The situation in Libya

regard. Political legitimacy must be restored in Libya.
That requires a relaunch of the electoral process.
Millions of Libyans are waiting to participate
in simultaneous, inclusive, credible and transparent
presidential and parliamentary elections. A unified
Libyan Government is needed to organize those
elections throughout the country in order to control its
borders and to govern everywhere and for everyone. An
agreement on a legal basis and a new political road map
is also essential. In particular, it will be important to
ensure a level playing field for candidates. Corruption
and intimidation should not be used as campaign
tools. France therefore fully supports the efforts and
proposals of the Special Representative to achieve
those objective, in particular the creation of a highlevel steering panel for Libya in order to facilitate the
organization of elections.
The October 2020 ceasefire agreement is a valuable
achievement for Libya and regional stability. France
will continue to defend its full implementation, in
coordination with the United Nations. The determined
work of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission in that
regard must be fully supported, particularly in the
creation of a unified Libyan army and the process of
dismantling and reintegrating the militias. France has
therefore decided to allocate $100,000 to finance the
efforts of the Special Representative in order to support
the work of the Commission.
France will also continue to demand compliance
with the arms embargo and the withdrawal of all foreign
forces, foreign fighters and mercenaries from Libyan
territory, in cooperation with Libya’s neighbours.
France also recalls its commitment to the preservation
of the consensus in Libya on countering terrorism and
radical Islamism.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Libya and Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, for his briefing. We listened
attentively to his new proposals and will analyse them
with great care.
We are paying very close attention to developments
in the former Jamahiriya. Those development are
undoubtedly having an impact on the stability and
the security situation in the region and throughout the
African continent. Unfortunately, despite numerous
attempts there, it has not yet been possible to achieve
14/18

27/02/2023

the desired pace of initiatives to fully restore Libyan
statehood. After the failure to hold elections in
December 2021 and the expiration of the road map of
the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum in June 2022, the
political process in the country is still stagnating. The
already difficult relations between the west and east of
Libya are further complicated by the existence of the
two parallel Governments and the duplication of many
State institutions and mechanisms.
A solution to that situation could be the
organization of national elections. We underscore our
fundamental support for the efforts of Mr. Bathily to
organize an inclusive and transparent electoral process.
Nonetheless, we caution against organizing them too
hastily. Badly prepared national elections are hardly
likely to be a panacea for all of Libya’s outstanding
problems. Moreover, it would be counterproductive to
discard the achievements already made by the House
of Representatives and the High State Council, in
which so much work has been invested. In particular,
we thank our Egyptian colleagues for their efforts. We
also believe that one key to guaranteeing the elections’
success is the involvement of all the leading political
forces in Libya, including representatives of the
former Government.
We were pleased with the efforts of the African
Union and President Nguesso of the Republic of the
Congo to promote the inter-Libyan reconciliation
process. We believe that the initiative to organize a
national reconciliation conference is extremely timely.
Furthermore, it is perfectly in line with the principle of
African solutions to African problems. For our part, we
once again affirm our readiness to provide all possible
assistance in that regard.
We believe that further progress towards peace
requires the coordinated efforts of all international and
regional stakeholders. It is largely thanks to the schism
among them that the political stalemate has continued.
The Libyan parties’ attempts to manipulate and exercise
unilateral influence on the situation on the ground
will not help to reach a political solution and will only
deepen the country’s divide. Attempts to establish
separate mechanisms to manage the settlement of the
Libyan issue, as per usual without Libyan ownership,
are very unlikely to advance things, as the Libyans
themselves have been saying for a long time. We have
no illusions about the added value of such formats.
23-05965

27/02/2023

The situation in Libya

The fact is that a political settlement itself is
only the beginning. Libyans face the daunting task of
rebuilding the country and revitalizing its economy,
which was destroyed by the NATO countries’ illegal
intervention in 2011. The export of hydrocarbons,
whose revenue is vital to Libyans, has a key role to play
in that regard. In that connection, we feel compelled to
point to the duplicity of some Western countries, which
are playing that card to serve their own geopolitical
and commercial interests. Washington’s relentless
activity on the Libyan track is quite clear, something
that its high-ranking officials’ many public statements
and visits to the country attest to. The only problem is
that their real goal is obviously preserving the status
quo whereby Libya continues to be a stable exporter of
oil to international markets. We hope that the Libyan
people are wise enough not to fall into the same trap
in which many other countries in the Middle East and
North Africa have found themselves.
We reaffirm our continued support for United
Nations efforts to finding an acceptable solution to the
crisis in the country. We see the active work of UNSMIL
as a key element in that international framework. We
welcome the resumption of the work of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission (JMC) through the mediation of
Mr. Bathily and the help of the Egyptian authorities.
The fact is that the turbulence in Libya is not over. We
are alarmed by the reports of sporadic fighting among
armed groups in some regions of Libya. Against that
backdrop, the work of the JMC is key to improving
coordination among the parties on the military track
and forming a unified security architecture. Dropping
the ball in that extremely sensitive area could lead to
an escalation of armed clashes and a repetition of the
unfortunate scenarios of 2019. Another important issue
is the elimination of any foreign military presence in
Libya. Our position is well known. We are in favour
of a synchronized, balanced and gradual withdrawal
of all non-Libyan armed groups and military units,
without exception.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malta.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Bathily for his briefing, and I welcome the
participation of the Permanent Representative of Libya
in today’s meeting.
The situation in Libya is one that continues to warrant
the international community’s focus and support, and it

S/PV.9270

remains equally crucial for the international community
to speak and act with one voice. Libya continues to find
itself at a political impasse, and we are concerned about
the fact that the situation in Libya is still marred by
political polarization. We are encouraged by the Special
Representative’s efforts towards inclusivity and his
consultations with a broad range of actors to address the
stalemate. We note the Special Representative’s recent
message that there is a growing convergence of opinion
among Libyan actors regarding the holding of elections
this year. We strongly support his work, including
his commitment to establishing a high-level steering
panel and his calls for a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned
political process under United Nations auspices.
We reiterate that the Libyan people have the right
to choose their own leadership through free, fair and
inclusive elections that can take place during the
current year. Progress towards agreement on a legal and
constitutional basis for those elections is paramount.
We call on all parties to engage with the Special
Representative constructively and in good faith in order
to overcome their political and institutional divisions
and bring much-needed stability to the country. In
doing so, human rights must also be protected. Malta
also emphasizes the importance of an inclusive political
process that allows for the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women, civil-society organizations and
young people.
One consequence of the continued political
uncertainty is that the security situation remains fragile.
While the ceasefire continues to hold and the continued
work of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission plays a
crucial role in that, violent clashes persist. All Libyan
actors have a responsibility to refrain from escalatory
actions and prioritize the protection of civilians.
We are equally concerned about the continued
presence of foreign fighters, foreign forces and
mercenaries in Libya. That continues to pose a serious
challenge to the safety and security of Libyans and
undermines efforts to unify the country’s security and
military institutions. Their full withdrawal should be
prioritized in any political process. On that note, we
welcome the 5+5 Joint Military Commission’s approval,
in conjunction with liaison committees from Libya,
the Sudan and the Niger, to establish an integrated
mechanism for joint coordination and data-exchange to
facilitate the full withdrawal of mercenaries and foreign
fighters from Libya. That is an additional important step
towards achieving stability and fostering a favourable

23-0596515/18

S/PV.9270

The situation in Libya

climate for the political process. Unfortunately,
that stability has been further undermined by the
proliferation of weapons under the control of various
State and non-State actors. We underline the need for
the full implementation of the arms embargo, in line
with the relevant Security Council resolutions. In that
context, we also emphasize the role of European Union
Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI.
On the socioeconomic front, large segments of
the Libyan population continue to face increasingly
difficult living conditions. In that regard, we welcome
the recent convening of the Economic Working Group
of the International Follow-up Committee on Libya and
its efforts to make progress towards reunifying and
reforming the Central Bank of Libya. A unified Central
Bank will enable the consolidation of monetary policy,
consistent Government funding and greater direct
foreign investment. Transparent and accountable public
finances, coupled with the equitable management of
national resources, are measures that can ameliorate
the economic situation for all the people of Libya.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate Malta’s support
for all efforts that seek to secure a peaceful, stable and
prosperous present and future for all Libyans. We can
all do our bit to help Libya along the path to developing
its full potential both for the benefit and well-being of
its people and for the benefit of stability in the region
as a whole.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate you, Madam President,
on joining the Security Council and on assuming the
presidency of the Council for this month. I would also
like to welcome the Council’s other newly elected
members — Mozambique, Switzerland, Ecuador and
Japan— and I wish them all every success. I also
thank Mr. Bathily for his important briefing, which
we followed attentively. We also welcome the efforts
he has made since assuming his position, including his
many meetings within and outside Libya with political
forces and stakeholders to move forward the political
process and put an end to the current impasse.
Today we mark 12 years since the Council adopted
resolution 1973 (2011), on putting Libya under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, using the
16/18

27/02/2023

slogan of protecting civilians. Nevertheless, today we
are still suffering the consequences of the negative
interventions by some countries and their deviation
from that slogan. They took advantage of the Libyan
people’s dream of change, which has led us to where we
are today. Unfortunately, even to this very day, we are
still speaking about resolutions, initiatives, proposals
and ways to end the crisis. It was important for me to
give this introduction to remind the Council that the
blame should not be placed solely on Libyans, and that
all of us must shoulder the responsibilities.
However, today we are trying to view positively
and optimistically the current attempts to reach a
regional and international agreement. We have seen a
convergence of viewpoints among many parties that
were previously contradictory. We are also seeing the
emergence of many initiatives and proposals that are all
geared towards the same objective, which is, to complete
the democratic process and hold elections as soon as
possible. We therefore call on Council members today
to support the national will and respond to the call of
millions of Libyans who are fed up with the status quo
and look forward to ending the conflict, division and
chaos as well as achieving safety and stability. I assure
the Council that the Libyan people, despite their loss
of trust in the international community over the years,
are closely following Council meetings and looking
forward to any decisions that may come out of them.
We reaffirm the importance of directing all efforts
and initiatives towards garnering national consensus
around a fair and impartial constitutional basis and
non-discriminatory electoral laws that give everyone
an opportunity to participate. A clear timetable and
favourable conditions should be put in place for the
presidential and parliamentary elections, letting the
Libyan people decide. That will ensure the end to all
the transition periods and prevent us from repeating the
mistakes of the past.
In that regard, we would like to remind the
Secretary-General, Mr. Bathily, his team and the
Council that, when presenting solutions for mediation,
they should carefully examine the previous experiences
led by the United Nations in my country over many
years and learn lessons from them, because we cannot
tolerate any further road maps, transitional periods
or new paths. We have the Skhirat agreement and the
Geneva agreement, and I believe it is now high time
to change the course of action. Therefore, any new
mechanism should focus solely on addressing the points
23-05965

27/02/2023

The situation in Libya

of contention and setting a timetable for completing
the impeded constitutional and electoral path so as to
ensure that the presidential and parliamentary elections
are held by the end of this year. To put it simply, do
not repeat the same mistakes and expect different
results — as this illness cannot be treated by the same
medicine that failed to cure repeatedly in the past.
We reiterate the importance of ownership and
leadership by Libyans of any political process, the
process that can lead the country to stability and state
authority, free from any foreign dictates. Therefore,
we call on the Council to support genuine national
efforts that are currently seeking to address challenges
and develop a comprehensive Libyan solution while
completing all fragile transitional phases. In that
context, we reaffirm that the Presidential Council
and the Government of National Unity are harnessing
all potential through State institutions, various
commissions and in cooperation with United Nations
bodies, as well as the High Electoral Commission, to
support the election process and complete that national
process. We also reiterate our call to the United Nations
henceforth to provide assistance in a more effective and
serious manner to support the election process and to
send its teams to assess the needs and to coordinate with
the Government and the High Electoral Commission to
prepare for the upcoming in good time. That will send
the message to all that the international community
is serious about holding free, fair and transparent
elections, which everybody is looking for, without
doubting their outcomes.
Speaking of Libyan ownership, Libyan leadership
and national sovereignty leads us to talk about the
military path. We commend the continuous efforts of
the Joint Military Commission, which dissociated itself
from the political controversy. Therefore, we call on the
Council members to support its efforts that target the
unification of the military institution in a professional
and effective manner while establishing the mechanisms
for putting an end to all kinds of foreign presence on
Libyan territory, irrespective of their names. That is a
sovereign call by all Libyans without which the national
will remains stolen and captive by others. Therefore,
we recall the importance of supporting efforts that
will draw a comprehensive strategy and a time-bound
plan to ensure the integration of all active forces on
the ground across the country to build non-politicized
security and military institutions that enjoy a national
doctrine of a civilian State and the rule of law.

S/PV.9270

In relation to the sanctions dossier, we would like
to recall once again our repeated calls on the Council
that have been supported by a number of its members
on many occasions, namely, that the sanctions regime,
which is more than 12 years old now, should be reviewed
and amended. That will enable Libya to manage its
frozen assets, at least for now, so that they do not lose
their value. The losses have been ascertained in reports
by unbiased international institutions. We also request
the Council to take a strong and decisive position as
to any attempt to undermine frozen Libyan assets and
funds of the Libyan Investment Authority, regardless of
the pretexts and justifications, because efforts continue
to lay have hands on the wealth of Libyans. We will
not allow that to happen. In the same context, we call
for heeding our request to delist some citizens now
on sanctions lists, either for humanitarian reasons or
because the reason for listing them no longer exists
after all these years. That request would prove the
support of the international community for the efforts
at achieving national reconciliation and rebuilding trust
among Libyans.
Libya is not isolated from the situation in the
world. Let us work together for the stability of Libya.
We understand the concerns of our neighbours and
the region. We stress that, whatever happens, Libya
is working to restore its active role at the regional and
international levels by promoting joint cooperation
and solidarity on an equal footing and on the basis of
respecting Libya’s sovereignty and territorial unity.
Therefore, we look forward to a serious and more
effective role from the Council to correct mistakes of
the past and to reveal spoilers, whether individuals,
entities or even States. Some of them are still trying to
abort the political process and put Libya back in a state
chaos, because they fear losing their authority or for the
people to regain the authority from them through the
free democratic and direct path.
In conclusion, we call on Council members
to participate actively in supporting all efforts to
implement national reconciliation and transitional
justice. Those are two essential paths that go hand in
hand but were unfortunately undermined over the past
years, although they constitute the principal foundation
to bring about success in any political solution that
can lead to stability of the country. In that regard,
we would like to thank the African Union for its
support of the Presidential Council on that dossier, as
we have started to witness encouraging steps during

23-0596517/18

S/PV.9270

The situation in Libya

this period. We have followed the proceedings of the
Preparatory Committee of the National Reconciliation
Conference in Tripoli, which included members of all
political trends and affiliations. Despite the challenges
faced by that path, it is high time to build bridges of
trust and stop recalling wounds of the past. We have
to look forward for putting an end to all controversies
about existing negative aspects while establishing
the principles of transitional justice, honesty, being
apologetic, tolerance and compensation. There is also
a need to reveal the fate of missing persons and for the

18/18

27/02/2023

return of all refugees and displaced persons. We must
work together to lead the country towards safety and
move from chaos and conflict to stability and peace. It
is high time to start the development and reconstruction
period and to end all manifestations of destruction.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

23-05965
