244

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

resolution 15 I 4 (XV), as well as all other relevant resolutions of the Assembly;
6. Reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of
Montserrat themselves to determine their future political
status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration and
reiterates its call upon the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial Government, to launch programmes of political education so that the people of Montserrat win be fully informed of the options available to
them in the exercise of their right to self-determination
and independence;
7. Calls upon the administering Power, in co-operation
with the territorial Government, to continue to strengthen
the economy and to increase its assistance to programmes
of diversification in order to promote the economic and
financial viability of the Territory;
8. Urges the administering Power to take the necessary
measures, in co-operation with the territorial Government, to restore sustained and balanced growth to the
economy of the Territory and to intensify its assistance in
the development of an sectors thereof, which win benefit
the people of the Territory, and expresses the hope that
Montserrat's non-budgetary grant-in-aid status can be
maintained;
9. Also urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the territorial Government, to take effective measures
to safeguard, guarantee and ensure the rights of the people
of Montserrat to own and dispose of their natural
resources and to establish and maintain control of their
future development;
10. Further urges the administering Power, in co-operation with the territorial Government, to continue to provide the assistance necessary for the localization of the civil service at all levels, particularly the senior levels;
11. Takes note of the continued participation of the
Territory in the work of the Caribbean Group for Co-operation and Economic Development, as well as such regional
organizations as the Caribbean Community and the Caribbean Development Bank, and cans upon the organizations
of the United Nations system, as wen as donor Governments and regional organizations, to intensify their efforts
to accelerate progress in the economic and social life of the
Territory;
12. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to Montserrat at an appropriate time
should be kept under review;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to Montserrat at an appropriate time and in consultation with the
administering Power, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session.

87th plenary meeting
5 December 1984

39/37. Question of the Turks and Caicos Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Turks and Caicos
Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
23 Ibid., chaps. IV, V, VI and XXIV.
24 See A/ AC. l09/765, para. 21

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 23
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and an other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
the Turks and Caicos Islands, including in particular its
resolution 38/4 7 of 7 December 1983,
Taking into account the statement of the representative
of the administering Power relating to the Territory, 13 in
which he said that his Government would fully respect the
wishes of the people of the Turks and Caicos Islands in
determining the future constitutional status of the Territory, and bearing in mind the importance of fostering an
awareness among the people of the Territory of the possibilities open to them,
Conscious of the need to ensure the fun and speedy
implementation of the Declaration in respect of the
Territory,
Noting with appreciation the participation of the administering Power in the work of the Special Committee,
thereby enabling it to conduct a more informed and meaningful examination of the situation in the Territory,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the Territory and
bearing in mind the necessity of diversifying and strengthening further its economy as a matter of priority in order
to promote economic stability and to develop a wider economic base for the Territory,
Recalling its strong conviction that military bases and
instanations must not hinder the populations of the NonSelf-Governing Territories from exercising their right to
self-determination and independence in conformity with
the purposes and principles of the Charter and the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations,
Noting the statement of the administering Power that an
experimental farm has been set up on North Caicos to
study agricultural techniques, 24
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the
small Territories and expressing its satisfaction at the
willingness of the administering Power to receive visiting
missions in the Territories under its administration,
l . Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Turks
and Caicos lslands; 25
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the
Turks and Caicos Islands to self-determination and independence in conformity with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);

3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exercise by the people of the Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), which funy applies to the Turks and
Caicos Islands;
4. Reiterates that it is the obligation of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
2 5 Official Records of1he General Assembly, Thirly-ninth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/39/23), chap. XXIV.

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

administering Power, to create such conditions in the ~erritory as will enable the people of the Turks and Caicos
Islands to exercise freely and without interference their
inalienable right to self-determination and independence
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV), as well as all other relevant resolutions of the
Assembly;
5. Reaffirms that it is the responsibility of the administering Power under the Charter of the United Nations to
develop its dependent Territories economically and socially and urges the administering Power, in consultation with
the territorial Government, to take the necessary measures
to promote the economic and social development of the
Turks and Caicos Islands and, in particular, to intensify
and expand its programme of assistance in order to accelerate the development of the economic and social infrastructure of the Territory;
6. Emphasizes that greater attention should be paid to
diversification of the economy, particularly in the promotion of agriculture and fisheries, which will benefit the
people of the Territory;
7. Recalls that it is the responsibility of the administering Power, in accordance with the wishes of the people of
the Turks and Caicos Islands, to safeguard, guarantee and
ensure the inalienable right of the people to the enjoyment
of their natural resources by taking effective measures to
guarantee their right to own and dispose of those resources
and to establish and maintain control of their future
development;
8. Takes note of the statement of the administering
Power to the effect that the military facility in the Turks
and Caicos Islands has been closed and that the territorial
Government now has complete control over the disposition of the land vacated by the base; 26
9. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, as well as such regional institutions as the Caribbean Development Bank, to
continue to pay special attention to the development needs
of the Turks and Caicos Islands and welcomes the continuing contribution of the United Nations Development
Programme;
l 0. Requests the administering Power, in consultation
with the territorial Government, to continue to provide
the assistance necessary for the training of qualified local
personnel in the skills essential to the development of economic and social sectors of the Territory;
11. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to the Turks and Caicos Islands at an
appropriate time should be kept under review;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
·the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to the
Turks and Caicos Islands at an appropriate time and in
consultation with the administering Power, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
87th plenary meeting
5 December 1984

245

Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Sit1;1ation with regard _to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 27
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
I 960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries an~ People~, and all _other
resolutions and decisions of the Umted Nations relating to
the United States Virgin Islands, including in particular its
resolution 38/48 of 7 December 1983,
Noting with appreciation the continued participation of
the United States of America, as the administering Power,
in the work of the Special Committee in regard to the
United States Virgin Islands, thereby enabling it to conduct a more informed and meaningful examination of the
situation in the Territory, and expressing its satisfaction at
the willingness of the administering Power to receive visiting missions in the Territories under its administration,
Welcoming the participation of a representative of t~e
territorial Government in the work of the Special
Committee,
Having heard the statement of the representative of the
administering Power relating to the United States Virgin
Islands, 28
Noting that the territorial Government has undertaken
to intensify its efforts to expand and diversify the economy
and further noting the growth in the manufacturing, construction and tourism sectors and in per capita income, as
well as the relatively low unemployment rate in the
Territory,
Noting that the territorial Government is encouraging
the growth of agriculture and to that end recently purchased 804 hectares of land on St. Croix for agricultural
development, home ownership and the construction of a
vocational school,
Reiterating the view that the participation of Territories
as associate members in organizations of the United
Nations system is a part of the overall strategy of accelerating the decolonization process,
A ware that in 196 7 the administering Power transferred
possession of its former naval base on St. Thomas to the
territorial Government while retaining the right to reoccupy it, and that it maintains a radar and sonar calibration
station and an underwater tracking range off the west coast
of St. Croix,
I. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting oflndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the United
States Virgin Islands; 29
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the
United States Virgin Islands to self-determination and
independence in conformity with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);

Having considered the question of the United States
Virgin Islands,

3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exercise by the people of the Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), which fully applies to the United States
Virgin Islands;

26 See A/ AC. I091778, para. 20.
27 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/39/23), chaps. IV, VI and XXV.

28 Ibid.. Thirty-ninth Session, Fourth Committee, 17th meeting, paras.
73-82.
29 Ibid.. Thirtl'-ninth Session Supplement No. 23 (A/39/23), chap. XXV.

39/38. Question of the United States Virgin Islands
The General Assembly,
