United Nations

A/RES/67/290

General Assembly

Distr.: General
23 August 2013

Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 20 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 9 July 2013
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/67/L.72)]

67/290. Format and organizational aspects of the high-level
political forum on sustainable development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 66/288 of 27 July 2012, by which it endorsed the
outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,
entitled “The future we want”,
Emphasizing the need for an improved and more effective institutional
framework for sustainable development, which should be guided by the specific
functions required and mandates involved; address the shortcomings of the current
system; take into account all relevant implications; promote synergies and
coherence; seek to avoid duplication and eliminate unnecessary overlaps within the
United Nations system and reduce administrative burdens and build on existing
arrangements,
Recalling the decision contained in paragraph 84 of the outcome document of
the Conference 1 to establish a universal, intergovernmental, high-level political
forum, building on the strengths, experiences, resources and inclusive participation
modalities of the Commission on Sustainable Development, which would
subsequently replace the Commission, as well as the decision that the high-level
political forum should follow on the implementation of sustainable development and
should avoid overlap with existing structures, bodies and entities in a cost-effective
manner,
Reaffirming the role and authority of the General Assembly on global matters
of concern to the international community, as set out in the Charter of the United
Nations, and its central position as the chief deliberative, policymaking and
representative organ of the United Nations, and recognizing the need for it to further
integrate sustainable development as a key element of the overarching framework
for United Nations activities,

_______________
1

Resolution 66/288, annex.

12-49600

*1249600*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/290

Format and organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable development

Reaffirming also the commitment to strengthen the Economic and Social
Council, within its mandate under the Charter, as a principal organ in the integrated
and coordinated follow-up of the outcomes of all major United Nations conferences
and summits in the economic, social, environmental and related fields, and
recognizing the key role of the Council in achieving a balanced integration of the
three dimensions of sustainable development,
Recalling the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, 2 Agenda 21, 3
the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21, 4 the Plan of
Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation) 5 and the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable
Development, 6
Recalling also the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States (Barbados Programme of Action) 7 and the Mauritius
Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, 8
Recalling further the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries
for the Decade 2011–2020 (Istanbul Programme of Action), 9 the Almaty Programme
of Action: Addressing the Special Needs of Landlocked Developing Countries
within a New Global Framework for Transit Transport Cooperation for Landlocked
and Transit Developing Countries, 10 the political declaration on Africa’s
development needs 11 and the New Partnership for Africa’s Development, 12
Recalling the commitments in the outcomes of all the major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic, social and environmental fields,
including the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 13 the 2005 World Summit
Outcome, 14 the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing
for Development, 15 the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome
_______________
2

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
3
Ibid., annex II.
4
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
5
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
6
Ibid., resolution 1, annex.
7
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,
Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and
corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
8
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
9
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey,
9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7), chap. II.
10
Report of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and
Donor Countries and International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Cooperation,
Almaty, Kazakhstan, 28 and 29 August 2003 (A/CONF.202/3), annex I.
11
Resolution 63/1.
12
A/57/304, annex.
13
Resolution 55/2.
14
Resolution 60/1.
15
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico,
18–22 March 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.

2/7

Format and organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable development

A/RES/67/290

document of the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development
to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus, 16 the outcome document
of the High-Level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium
Development Goals, 17 the Programme of Action of the International Conference on
Population and Development, 18 the key actions for the further implementation of the
Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and
Development 19 and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, 20
Recalling also its resolution 67/203 of 21 December 2012,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the lessons learned
from the Commission on Sustainable Development; 21
2.
Decides that the high-level political forum, consistent with its universal
intergovernmental character, shall provide political leadership, guidance and
recommendations for sustainable development, follow up and review progress in the
implementation of sustainable development commitments, enhance the integration
of the three dimensions of sustainable development in a holistic and cross-sectoral
manner at all levels and have a focused, dynamic and action-oriented agenda,
ensuring the appropriate consideration of new and emerging sustainable
development challenges;
3.
Also decides that the meetings of the forum shall be convened under the
auspices of the General Assembly and of the Economic and Social Council;
4.
Further decides that all meetings of the forum shall provide for the full
and effective participation of all States Members of the United Nations and States
members of specialized agencies;
5.
Decides that, in all meetings of the forum, every effort shall be made to
reach consensus;
6.
Also decides that the meetings of the forum under the auspices of the
General Assembly:
(a)

Shall be convened at the level of Heads of State and Government;

(b) Shall be convened every four years by the President of the Assembly for
a period of two days, at the beginning of the session of the Assembly, as well as on
other occasions, on an exceptional basis, upon a decision by the Assembly;
(c)

Shall be chaired by the President of the Assembly;

(d) Shall result in a concise negotiated political declaration to be submitted
for the consideration of the Assembly;

_______________
16

Resolution 63/239, annex.
Resolution 65/1.
18
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
19
Resolution S-21/2, annex.
20
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
21
A/67/757.
17

3/7

A/RES/67/290

Format and organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable development

7.
Further decides that the meetings of the forum under the auspices of the
Economic and Social Council:
(a) Shall be convened annually by the President of the Council for a period
of eight days, including a three-day ministerial segment to be held in the framework
of the substantive session of the Council, building on and subsequently replacing the
annual ministerial review as from 2016;
(b)

Shall be chaired by the President of the Council;

(c) Shall have a thematic focus reflecting the integration of the three
dimensions of sustainable development, in line with the thematic focus of the
activities of the Council and consistent with the post-2015 development agenda;
(d) Shall follow up and review progress in the implementation of all the
outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic,
social and environmental fields, as well as their respective means of
implementation, improve cooperation and coordination within the United Nations
system on sustainable development programmes and policies, promote the sharing
of best practices and experiences relating to the implementation of sustainable
development and, on a voluntary basis, facilitate sharing of experiences, including
successes, challenges and lessons learned, and promote system-wide coherence and
coordination of sustainable development policies;
(e) Shall take into account the work of the Development Cooperation Forum,
as well as other activities of the Council relating to the integration and
implementation of sustainable development;
(f)

Shall benefit from regional preparatory processes;

(g) Shall result in a negotiated ministerial declaration for inclusion in the
report of the Council to the General Assembly;
8.
Decides that the forum, under the auspices of the Economic and Social
Council, shall conduct regular reviews, starting in 2016, on the follow-up and
implementation of sustainable development commitments and objectives, including
those related to the means of implementation, within the context of the post-2015
development agenda, and further decides that those reviews:
(a) Shall be voluntary, while encouraging reporting, and shall include
developed and developing countries, as well as relevant United Nations entities;
(b) Shall be State-led, involving ministerial and other relevant high-level
participants;
(c) Shall provide a platform for partnerships, including through the
participation of major groups and other relevant stakeholders;
(d) Shall replace the national voluntary presentations held in the context of
the annual ministerial-level substantive reviews of the Council, building upon the
relevant provisions of General Assembly resolution 61/16 of 20 November 2006, as
well as experiences and lessons learned in this context;
9.
Also decides that all meetings convened under the auspices of the
General Assembly shall operate under the rules of procedure of the main committees
of the Assembly, as applicable, unless otherwise provided in the present resolution,
and that all meetings convened under the auspices of the Economic and Social
Council shall operate under the rules of procedure of the functional commissions of
the Council, as applicable, except as otherwise provided in the present resolution;
4/7

Format and organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable development

A/RES/67/290

10. Underlines that the arrangement established by the Economic and Social
Council for the Commission on Sustainable Development in Council decision
1995/201 of 8 February 1995 shall apply to the meetings of the forum held under
the auspices of the Council, and that the arrangements established by the General
Assembly in the annex to its resolution 65/276 of 3 May 2011 shall apply to the
meetings of the forum held under the auspices of the Assembly;
11. Decides that the meetings of the forum shall devote adequate time to the
discussion of the sustainable development challenges facing developing countries,
including the most vulnerable countries, in particular the least developed countries,
small island developing States, landlocked developing countries and African
countries, with the aim of enhancing engagement and implementing commitments
and that they will recognize the particular challenges facing the middle-income
countries in achieving sustainable development, and reiterates that the efforts of
middle-income countries should be adequately supported by the international
community, in various forms, taking into account the needs of those countries and
their capacity to mobilize domestic resources;
12. Encourages States to ensure that their participation in the meetings of the
forum reflect the balanced integration of the social, economic and environmental
dimensions of sustainable development from their national perspectives;
13. Acknowledges the importance of the regional dimension of sustainable
development, and invites the United Nations regional commissions to contribute to
the work of the forum, including through annual regional meetings, with the
involvement of other relevant regional entities, major groups and other relevant
stakeholders, as appropriate;
14. Stresses the need for the forum to promote transparency and
implementation by further enhancing the consultative role and participation of the
major groups and other relevant stakeholders at the international level in order to
make better use of their expertise, while retaining the intergovernmental nature of
discussions, and in this regard decides that the forum shall be open to the major
groups, other relevant stakeholders and entities having received a standing
invitation to participate as observers in the General Assembly, building on
arrangements and practices observed by the Commission on Sustainable
Development, including Economic and Social Council decision 1993/215 of
12 February 1993 and Council resolution 1996/31 of 25 July 1996, which shall be
applicable to the forum;
15. Decides, in this regard, that, while retaining the intergovernmental
character of the forum, the representatives of the major groups and other relevant
stakeholders shall be allowed:
(a)

To attend all official meetings of the forum;

(b)

To have access to all official information and documents;

(c)

To intervene in official meetings;

(d)

To submit documents and present written and oral contributions;

(e)

To make recommendations;

(f) To organize side events and round tables, in cooperation with Member
States and the Secretariat;
16. Encourages the major groups identified in Agenda 21 3 and other
stakeholders, such as private philanthropic organizations, educational and academic
5/7

A/RES/67/290

Format and organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable development

entities, persons with disabilities, volunteer groups and other stakeholders active in
areas related to sustainable development, to autonomously establish and maintain
effective coordination mechanisms for participation in the high-level political forum
and for actions derived from that participation at the global, regional and national
levels, in a way that ensures effective, broad and balanced participation by region
and by type of organization;
17. Invites the organizations of the United Nations system, including the
Bretton Woods institutions and other relevant intergovernmental organizations,
including the World Trade Organization, to contribute within their respective
mandates to the discussions of the forum;
18. Emphasizes that the forum shall provide a dynamic platform for regular
dialogue and for stocktaking and agenda-setting to advance sustainable development
and that the agenda of all meetings of the high-level political forum shall be
focused, while allowing flexibility to address new and emerging issues;
19. Reaffirms that the forum shall contribute to the enhanced integration of
the three dimensions of sustainable development in a holistic and cross-sectoral
manner at all levels, and in this regard invites the forum to take into account the
contributions and work of relevant United Nations intergovernmental bodies in the
social, economic and environmental fields;
20. Decides that the forum shall strengthen the science-policy interface by
examining documentation, bringing together dispersed information and assessments,
including in the form of a global sustainable development report, building on
existing assessments, enhancing evidence-based decision-making at all levels and
contributing to the strengthening of ongoing capacity-building for data collection
and analysis in developing countries, and requests the forum to consider, in 2014,
the scope and methodology of a global sustainable development report, based on a
proposal of the Secretary-General reflecting the views and recommendations of
Member States, and relevant United Nations entities, including the Committee for
Development Policy;
21. Also decides that the forum may provide recommendations to the board
of the 10-year framework of programmes for sustainable consumption and
production, as well as to the United Nations Environment Programme, as the
secretariat of the 10-year framework, taking into account their reports;
22. Requests the President of the General Assembly and the President of the
Economic and Social Council to coordinate with the Bureau of the Council and with
the bureaux of the relevant committees of the Assembly to organize the activities of
the forum so as to benefit from the inputs and advice of the United Nations system,
the major groups and other relevant stakeholders, as appropriate;
23. Decides that the forum shall be supported by the Department of
Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat in close cooperation with all relevant
entities of the United Nations system, including funds and programmes, multilateral
financial and trade institutions, the secretariats of the three Rio conventions and
other relevant treaty bodies and international organizations within their respective
mandates;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to carry over all the remaining funds
from the Trust Fund for Support of the Work of the Commission on Sustainable
Development to a voluntary trust fund of the forum in order to facilitate the
participation of developing countries, the least developed countries, representatives
of major groups and other relevant stakeholders, as appropriate, in the work of the
6/7

Format and organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable development

A/RES/67/290

forum and to support the preparations of the forum, and in this regard invites
Member States, financial institutions and other organizations to contribute to the
voluntary trust fund of the forum;
25. Decides that travel expenses for one representative of each of the least
developed countries shall be paid from the regular budget of the United Nations for
participation in all formal meetings of the forum;
26. Recommends that the Economic and Social Council abolish the
Commission on Sustainable Development effective upon the conclusion of its
twentieth session, to be held prior to the first meeting of the forum, pursuant to
General Assembly resolution 67/203 of 21 December 2012;
27. Decides that the first meeting of the forum under the auspices of the
General Assembly shall have an inaugural character, requests the President of the
Assembly to convene the meeting at the beginning of the sixty-eighth session for the
duration of one day, and decides that, on an extraordinary basis and only for the
purpose of that meeting, the outcome of the meeting shall consist of the summary of
the President;
28. Also decides to consider at its sixty-ninth session the need to convene a
meeting of the forum under the auspices of the General Assembly in 2015 in relation
to the launch of the post-2015 development agenda;
29. Further decides to review at its seventy-third session the format and the
organizational aspects of the forum, unless otherwise decided;
30. Emphasizes that the review of the implementation of General Assembly
resolution 61/16 should take into account the present resolution in order to avoid
duplication.
91st plenary meeting
9 July 2013

7/7
