V l.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Expressing grave concern that, as a consequence of the
persistence of such actions, millions of people have been
and are being uprooted from their homes as refugees and
displaced persons, and emphasizing the urgent need for
concerted international action to alleviate their condition,
Recalling the relevant resolutions regarding the violation of the right of peoples to self-determination and other
human rights as a result of foreign military intervention,
aggression and occupation, adopted by the Commission
on Human Rights at its thirty-sixth, 25 thirty-seventh, 26
thirty-eighth, 2'f thirty-ninth,2 8 fortieth, 29 forty-first30 and
forty-second 31 sessions,
Reiterating its resolutions 35/35 B of 14 November
1980, 36/10 of 28 October 1981, 37/42 of 3 December
1982, 38/16 of22 November 1983, 39/18 of23 November
1984 and 40/24 of 29 November 1985,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 32
l. Reaffirms that the universal realization of the right
of ali peoples, including those under colonial, foreign and
alien domination, to self-determination is a fundamental
condition for the effective guarantee and observance ofhuman rights and for the preservation and promotion of such
rights;
2. Declares its firm opposition to acts of foreign military intervention, aggression and occupation, since these
have resulted in the suppression of the right of peoples to
self-determination and other human rights in certain parts
of the world;
3. Calls upon the States responsible for those acts to
cease immediately their military intervention and occupation of foreign countries and territories and ali acts of
repression, discrimination, exploitation and maltreatment, particularly the brutal and inhuman methods reportedly employed for the execution of these acts against
the peoples concerned;
4. Deplores the plight of the millions of refugees and
displaced persons who have been uprooted by the aforementioned acts and reaffirms their right to return to their
homes voluntarily in safety and honour;
S. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to continue to give special attention to the violation of human
rights, especially the right to self-determination, resulting
from foreign military intervention, aggression or occupation;

6. Requests the Secretary-General to report on this issue to the General Assembly at its forty-second session
under the item entitled "Importance ofthe universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination and of
the speedy granting of independence to colonial countries
and peoples for the effective guarantee and observance of
human rights".
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

25 See Official Records of the &onomic and Social Council. /980.
Suf¡iement No. 3 (E/1980/13 and Corr.1), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
/bid., 1981, Supplement No. 5 (E/1981/25 and Corr.l),
chaf. XXVIII, sect. A.
2
/bid., 1982, Supplement No. 2 (E/ 1982/ 12 and Corr. 1),
chap. XXVI, sect. A.
28 /bid., 1983, Supplement No. 3 (E/1983/13 and Corr.1 ),
chap. XXVII, sect. A.
29 /bid., 1984, Supplement No. 4 (E/1984/14 and Corr. l), chap. 11,
sect. A.
30 /bid., 1985, Supplement No. 2 (E/1985/22), chap. Il, sect. A.
31 /bid., 1986, Supplement No. 2 (E/1986/22), chap. Il, sect. A.
32 A/41/433 and Add.1-3.

41/101.

163

lmportance of the universal realization of the
right of peoples to self-determination and of the
speedy granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples for the effective guarantee and observance of human rights

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its faith in the importance of the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Reaffirming the importance of the universal realization
of the right of peoples to self-determination, national sovereignty and territorial integrity and of the speedy granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples as
imperatives for the full enjoyment of ali human rights,
Reaffirming the obligation of ali Member States to comply with the principies of the Charter of the United Nations and the resolutions of the United Nations regarding
the exercise of the right to self-determination by peoples
under colonial and foreign domination,
Recalling its resolution IS 14 (XV) and ali relevant resolutions concerning the implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples,
Recalling a/so its resolutions on the question of Namibia, in particular resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966 and S-14/1 of 20 September 1986, as well as ali the
relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular resolutions 385 (1976) of 30 January 1976 and 435 (1978) of
29 September 1978,
Recallingthe Declaration adopted by the World Conference on Sanctions against Racist South Africa 33 and the
Declaration of the International Conference for the Immediate Independence of Namibia and the Programme of
Action on Namibia,3 4
Bearing in mind the outcome of the International Conference on the Alliance between South Africa and Israel,
held at Vienna from 11 to 13 July 1983, 35
Welcoming the holding at Tunis from 7 to 9 August
1984 of the Conference of Arab Solidarity with the Struggle for Liberation in Southern Africa, 36
Recalling resolutions CM/Res.1052 (XLIV)/Rev.1 on
South Africa and CM/Res.1055 (XLIV)/Rev. l on Namibia adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its forty-fourth ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from 21 to 26 July 1986, 16
Reaffirming that the system of apartheid imposed on the
South African people constitutes a violation of the fundamental rights of that people, a crime against humanity and
a constant threat to international peace and security,
Grave/y concerned at the continuation of the illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa and the continued
violations of the human rights of the people in the Territory and of the other peoples still under colonial domination and alíen subjugation,
Reaffirming its resolution 39/2 of 28 September 1984
and recalling Security Council resolution 554 (1984) of
17 August 1984, in which the Council rejected the so.ll Report of the World Conference on Sanctions against Racisl South
A/rica, Paris, /6-20 June /986 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.86.1.23), chap. IX.
14 See Report of the lntcrnational Conference far the 1mmedia11,
1ndependence of Namibia. Vienna. 7-11 Ju/y 1986 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.86.1.16 and addendum), part three.
35 See A/38/311-S/15883, annex.
l6 See A/39/450-S/16726.

164

General Assembly-Forty-first Session

called "new constitution" as null and void, Council resolution 569 (1985) of26 July 1985, and the statement made
by the President of the Security Council on 13 June 1986
on the nation-wide state of emergency in South A frica, 37
Deeply concerned at the continued terrorist acts of aggression committed by the Pretoria régime against independent African States in the region, in particular the unprovoked attacks against Zimbabwe, Zambia and
Botswana,
Deeply indignant at the continued occupation of part of
the territory of Angola by the troops ofthe racist régime of
South Africa and the persistent, hostile and unprovoked
acts of aggression and sustained armed invasions carried
out by that régime in violation of the sovereignty, airspace
and territorial integrity of Angola, in particular the armed
invasion of Angola on 28 September 1985 and the
premeditated attack on the port of Namibe on 5 June
1986,
Recalling Security Council resolutions 527 (1982) of
15 December 1982 and 535 (1983) of 29 June 1983 on
Lesotho, and Council resolutions 568 (1985) of 21 June
1985 and 572 (1985) of 30 September 1985 on Botswana,
Reaffirming the national unity and territorial integrity
of the Comoros,
Recalling the Political Declaration adopted by the First
Conference of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity and the League of Arab
States, held at Cairo from 7 to 9 March 1977,38
Recalling also its relevant resolutions on the question of
Palestine, in particular resolution 40/96 of 12 December
1985,
Recalling further the Geneva Declaration on Palestine
and the Programme of Action for the Achievement of
Palestinian Rights, adopted by the Intemational Conference on the Question of Palestine,39
Considering that the denial of the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people to self-determination, sovereignty,
independence and return to Palestine and the repeated
acts of aggression by Israel against the people of the region
constitute a serious threat to international peace and
security,
Deeply shocked and alarmed at the deplorable consequences ofthe lsraeli invasion ofLebanon and recalling ali
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, in particular resolutions 508 ( 1982) of 5 June 1982, 509 (1982)
of 6 June 1982, 520 (1982) of 17 September 1982 and
521 (1982) of 19 September 1982,
l. Calls upan all States to implement fully and faithfully ali the resolutions of the United Nations regarding
the exercise ofthe right to self-determination and independence by peoples under colonial and foreign domination;
2. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of peoples
for their independence, territorial integrity, national unity
and liberation from colonial domination, apartheid and
foreign occupation by ali available means, including
armed struggle;
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right ofthe Namibian people, the Palestinian people and ali peoples under foreign
and colonial domination to self-determination, national

37 See Official Records of Ihe Security Council, Forty-first Year.
Reso/utions and Decisions.
38 A/32/61, annex l.

39 Reporl ofthe lntemational Conjáence on the Question of Palestine,
Geneva, 29 August-7 Septemher 1983 (United Nations publication, Sales

No. E.83.1.21 ), chap. l.

independence, territorial integrity, national unity and sovereignty without foreign interference;
4. Strongly condemns those Governments that do not
recognize the right to self-determination and independence of ali peoples still under colonial domination and
alíen subjugation, notably the peoples of Africa and the
Palestinian people;
5. Calls for the full and immediate implementation of
the declarations and programmes of action on Namibia
and on Palestine adopted by the international conferences
on those questions:
6. Reaffirms its vigorous condemnation of the continued illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa;
7. Condemns once again the racist régime of South
Africa for its installation of a so-called "interim administration" at Windhoek and declares that action to be illegal, null and void;
8. Further condemns the policy of "bantustanization"
and reiterates its support for the oppressed people of
South Africa in its just and legitima te struggle against the
racist minority régime of Pretoria;
9. Reaffirms its rejection of the so-called "new constitution" as null and void and reiterates that peace in South
Africa can only be guaranteed by the establishment of
majority rule through the full and free exercise of adult
sutfrage by all the people in a united and undivided South
Africa;
10. Strongly condemns the wanton killing of peaceful
and defenceless demonstrators and workers on strike, as
well as the arbitrary arrests of the leaders and activists of
the United Democratic Front, National Forum, trade
unions and other mass organizations, and demands their
immediate and unconditional release, in particular that of
Nelson Mandela and Zephania Mothopeng;
11. Strongly condemns South Africa for the imposition
of the state of emergency under its repugnant Internal
Security Act and calls for the immediate lifting of the state
of emergency, as well as the repeal ofthe Internal Security
Act;
12. Condemns South Africa for its increasing oppression ofthe Namibian people, for the massive militarization
of Namibia and for its armed attacks launched against the
States in the region in order to destabilize them politically
and to sabotage and destroy their economies;
13. Strongly condemns the establishment and use of
armed terrorist groups by South Africa with a view to pitting them against the national liberation movements and
destabilizing the legitimate Governments of southern
Africa;
14. Strongly condemns the repeated acts of aggression
and the continued occupation of parts of southern Angola
and demands the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of the South African troops from Angolan territory;
15. Strongly condemns the persisten!, hostile and unprovoked acts of aggression and sustained armed invasions carried out by the racist régime ofSouth Africa in violation of the sovereignty, airspace and territorial
integrity of Angola, in particular the armed invasion of
Angola on 28 September 1985 and the premeditated attack on the port of Namibe on 5 June 1986;
16. Strongly reaffirms its solidarity with the independent African countries and national liberation movements
that are victims of murderous acts of aggression and destabilization by the racist régime of Pretoria, and calls
upon the international community to render increased as-

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

sistance and support to these countries in order to enable
them to strengthen their defence capacity, defend their
sovereignty and territorial integrity and peacefully rebuild
and develop;
17. Reaffirms that the practice of using mercenaries
against sovereign States and national liberatíon movements constitutes a criminal act and calls upon the Governments of ali countríes to enact legislation declaríng the
recruitment, financing and traíníng of mercenaries in theír
territoríes and the transít of mercenaries through their territories to be punishable offences, and prohíbiting their natíonals from serving as mercenaries, and to report on such
legíslation to the Secretary-General;
18. Strongly condemns the contínued violation of the
human rights of the peoples stíll under colonial domínation and alien subjugatíon, the continuation of the illegal
occupation by the racist minoríty régime in southern
Africa and the deníal to the Palestinian people of their
inalienable natíonal rights;
19. Further strongly condemns the racist régíme of
Pretoría for its acts of destabilízation, armed aggressíon
and economíc blockade against Lesotho and strongly
urges the ínternational communíty to contínue to extend
maxímum assistance to Lesotho to enable it to fulfil its ínternational humanítarian obligations towards refugees
and to use its influence on the racist régime so that it
would desist from its terrorist acts against Lesotho;
20. Strongly condemns the unprovoked and unwarranted military attack on the capital of Botswana and demands that the racist régime pay full and adequate compensation to Botswana for the loss of life and damage to
property;
21. Denounces the collusion between Israel and South
Africa and expresses support for the Declaration ofthe International Conference on the Alliance between South
Africa and Israei;35
22. Strongly condemns the policy of those Western
States, Israel and other States whose political, economic,
military, nuclear, strategic, cultural and sports relations
with the racist minoríty régime ofSouth Africa encourage
that régime to persist in its suppression of the aspirations
of peoples to self-determination and independence;
23. Again demands the immediate application of the
mandatory arms embargo against South Africa, imposed
under Security Council resolution 418 ( 1977) of 4 November 1977, by ali countries and more particularly by those
countries that maintain military and nuclear co-operation
with the racist Pretoria régime and continue to supply it
with related matériel;

165

27. Urges ali States, the specialized agencies, organizations of the U nited N ations system and other international
organizations to extend their support to the Namibian
people through its sote and legitimate representative, the
South West Africa People's Organization, in its struggle to
gain its right to self-determination and independence in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations;
28. Notes the contacts between the Government of the
Comoros and the Government of France in the search for
a just solution to the problem of the integration of the
Comorian island of Mayotte into the Comoros, in accordance with the resolutions of the Organization of African
Unity and the United Nations on this question;
29. Calls for a substantial increase in ali forms of assistance given by ali States, United Nations organs, the specialized agencies and non-governmental organizations to
the victims of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid
through national liberation movements recognized by the
Organization of African Unity;
30. Demands the immediate release of women and
children detained in Namibia and South Africa;
31. Strongly condemns the constant and delíberate violations ofthe fundamental rights ofthe Palestinian people,
as well as the expansionist activities of Israel in the Middle
East, which constitute an obstacle to the achievement of
self-determination and independence by the Palestinian
people and a threat to peace and stability in the region;
32. Demands the immediate and unconditional release
of ali persons detained or imprisoned as a result of their
struggle for self-determination and independence, full respect for their fundamental individual rights and compliance with article 5 ofthe Universal Declaration ofHuman
Rights, 2 under which no one shall be subjected to torture
or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment;
33. Urges ali States, the specialized agencies, organizations ofthe United Nations system and other international
organizations to extend their support to the Palestinian
people through its sole and legitimate representative, the
Palestine Liberation Organization, in its struggle to regain
its right to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Charter;
34. Expresses its appreciation for the material and
other forms of assistance that peoples under colonial rule
continue to receive from Governments, organizations of
the United Nations system and intergovernmental organizations, and calls for a substantial increase in this assistance;

24. Calls for the full implementation of the provisions
of the Declaration adopted by the World Conference on
Sanctions against Racist South Africa 33 and of the Declaration of the International Conference for the Immediate
Independence of Namibia and the Programme of Action
on Namibia; 34

35. Urges ali States, the specialized agencies and other
competent organizations of the United Nations system to
do their utmost to ensure the full implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples and to intensify their efforts to support peoples under colonial, foreign and racist domination
in their just struggle for self-determination and independence;

25. Demands once again the immediate implementation of its resolutions ES-8/2 of 14 September 1981 and
S-14/ 1 of 20 September 1986;
26. Reaffirms ali relevant resolutions adopted by the
Organization of African Unity and the United Nations on
the question of Western Sahara, including General Assembly resolution 40/50 of 2 December 1985, and calls
upon the current Chairman ofthe Organization of African
Unity and the Secretary-General ofthe United Nations to
continue their efforts to find a just and lasting solution to
this question;

36. Requests the Secretary-General to give maximum
publicity to the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and to give the
widest possible publicity to the struggle of oppressed peoples for the achievement of their self-determination and
national independence and to report periodically to the
General Assembly on his activities in this regard;
37. Decides to consider this ítem at its forty-second
session on the basis of the reports on the strengthening of
assistance to colonial territories and peoples that Governments, organizations ofthe United Nations system and in-

166

General Assembly-Forty-first Session

tergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
have been requested to submit.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986
41/102.

Use ofmercenaries as a meaos to violate human
rights and to impede the exercise of the right of
peoples to self-determination

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the need for strict observance of the
principies of sovereign equality, political independence,
territorial integrity of States and self-determination of
peoples, as well as scrupulous respect for the principie of
the non-use or threat ofthe use offorce in intemational relations, enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
and developed in the Declaration on Principies of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, 40
Reaffirming the legitimacy of the struggle of peoples and
their liberation movements for their independence, territorial integrity, national unity and liberation from
colonial domination, apartheid and foreign intervention
and occupation, and that their legitimate struggle can in
no way be considered as or equated to mercenary activity,
Deeply concerned about the increasing menace that the
activities of mercenaries represent for ali States, particularly African, Central American and other developing
States,
Recognizing that mercenarism is a threat to international peace and security,
Recognizing also that the activities of mercenaries are
contrary to fundamental principies of international law,
such as non-interference in the internal affairs of States,
territorial integrity and independence, and seriously impede the process of self-determination of peoples struggling against colonialism, racism and apartheid and ali
forms of foreign domination,
Recalling ali of its relevant resolutions, particularly
resolution 40/74 of 11 December 1985, in which it denounced the practice of using mercenaries, in particular
against developing countries and national liberation
movements,
Recalling also Security Council resolutions 239 (1967)
of 10 July 1967, 405 (1977) of 14 April 1977, 419 (1977) of
24 November 1977, 496 (1981) of 15 December 1981 and
507 (1982) of 28 May 1982, in which the Council, inter alía, condemned any State that persisted in permitting
or tolerating the recruitment of mercenaries, and the
provision of facilities to them, with the objective of overthrowing the Governments of States Members of the
United Nations,
Welcoming the adoption by the Economic and Social
Council of resolution 1986/43 of 23 May 1986, in which
the Council condemned the increased recruitment, financing, training, assembly, transit and use of mercenaries,
Reaffirming its decision, in its resolution 32/130 of
16 December 1977, to accord priority to the search for solutions to the mass and flagrant violations ofhuman rights
of peoples and persons affected by situations such as those
resulting, in ter alía, from aggression and threats against
national sovereignty, national unity and territorial integrity,
40 Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

Recalling the relevant resolutions of the Organization of
African Unity and the convention adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization
of African Unity at its fourteenth ordinary session, held at
Libreville from 2 to 5 July 1977,41 condemning and outlawing mercenarism and its adverse effects on the independence and territorial integrity of African States,
Deeply concerned at the loss of life, substantial damage
to property and long-term negative effects on the economy
of southern African countries resulting from mercenary
aggression,
Strongly condemning the racist régime of South Africa
for its increasing use of groups of armed mercenaries
against national liberation movements and for the destabilization of the Governments of southern African
States,

1. Condemns the increased recruitment, financing,
training, assembly, transit and use of mercenaries, as well
as ali other forms of support to mercenaries for the purpose of destabilizing and overthrowing the Governments
of southern Africa and Central America and of other developing States and fighting against the national liberation
movements of peoples struggling for the exercise of their
right to self-determination;
2. Denounces any State that persists in the recruitment, or permits or tolerates the recruitment, of mercenaries and provides facilities to them for launching armed
aggression against other States;
3. Calls upan ali States to exercise the utmost vigilance
against the menace posed by the activities of mercenaries
and to ensure, by both administrative and legislative measures, that the territory of those States and other territories under their control, as well as their nationals, are not
used for the recruitment, assembly, financing, training and
transit of mercenaries, or the planning of such activities
designed to destabilize or overthrow the Government of
any State and to fight the national liberation movements
struggling against racism, apartheid, colonial domination
and foreign intervention and occupation for their independence, territorial integrity and national unity;
4. Urges ali States to take the necessary measures under their respective domestic laws to prohibit the recruitment, financing, training and transit of mercenaries on
their territory;
5. Calls upan all States to extend humanitarian assistance to victims of situations resulting from the use of
mercenaries, as well as from colonial or alien domination
or foreign occupation;
6. Takes note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1986/43, in which the Council urged the Commission
on Human Rights to appoint a special rapporteur on this
subject with a view to preparing a report for consideration
at the forty-fourth session of the Commission;
7. Decides to pay due attention to the matter at its
forty-second session under the item entitled "lmportance
of the universal realization of the right of peoples to selfdetermination and of the speedy granting of independence
to colonial countries and peoples for the effective guarantee and observan ce of human rights".
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986
41

See A/32/310, annex 11.
