llO

General Assembly

1O. Recommends that all Governments intensify
their efforts in the specialized ag~ncies and other org~nizations within the United N at1ons system of wh1ch
they are members in order to ensure. the full and
effective implementation of the Declara~10n and other
relevant resolutions of the United Nat1ons;
11. Recommends that, in order to facilita~e .implementation of paragraph_ 1q abov~, ~he speciah_zed
agencies and other orgamzations_ w1thm . the Umted
N ations system should request their. executive h~ads. to
present to their ~espective govern~ng and leg1slat1ve
organs, in a spec1fic and systematlc manner, recommendations on decolonization adopted by competent
United Nations bodies, together with a full analysis of
the issues and problems involved, if any, and concrete
suggestions for the implementation of these recommendations;
12. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
continue to consider, in consultation with the Special
Committee, appropriate measures for co-ordination of
the policies and activities of the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the Unit~d Nations
system in implementing the relevant resolut10ns of the
General Assembly;
13. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To prepare for submission to the relevant b?dies
concerned with related aspects of the present 1tem,
with the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system,
a report on the action taken since the circulation of
his comprehensive report, 46 or envisaged by those organizations in implementation of the relevant United
Nations resolutions, including the present resolution;
( b) To continue to assist the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations
system in working out appropriate measures for implementing the present resolution and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session;
14. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine the question and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session.
2028th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
2875 (XXVI). United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Mrica

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2349 (XXII) of 19 December 1967, whereby it established an inte_g~ated
educational and training programme for N am1bians,
South Africans, Southern Rhodesians and persons from
Territories under Portuguese administration,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa, 47
Recalling its decision, contained in paragraph 7 of
resolution 2349 (XXII), that the Programme should
be financed from a trust fund made up of voluntary
contributions,
Further recalling that, by paragraph 8 of resolution 2349 (XXII), it authorized the SecretaryGeneral to appeal to States Members of the United
Nations or members of specialized agencies for funds
46 A/8314 and Add.1-6.
47 A/8485 and Add.1 and 2.

Twenty-sixth Session

to achieve a target of $US 3 million in the period
from 1968 to 1970,
Noting that the voluntary contributions received in
the four-year period from 1968 to 1971 have fallen
far short of the original three-year target,
Noting further that such funds as have been m~de
available have been expended annually to prov1de
assistance in the form of individual awards to persons
from the Territories concerned to further their education and that, consequently, addi~iona~ funds .are
required if the Programme is to contmue m operat10n,
Expressing its firm conviction that the provision of
assistance for the education and training of persons
from the Territories concerned is as essential as ever
and should not only continue, but also be expanded,
1. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
made voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa since its inception;
2. Urgently appeals to ali States, organizations and
individuals to make generous contributions to the trust
fund for the Programme so that it might not only be
continued, but also strengthened and expanded;
3. Decides that, as a further transitional measure,
provision shall be made, under section 12 of the regular
budget of the United Nations for the financia} year
1972, for an amount of $100,000 to ensure continuity
of the Programme pending the receipt of adequate voluntary contributions;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral and to the members of the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa, established in pursuance of paragraph 2 of General Assembly resolution 2431 (XXIII) of 18 December 1968, for the
work they have accomplished during the period under
review in connexion with the Programme;
5. Takes note with approval of the efforts made
during the period under review to strengthen cooperation between the Programme and the Uni~ed
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the spec1alized agencies and the Organization of African Unity,
and hopes that these efforts will be continued with a
view to further co-ordination of their activities in the
field of education and training for persons from the
Territories concerned;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session on the
progress of the Programme.
2028th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
2876 (XXVI). O:ffers by Memher States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2705 (XXV) of 14 December 1970,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training
facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, 48 prepared under the terms of General Assembly
resolution 845 (IX) of 22 November 1954,
48 A/8530.
