S/2008/347

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 May 2008
Original: English

Letter dated 30 May 2008 from the President of the
Security Council to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council have
decided to send a mission to Africa from 31 May to 10 June 2008. The mission will
travel to Djibouti (on Somalia), the Sudan, Chad, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Côte d’Ivoire. The segment of the mission concerning Somalia and the
Sudan will be co-led by Ambassador Kumalo of South Africa and myself.
Ambassador Jean-Maurice Ripert (France) will lead the segment concerning Chad
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Ambassador Michel Kafando
(Burkina Faso) the Côte d’Ivoire segment.
The members of the Council have agreed to the attached terms of reference for
the mission (annexes I-V). The composition of the mission is as follows:
Ambassador Olivier Belle (Belgium)
Ambassador Michel Kafando (Burkina Faso)
Ambassador Liu Zhenmin (China)
Ambassador Jorge Urbina (Costa Rica)
Ambassador Ranko Vilović (Croatia)
Ambassador Jean-Maurice Ripert (France)
Ambassador R. M. Marty M. Natalegawa (Indonesia)
Ambassador Aldo Mantovani (Italy)
Ambassador Giadalla Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)
Ambassador Alfredo Suescum (Panama)
Senior Counsellor Vladimir K. Safronkov (Russian Federation)
Ambassador Dumisani Kumalo (South Africa)
Ambassador John Sawers (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland)
Ambassador Alejandro Wolff (United States of America)
Ambassador Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam)

08-36071 (E) 020608

*0836071*

S/2008/347

I should be grateful if you could have the present letter and its annexes
circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) John Sawers
President of the Security Council

2

08-36071

S/2008/347

Annex I
Security Council mission to Africa: Somalia
Led by Ambassador Dumisani Kumalo (South Africa) and Ambassador John Sawers
(United Kingdom)
Terms of reference
1.
To reaffirm the Security Council’s respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and unity of Somalia.
2.
To reaffirm the Security Council’s commitment to a comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the situation in Somalia through the Transitional Federal Charter, and
to stress the importance of broad-based and representative institutions reached
through a political process ultimately inclusive of all, as envisaged in the
Transitional Federal Charter.
3.
To welcome and encourage the continued efforts of the President, the Prime
Minister and the transitional federal institutions to advance the political process and
implement the relevant steps of the transitional period, as required by the
Transitional Federal Charter, in particular:
▪ the agreement to prepare a timetable for the constitutional process leading to a
referendum and free and democratic elections in 2009.
▪ the presentation of the Reconciliation Strategy of the Transitional Federal
Government.
▪ engagement with clan and local leaders across the country.
▪ efforts to improve public finance management, including budgetary and fiscal
processes.
4.
To reiterate the need for agreement on a comprehensive and lasting cessation
of hostilities and a road map for the remainder of the transitional process.
5.
To express the determination of the Security Council to assist the Somali
efforts through a strengthened presence and a more active role of the United
Nations, including practical support of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations Political Office for Somalia, in fostering dialogue
among Somali parties, contributing to the creation of a stable security environment,
and coordinating the United Nations integrated approach towards Somalia.
6.
To recognize the contribution that the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) is making to lasting peace and stability in Somalia, and to highlight the
need to provide financial resources, personnel, equipment and services for the full
deployment of AMISOM.
7.
To express the Council’s deep concern at the persistence of violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law in Somalia, underlining the need
for those responsible to be brought to justice, and to support work to promote and
enhance the protection of human rights in Somalia.

08-36071

3

S/2008/347

8.
To register the Council’s serious concern at the worsening humanitarian
situation in Somalia and to call on all parties and armed groups in Somalia to take
appropriate steps to protect the civilian population, to ensure the safety and security
of AMISOM, United Nations and humanitarian personnel, and to permit timely, safe
and unhindered access for the delivery of humanitarian assistance to all those in
need.

4

08-36071

S/2008/347

Annex II
Security Council mission to Africa: Sudan
Led by Ambassador Dumisani Kumalo (South Africa) and Ambassador John Sawers
(United Kingdom)
Terms of reference
1.
To reaffirm the Security Council’s commitment to the sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of the Sudan and the international community’s determination to
implement the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and resolve the situation in Darfur.
2.
To stress that successful implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement is essential to sustainable peace and stability throughout the Sudan,
including Darfur, and in the region and to encourage further cooperation between
the National Congress Party and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement in
carrying out their responsibilities to further implement the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement.
3.
To urge the Government of the Sudan to intensify its efforts to resolve the
crisis in Darfur, while expressing the Council’s deep concern at the ongoing
violence, impunity and consequent deterioration in the humanitarian situation in that
region.
4.
To reiterate the Security Council’s support for the political process under the
mediation of the United Nations Special Envoy for Darfur, Jan Eliasson, and the
African Union Special Envoy for Darfur, Salim Salim, and to urge all parties to end
the violence and engage constructively in a peace process in Darfur with a view to
finding lasting peace in the Sudan.
5.
To demonstrate the Security Council’s profound appreciation of and support
for the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and
its personnel, and to reiterate its call on the Government of the Sudan, donors, troop
contributors and all relevant parties to facilitate the full deployment of the force at
the earliest opportunity as planned by the Secretary-General.
6.
To underline its concern for the security of civilians and humanitarian aid
workers and about humanitarian access to populations in need, and to call upon all
parties in Darfur to cease offensive actions and allow full, safe and unhindered
access of relief personnel to all those in need.
7.
To reiterate its conviction that a reduction in tensions between the
Governments of the Sudan and Chad is essential for lasting regional security and to
call on both Governments to abide by their obligations under the Dakar Agreement
of 13 March 2008, the Tripoli Agreement of 8 February 2006 and other bilateral
agreements.
8.
To underline the need to ensure that all Security Council resolutions are
implemented, that the rule of law is upheld in all situations and that due process
must take its course.

08-36071

5

S/2008/347

Annex III
Security Council mission to Africa: Chad
Led by Ambassador Jean-Maurice Ripert (France)
Terms of reference
1.
To reaffirm the Security Council’s commitment to the sovereignty, unity,
territorial integrity and political independence of Chad and to the cause of peace in
the region, in the context of the ongoing violence and activities of armed groups in
Darfur, eastern Chad and the north-eastern Central African Republic.
2.
To stress the Council’s commitment to help the Chadian and Central African
authorities to protect refugees from Darfur, internally displaced persons and other
vulnerable civilian populations and facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance
in eastern Chad and the north-eastern Central African Republic, through the
deployment of a multidimensional presence in those areas.
3.
To demonstrate the Council’s support for the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad and the European Union operation in Chad and
the Central African Republic (EUFOR), and to recall that the Council has requested
the Secretary-General to report to it in September, after due consultations with the
Governments of Chad and the Central African Republic, on the arrangements for
following up EUFOR, including a possible United Nations operation, depending on
the developments in the situation.
4.
To reiterate its conviction that a reduction in tensions between the
Governments of the Sudan and Chad is essential for lasting regional security and to
call on both Governments to abide by their obligations under the Dakar Agreement
of 13 March 2008, the Tripoli Agreement of 8 February 2006 and other bilateral
agreements.
5.
To recall the Council’s condemnation of the continuing activity of rebel armed
groups in Chad, and to urge all concerned parties to respect the Syrte Agreement of
25 October 2007.
6.
To encourage the Chadian authorities to persevere in promoting political
dialogue with respect for the constitutional framework, as initiated by the agreement
of 13 August 2007.

6

08-36071

S/2008/347

Annex IV
Security Council mission to Africa: Democratic Republic of
the Congo
Led by Ambassador Jean-Maurice Ripert (France)
Terms of reference
1.
To acknowledge the primary responsibility of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to consolidate peace and stability, and to
promote recovery and development in the country, which require long-term
sustained efforts and appropriate international support.
2.
To reaffirm the Security Council’s commitment to contribute to the
consolidation of peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
particular through the United Nations Organization Mission (MONUC), bearing in
mind that the Council has requested the Secretary-General to develop benchmarks
for a future gradual drawdown of MONUC.
3.
To express the Council’s strong support for the new dynamic launched by the
Nairobi joint communiqué of 9 November 2007 and the Goma conference of 6 to
23 January 2008, which together represent a major step towards the restoration of
lasting peace and stability in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Great Lakes region.
4.
To stress the Council’s demand, as made in particular in resolution 1804
(2008), that the militias and armed groups that are still present in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo lay down their arms, and to encourage efforts
by the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and regional
cooperation to this effect, including improved relations between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Republic of Rwanda.
5.
To urge the Congolese authorities, with the support of other States concerned,
especially those in the region, to take appropriate steps to end the illegal trade in
natural resources.
6.
To call on the Congolese authorities to intensify as a matter of urgency their
efforts to reform the security sector, including the army, the police and the justice
sector, to welcome in this regard the round table on the reform of the security sector
that was held on 25 and 26 February 2008 in Kinshasa and to discuss the way
forward.
7.
To emphasize the Council’s support for the strengthening of democratic
institutions, the rule of law, and good governance in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, including through the timely holding of local elections.
8.
To encourage further efforts to address the grave humanitarian situation that
persists in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to protect vulnerable civilian
populations, to promote and protect human rights and to fight impunity, including
with regard to sexual violence perpetrated by armed elements.

08-36071

7

S/2008/347

Annex V
[Original: French]

Security Council mission to Africa: Côte d’Ivoire
Led by Ambassador Michel Kafando (Burkina Faso)
Terms of reference
1.
To welcome the ownership of the peace process by the Ivorian parties in the
framework of the Ouagadougou Political Agreement and its supplementary
agreements.
2.
To welcome the significant progress made since the signing of the Agreement
and its supplementary agreements.
3.
To express the Council’s support for the activities of the Facilitator, his Special
Representative and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
4.
To further encourage the parties to implement fully and in good faith all the
provisions of the Agreement and its supplementary agreements, underline the need
to meet the timelines established therein and assure them of the Council’s support in
that regard.
5.
To welcome the signing of regulatory decrees relating to the organization of
the elections, in particular setting the date of the first round of the presidential
election for 30 November 2008.
6.
To urge the Government and the Independent Electoral Commission to resolve
promptly the technical issues concerning the elections.
7.
To welcome the signing on 24 April 2008 of the Code of Good Conduct by the
major political parties in Côte d’Ivoire, and stress the need for it to be observed
scrupulously by all the signatories.
8.
To call upon the parties to ensure an environment favourable to the holding of
free, open, fair and transparent elections, recall the importance of certification of all
stages of the electoral process by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and encourage the Government of Côte d’Ivoire to facilitate the presence of
international observers during the elections.
9.
To encourage the Government to ensure the security of polling places, voters
and the Independent Electoral Commission and the dismantling thereof.
10. To encourage the involvement of civil society in the implementation of the
Agreement, in particular the electoral process.
11. To point out that the Council will examine the sanctions regime in the light of
developments in the peace process and the elections.
12. To urge the Ivorian parties to ensure the protection of the civilian population,
in particular women and children.
13. To commend and encourage the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and
Force Licorne for their peacekeeping efforts.

8

08-36071
