S/PV.7262

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7262nd meeting

Thursday, 11 September 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Power/Mr. Dunn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland  . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Manzi
Mr. Tatham

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2014/617)

14-53169 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1453169*

S/PV.7262

The question concerning Haiti

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

valuable support to peacebuilding and democracy in
Haiti.

Adoption of the agenda

(spoke in English)

The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(S/2014/617)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Ecuador,
Guatemala, Haiti, Mexico, Peru, Spain and Uruguay to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Sandra
Honoré, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/617, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.
I now give the floor to Ms. Honoré.
Ms. Honoré: I would first like to express my
gratitude to the United States in its capacity as President
of the Security Council for the organization of this
meeting on Haiti.
(spoke in French)
I also take this opportunity to express my
appreciation to the Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Haiti.
(spoke in Spanish)
I would like to thank in particular all of the
countries that contribute troops and police to the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and all States members of the Security Council for their

2/30

11/09/2014

When I last briefed the Security Council in March
2014 (see S/PV.7147), the political momentum created
by the inter-Haitian dialogue, resulting in the signing
of the El Rancho Accord, had generated the hope that
combined elections would be held by the end of 2014
for two thirds of the Senate, the entire Chamber of
Deputies, municipal administrations and local councils.
The Accord also foresaw other provisions, including a
vote on amendments to the electoral law promulgated
in December 2013.
Since then, continuing mistrust and disagreements
over the electoral process between the executive and
opposition members in the legislature have caused
repeated delays in the implementation of the Accord.
A group of Senators opposed to the El Rancho Accord
continued to condition their vote on the amended
electoral law, inter alia, upon the establishment of an
entirely new Electoral Council and have consistently
blocked the required quorum. To date, no agreement
has been reached on the required legal framework for
the elections.
After a period of deadlock, the parties have recently
shown renewed signs of willingness to remain engaged.
However, given the time needed for logistic preparations,
the window for holding the elections before the end of
the year is now rapidly closing. This is particularly
worrisome since, without elections, Parliament would
be rendered dysfunctional on 12 January 2015, thereby
creating an institutional vacuum until elections are held
and a new legislature is installed.
Against this backdrop, various options out of the
impasse are being discussed among Haiti’s political
actors, including calling for elections on the basis of
the El Rancho Accord or invoking certain articles of
the Constitution and the 2013 electoral law. While
I welcome these various attempts at identifying a
consensual solution through dialogue as soon as
possible, I also wish to call on all actors concerned to
ensure that the solution is based on the Constitution and
within a solid legal framework that allows for credible,
inclusive and transparent elections in support of a
peaceful democratic transition in 2015.
Despite the political stalemate, the security
environment in Haiti has remained relatively stable.
Today’s security situation is characterized by threats
14-53169

11/09/2014

The question concerning Haiti

to law and order, linked primarily to criminality, gang
violence and mobilized or spontaneous civil unrest
and demonstrations. Crime statistics continue to
confirm a downward trend with respect to kidnappings
in particular, while homicide numbers have seen
an increase recently. During the reporting period,
the number of politically motivated demonstrations
remained low.
The performance of the Haitian National Police
(HNP) continued to improve, and the security situation
in the five departments vacated by MINUSTAH’s
military component, and where only individual police
officers remained, continues to be stable. The police
force has grown to 10,963 active officers, including 899
women. We have also seen improvements in other areas,
including in the overall professionalization of police
officers, recruitment and vetting, strategic planning
and community policing, among others. A case in point
in highlighting the increased capacities of the National
Police is that its specialized crowd control units are
now present at 50 per cent of the demonstrations, as
compared to 29 per cent during the same period in 2013.
A lot still remains to be done to achieve the targets
outlined in the national police development plan and
to overcome technical, structural and operational
challenges. For instance, the operational support
of MINUSTAH was still required in one-third of all
demonstrations due to insufficient personnel and
equipment of the National Police, which was unable to
provide efficient crowd control throughout the country.
The relatively high number of patrols carried out by the
Mission’s military component is also a further reflection
of the continuous need for further improvements in the
police’s operational capacity. Structural and technical
challenges — such as a weak administrative and
internal oversight capacity, limited regional coverage
and scarce institutional capacity in specialized fields,
including prison management — remain and require
a redoubling of efforts on the part of both the Haitian
Government and its international partners.
Regarding the humanitarian situation, the efforts
of the Haitian Government, supported by international
partners, have significantly reduced the toll of the
cholera epidemic. During the Secretary-General’s
two-day visit to Haiti in July, he and Prime Minister
Lamothe launched a total sanitation campaign — a
joint Government-United Nations programme designed
to reach 3 million people over the next five years. The
Mission and the United Nations country team will

S/PV.7262

continue to support the Government in implementing its
national cholera elimination plan, including through the
High-level Committee for the Elimination of Cholera,
established in May of this year upon the initiative of the
Prime Minister and the Secretary-General.
Haiti continued to make progress on the relocation
of persons displaced by the 2010 earthquake. Durable
solutions still need to be identified for the approximately
103,560 remaining internally displaced persons. The
Government also continued to deploy efforts to attract
investors and to stimulate economic growth and job
creation. The Government’s renewed emphasis on
public financial management is a commendable step
towards improving transparency and accountability,
and its implementation should be vigorously pursued.
Considering the significant achievements of the
past 10 years in the overall stabilization process in
Haiti and mindful of the remaining challenges, the
Secretary-General has recommended a deepening of
MINUSTAH’s consolidation process, including the
drawdown of the military component to two battalions,
with enablers, by June 2015, while maintaining
MINUSTAH’s police component at near to current
levels. The recommendation is based on a careful
analysis of the political and security situation, the
capabilities of the National Police and the Mission’s
activities. A strategic assessment mission was
deployed, under the leadership of the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, in June for
consultations with the Government, elected officials,
political parties, civil society and the private sector,
as well as with Haiti’s international partners and the
United Nations country team. I am confident, based
on the realities on the ground, that the recommended
reconfiguration would ensure an adequate stabilization
presence to support Haitian institutions, particularly in
the context of the next electoral cycle and the continuing
development of the Haitian National Police.
In this regard, let me underscore that it is critical for
enduring stability that the Government, MINUSTAH
and Haiti’s international partners redouble their efforts
and commitments in order to enable the National Police
to meet major benchmarks by 2016 and to assume full
responsibility for security and stability in Haiti. To
this end, maintaining both the Mission’s individual
police officers and the formed police units at near to
current levels would allow us to continue advising
and mentoring Haitian counterparts through static
co-location in police commissariats in targeted areas,

14-531693/30

S/PV.7262

The question concerning Haiti

11/09/2014

as well as to support HNP operations, upon request, as
a second line of response.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.

Equally, I wish to stress that it is vital that we all
look at police development through the wider rule-oflaw lens and underscore the dire need for long-overdue,
comprehensive justice sector reforms. Without a wellfunctioning justice system, including corrections,
even the best trained and equipped police force will be
unable to perform its duties to provide a safe and secure
environment. That would involve not only continuing
to support the adoption of a revised criminal code to
expedite the judicial process, but also addressing the
persistent problem of prolonged pretrial detention and
weaknesses in the corrections sector, as seen in the
Croix des Bouquets prison break in August.

Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Ms. Sandra Honoré, for his
briefing and for her exemplary work in the service of
all Haitians.

With regard to electoral operations, the transfer of
the Mission’s technical, logistic and security support
to the electoral process should be initiated while being
mindful of capacity-building and resource requirements,
so as to enable the relevant Haitian institutions to
assume full responsibility over the conduct of elections.
In conclusion, it is important for Haiti’s gains in
peace, security and stability to be sustained through
the consolidation of the democratic process, the rule of
law and good governance. That requires not only that
State institutions and actors in public life live up to
their responsibilities and assume increasingly greater
leadership, it also demands that Haiti’s international
friends and partners step up efforts and provide
additional funds for critical areas from which the
Mission is withdrawing and in which the Government
still requires continued support.
MINUSTAH stands ready to play its role in
continuing to use its good offices and the presence of
its uniformed personnel and civilian staff in support of
a peaceful and democratic political process and further
stabilization — all of that in the context of the Mission’s
consolidation. We will work with the Government, the
United Nations country team and Haiti’s international
partners to develop a comprehensive transition plan
that underpins the gradual reduction of the Mission’s
footprint. In keeping with the Secretary-General’s
recommendation, we count on the support of the Council
to determine the Mission’s core mandated functions
and the appropriate level of resources necessary to
fulfil them over a predictable period.
The President: I thank Ms. Honoré for her briefing.

4/30

Luxembourg aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.
We recognize the progress made i​​ n Haiti, but we are
also aware of the difficulties that still face the process
of stabilizing the country. As Ms. Honoré just said, the
priority in the weeks and months ahead is to hold, as
soon as possible, free legislative and local elections
that are credible and open to all. That is especially
essential to ensuring the continuity of Parliament in
2015. The inter-Haitian dialogue and the El Rancho
Accord, including specifically on the composition of
the Electoral Council, are positive developments that
reflect the willingness of politicial stakeholders to
resolve their disagreements. Nevertheless, we deeply
regret that it has not yet been possible to adopt the
amended election law, which recently led the Electoral
Council to declare that it would not be possible to hold
the elections by 26 October.
We take this opportunity to call on all political
actors in Haiti to pursue dialogue so that the various
elections that have been delayed for so long can be held
as quickly as possible. The continuity of democratic
institutions and the consolidation of the rule of law
are at stake. They are essential for socioeconomic
development and the sustainable stabilization of the
country. The time has come for all political actors to
set aside their differences in the greater interests of the
country and its people.
The challenges in Haiti are numerous. Certainly,
in collaboration with international partners, the Haitian
authorities have managed to relocate about 90 per
cent of displaced persons. But we are very concerned
about the living conditions of people who continue
to live in camps. Their access to water and sanitation
is not guaranteed everywhere, and the rate of acute
malnutrition remains very high. We must also continue
to improve the resilience of those populations against
natural disasters. Although we welcome the progress
made in
​​ the fight against cholera, it is clear that the
United Nations must continue to play its full rolе to

14-53169

11/09/2014

The question concerning Haiti

support the Government in its efforts to eradicate that
scourge.
We must properly appreciate the true value
of the fact that the security situation in Haiti has
remained relatively stable overall, including in the
five departments in which the military component of
MINUSTAH is no longer present. We are encouraged
by the significant improvement in the capacity and
professionalism of the Haitian National Police. However,
it is not yet able itself to provide security throughout
the country. The Government of Haiti should therefore
pursue vigorously efforts to strengthen the capacity of
the National Police, in accordance with development
plan for the period 2012 to 2016.
Beyond the police, strengthening all the
institutions for guaranteeing the rule of law and the
protection of human rights is essential for the longterm stabilization of the country. In that regard, we
welcome the establishment of the Ombudsman’s Office,
the promulgation of the anti-corruption legislation and
the pursuit of legal proceedings to try serious crimes
committed in the past. We also welcome the progress
made in recent months in terms of legislation to promote
the protection of children. Nevertheless, there is still
a long way to go to strengthen judicial institutions, to
address the practice of lengthy pre-trial detention and
to improve conditions of detention in prisons.
At our most recent debate, in March (see S/PV.7147),
we expressed the hope that the Council could decide,
against the backdrop of a full awareness of the situation,
the future United Nations presence in Haiti. I would
like therefore to thank the Secretary-General for his
proposal for the reconfiguration of MINUSTAH, which
is based on the results of a strategic assessment mission
that allowed for consultation with key stakeholders.
Luxembourg supports the gradual transfer of
MINUSTAH tasks to the Haitian Government, in
particular to the Haitian National Police in terms of
maintaing a secure and stable environment. We support
the one-year extension of the mandate of the Mission,
with a deepening of the consolidation process, as
recommended by the Secretary-General. In our view,
the phased withdrawal proposed is perfectly tailored in
order for us to continue to ensure the stability of the
country and to support Haiti and its institutions in view
of the crucial elections of 2015.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, Ambassador Sandra

S/PV.7262

Honoré. I also welcome the presentation of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2014/617) on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
And I acknowledge the work of Ms. Honoré and the
results that area being achieved, which contribute to
strengthening dialogue and institutions in Haiti.
Let me also acknowledge the presence of the
Permanent Representative of Haiti and his active
delegation. I would also like to express my thanks
for the work of Lieutenant General Jaborandy as
Force Commander of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, as well as that of outgoing Police
Commissioner Luis Carrilho.
When the Council considered the situation in
Haiti in March (see S/PV.7147), we welcomed the
conclusion of a landmark agreement among Haitians
under the coordination of the Episcopal Conference.
The prospects for holding partial legislative and local
elections today seems less clear. We therefore trust
that all Haitian political actors will continue to work
towards building the necessary consensus to enable
free, fair and transparent elections to be held during
this calendar year.
With respect to the Secretary-General’s report, I
would like to make two points that concern the renewal
of MINUSTAH’s mandate, which the Council is required
to approve before 15 October. First, we are concerned
by the timetable for deciding the future of the Mission.
Until a few months ago, we were looking at a scenario
that included a peacebuilding plan with four indicators
that would be used to measure progress, as well as
five options presented by the Secretary-General to be
implemented beginning in July 2016. Yet the current
report abandons that scenario and proposes a different
option that would establish a new design for the Mission
beginning in March 2015. Our primary concern is that
this acceleration appears to bear no relationship to the
situation in Haiti, but rather to respond to external
factors and budgetary considerations. Otherwise, we
see no evidence of changes in Haiti that would lead to
a recommendation for speeding up the process in such
a manner. We find it particularly worrisome that the
Council should take a decision on Haiti in October
2014, before elections have been held.
We believe it is important to proceed with caution
and that all decisions should be made based on
conditions on the ground in order to ensure that the
sole peacekeeping operation deployed on the American
continent be successfully brought to a close. In our

14-531695/30

S/PV.7262

The question concerning Haiti

view, the political and security situation in Haiti has
not visibly improved to an extent that would justify
an accelerated and abrupt troop reduction, as the
Secretary-General’s report proposes. By the same
token, we are concerned by the shift in the Mission’s
mandate as proposed in the report, since we do not wish
it to become an intervention brigade.
Along with other countries in our region, we
believe that the mandate of the Mission should remain
unchanged, and that we should explore options for
its modification starting in 2015. In that regard, we
believe that any decision on the future of MINUSTAH
should be closely tied to an effective improvement in
its operating capacities and an increase in the resources
of the Haitian National Police, which is, after all, the
force that should be in charge of security after the
international community withdraws.
This year marks 10 years since the Council
established MINUSTAH. The Mission, whose military
ranks are largely comprised of troops from countries
in our own region, has made an essential contribution
to the stability and security of our brother country.
Nonetheless, over the past 10 years, Haiti has faced
very difficult situations, including the devastating 2010
earthquake, which upended many of its achievements
and posed additional challenges to what would
otherwise have been a pace of uninterrupted progress.
We believe that MINUSTAH should not remain
in Haiti any longer than necessary, so long as it is
requested by the democratic Government of Haiti.
At the same time, we believe it is important to learn
from the lessons of the past and to bear in mind our
experiences with hasty retreats that forced us to return.
We are convinced that the Council will find the right
balance to prove that a peacekeeping operation of the
United Nations can succeed by working with the people
and the Government concerned to achieve their goals,
namely, democracy, human rights, security and peace.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I would like to start
by thanking Sandra Honoré, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, and her team for their
dedicated work on the ground.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
In my national capacity, I would like to stress
several points on the political progress, security and
the rule of law, and United Nations engagement in the
country.
6/30

11/09/2014

The last time we met in the Council on Haiti (see
S/PV.7147), we welcomed the progress achieved in the
political process towards holding national elections
on 26 October and presidential elections in 2015. That
progress, however, has not been sustained, and today
the holding of the elections on the established date is in
doubt. The people of Haiti have suffered too much, and
gone through too much, to live in political uncertainty,
especially because that will inevitably affect muchneeded progress in the country’s economic and social
development.
We call on all political stakeholders in Haiti to
overcome existing hurdles with regard to the electoral
framework and to engage in a genuine dialogue on
the matter, with all due urgency, keeping the tight
time frame in mind. A successful electoral cycle and
the consolidation of democratic institutions are key to
ensuring stability and addressing the challenges facing
the country’s social and economic development. The
authorities in Haiti need to move forward with the
political process towards holding inclusive elections in
a solid legal framework. We commend the efforts of the
United Nations and of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to engage Haiti’s
political actors on that matter and to advance towards
the elections.
Strengthening security and the rule of law are
some of the most important areas of United Nations
engagement in Haiti. We note the relative stability in
the security situation in the country. Thanks to the
commitment of the Government of Haiti and the active
collaboration of MINUSTAH’s police component, the
capacities and professionalism of the Haitian National
Police have increased. Still, while the progress made
by the Haitian National Police is undeniable, as the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/617) notes, it may
not have the strength to ensure country-wide security
without support, particularly if confronted with
additional challenges such as the electoral cycle, once
it begins.
Law and order problems also remain. Further efforts
are needed to solidify gains in combatting criminality
and tackling outstanding law and order concerns. Quickimpact projects aimed at improving the rule of law and
good governance in the country, including through
training and construction or through the rehabilitation
of peace tribunals, are an important contribution to
improving security and building confidence among
the population. For our part, we remain committed to

14-53169

11/09/2014

The question concerning Haiti

continuing our modest contribution to MINUSTAH’s
police component.
We welcome MINUSTAH’s commitment to assist
the Haitian police in addressing sexual and genderbased violence. We are concerned, however, that much
of the violence remains underreported. Although there
has been progress in trials related to human rights
abuses, prosecution of the perpetrators of sexual and
gender-based violence continues to lag. Sustained
efforts are needed to prevent and respond to sexual
and gender-based violence and to promote the political
participation of women. In that respect, we welcome
the fact that training sessions on the prevention of
sexual exploitation and abuse were provided to more
than 1,500 personnel and we encourage continued
awareness-raising on the matter, since tackling
gender-based violence is an important component of
women’s empowerment and their enhanced role in all
spheres of society, including as agents of the country’s
development. We also welcome Haiti’s continued
efforts to improve child protection legislation. The
Government’s ratification of the first two Optional
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
is a welcome step in that respect, and we appreciate it.
In terms of the way ahead, we are carefully
analysing the Secretary-General’s proposals on the
future of MINUSTAH. While we concur that further
continued efforts are needed to strengthen the country’s
capacity with respect to the rule of law and law and
order, we support a conditions-based consolidation plan
for the Mission, including a drawdown of its military
component, in view of the changing nature of the role
of the Mission as well as actual needs on the ground.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Sandra Honoré for her briefing
and for her astute leadership of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
The El Rancho Accord remains crucial in the
resolution of Haiti’s political situation. We acknowledge
the strong commitment of President Martelly to acting
in line with the provisions of the Accord. We note in
particular the President’s determined efforts to ensure
the holding of elections in October. However, they
cannot take place due to a technicality. It is our hope
that the political leaders of Haiti will reach a consensus
on the way forward so that the long-delayed elections
can take place.

S/PV.7262

As President Martelly rises to the enormous
challenges of his office, the support of the Haitian
people will remain vital. The security challenges
facing the country will require the Haitian authorities
to develop plans and resilient security institutions that
will effectively address the issues. We take positive
note of the operational presence of MINUSTAH, which
has so far proved successful in managing the security
situation of the country.
We would like to acknowledge the progress Haiti
has made in two important areas: agriculture and social
development. In regard to agriculture, we commend the
Haitian authorities for the remarkable progress made
in the production of yam, with output increasing from
354,500 metric tons in 2010 to nearly 500,000 metric
tons in 2013. While this is below Haiti’s potential in
yam production, we note that the authorities are making
efforts under the triennial agricultural recovery
programme 2013-2016 to address the constraints
faced by producers in the sector. We look forward to
the adoption of the policy for the yam industry, which
the Ministry of Agriculture is reportedly working on.
Yam has the potential to contribute to Haiti’s foreign
exchange earnings and improve national prosperity. We
therefore encourage the Haitian authorities to continue
to work on boosting its production.
In terms of social development, we applaud the
Government of Haiti for the high priority it attaches
to the eradication of illiteracy in the country. We note
that the Government is motivated by the desire to
reduce social inequality, fight extreme poverty and
improve social inclusion for all Haitians. In this regard,
252,000 Haitians have benefited from the efforts of
the Government over the past two years. Furthermore,
under the sixth national functional literacy campaign
launched in March, the Government has reportedly
set a target of achieving literacy for 450,000 Haitians
across the country by March 2016. We encourage the
Government to continue to promote literacy in order to
strengthen social cohesion and improve the lives of its
citizens.
Despite these positive developments in Haiti,
challenges still exist, and MINUSTAH remains
relevant in meeting these challenges. In this regard, we
take positive note of the progress that MINUSTAH has
made in achieving its stabilization benchmarks.
Concerning MINUSTAH’s consolidation and
reconfiguration beyond 2016, we believe that a phased

14-531697/30

S/PV.7262

The question concerning Haiti

11/09/2014

drawdown based on an overall assessment of overall
stability, the security situation and the capacity of the
National Police will provide optimal results. We welcome
the United Nations integrated strategic framework and
look forward to the outcome of the strategic planning
process being undertaken by MINUSTAH, the United
Nations partners and the Government of Haiti.

The Republic of Korea previously participated in
the reconstruction process of Haiti, including through
the dispatch of an engineering contingent. This year,
we joined in the support of the national plan for the
elimination of cholera with a modest donation, and we
are considering ways to continually contribute to the
humanitarian needs in Haiti.

Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): First of all, I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, Sandra Honoré, for her
briefing.

Mr. Manzi (Rwanda): I would like to thank
Ms. Sandra Honoré, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, for her briefing and her
continued able leadership at the helm of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

During the four years since the devastating
earthquake of 2010 the centre of gravity for rebuilding
Haiti has been shifting from the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and
international support to the Haitian people and their
leaders. The unprecedented catastrophe was extremely
challenging and still poses residual threats.
Having listened to the Special Representative’s
briefing, we hope that the political actors will make
every effort to hold elections as soon as possible. The
importance of the ownership and responsibility of
national stakeholders cannot be overemphasized. We
expect the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to continue to actively engage to promote
political dialogue and consensus. Capacity-building
for good governance is a priority for the international
community, which should focus its resources in this
regard.
As the rule of law is one of the key elements of
good governance, technical and operational support
for the national police should be sustained until
it is able to provide public order. We support the
Secretary-General’s recommendation concerning the
condition-based two-step drawdown of the MINUSTAH
military component. His recommendation is in line
with the ongoing consolidation process. We believe that
limited resources should be invested at a suitable time
and location. We hope that political leaders will tackle
the underlying causes of social grievances. Without
addressing the prevailing humanitarian problems,
especially those related to internally displaced people,
security and stability may remain elusive. Providing
social and economic alternatives to people will be
the best remedy to curb criminal activities. In this
regard, we believe that the role of the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations country
team and international partners should be enhanced
during the streamlining process of MINUSTAH.
8/30

Rwanda is encouraged by the continued consolidation
of the political, social and economic stability of Haiti.
We commend the Government for its progress in
strengthening national institutions and building social
cohesion. In particular, we applaud the Haitian people
and their partners, including MINUSTAH, for the
reported reduction in crime, the sustained fight against
cholera and the continued settlement of displaced
persons following the devastating earthquake of 2010.
The efforts of all political actors to continue the
political dialogue in the framework of the El Rancho
Accord is encouraging as it guarantees a peaceful and
progressive future for Haiti. We encourage them to
continue to engage constructively in order to uphold
the gains. In this regard, Rwanda commends President
Martelly and the national institutions for steps they
have taken to implement the Accord, including the
amendments to the electoral law by the Chamber
of Deputies and the appointment of members of the
Electoral Council.
We have taken note of the electoral schedule set by
President Martelly, as well as the concerns expressed
on this calendar, especially on the first round of
elections set for 26 October. We express our confidence
that the consultation initiated by the Government
with the leadership of both houses of Parliament will
lead to a consensus on the electoral calendar. In that
regard, we call upon all political actors, and the Senate
in particular, to engage positively to agree on a legal
framework, which is a prerequisite for other electoral
processes to go forward.
As MINUSTAH continues to draw down, it is
important for the Government of Haiti, with the
support of its partners, to ensure a successful transition
by improving the political and security situation
in the country and enhancing national institutions,

14-53169

11/09/2014

The question concerning Haiti

including security forces. In that regard, the increased
professionalization of the Haitian National Police and
the progressive stabilization of the security environment
are all critical benchmarks for MINUSTAH’s
consolidation plan. It is in that context that we support
the Secretary-General’s recommendation to extend the
mandate of the Mission for an additional year until
15 October 2015, as well as his proposal for a two-stage
drawdown based on a review of the overall stability,
the security situation and the capacity of the National
Police.
In the meantime, Rwanda is encouraged by the
continued investment of MINUSTAH in quick-impact
projects focusing on the rule of law, good governance,
health, infrastructure, access to water and civic
education. In the same vein, we acknowledge the
continued collaboration of the Government of Haiti
and the United Nations Development Programme in
the implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategic framework. We believe that the ongoing joint
programmes will enable the country to fully recover
from the 2010 earthquake and ensure that Haiti is
on the path to sustainable, peaceful and long-term
development. In that regard, we call on the Government
of Haiti to continue working with the international
community on necessary reforms that could set the
stage for increased foreign investment in the country
and enhanced socioeconomic reliance.
In conclusion, Rwanda, as a police contributor to
MINUSTAH, reaffirms its solidarity to the Government
and people of Haiti as we trust their resolve and
determination to succeed in their quest for stability and
prosperity.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré, for her briefing and her
work.
I also associate myself with the statements to be
made by the observer of the European Union and by
the representative of Uruguay on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.
The situation in Haiti contrasts markedly with
that of most of the topics covered by the Council.
Not everything has been resolved in Haiti and many
obstacles remain, which are risk factors in the country’s
progress. However, opportunities also exist. I have in
mind the proposals to address social inequalities and
human rights violations that were drawn up in
​​ Geneva

S/PV.7262

in February by the Independent Expert on the situation
of human rights in Haiti, Mr. Gustavo Gallón, who was
appointed by the Human Rights Council.
We are therefore pleased to see the country slowly
emerge from the acute crisis that led the Council to
deploy a peacekeeping operation there 10 years ago.
On the occasion of that anniversary, we are beginning
to see the success of our collective action, through
the Mission and the various Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General, and how it is paying off. I
will therefore limit my comments to two aspects that
lie at the heart of the mandate of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH): support
for political dialogue and the stabilization of the
security situation.
We are concerned by the growing delays in the
organization of the electoral process. None of the
elections scheduled for 2014 have been held, and despite
the agreement reached in June between the President
and opposition, it does not seem likely that the date of
26 October, on which the general elections had been
scheduled, will be respected. We know that democracy
thrives on elections. Their regularity is the hallmark
of a healthy democracy. Local, legislative and partial
senatorial elections have been postponed for too long,
while the major election — the presidential election of
late 2015 — is already on the horizon. It is therefore
essential that the organization of the electoral process
be resumed quickly, without any impediments and in a
spirit of democratic responsibility demonstrated by all
actors.
We note with satisfaction the elements of the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/617) referring to the
gradual strengthening of the Haitian National Police.
The decrease in certain forms of crimes and the police’s
growing territorial control are also positive signs.
The Haitian National Police, as we know, still needs
MINUSTAН’s support in conducting its operations.
However, we also note that it is now showing itself to
be more capable of dealing with public disturbances.
It may not yet operate completely independently,
but it has learned how to better control crowds and
prevent demonstrations from degenerating into violent
confrontations. For us, the strengthening of the Haitian
National Police must, of course, remain central to
MINUSTAH’s activities.
We also should not question the quality of the
Mission’s contact with the population, which depends
in particular on the ability of its staff members to

14-531699/30

S/PV.7262

The question concerning Haiti

speak French. With that in mind, it seems clear that
MINUSTAH’s reconfiguration should continue. Not to
change anything or to change things only on the margins
of the Mission’s current scope would be to disregard
the tangible signs of progress, which have just been
noted. Similarly, to prevent MINUSTAH from adapting
to the changing circumstances would be tantamount
to underestimating the political risks and would also
reward those who reject democracy. By maintaining the
status quo, the international community would deny to
Haiti the opportunity to emerge from the crisis.
The Mission must evolve in size and nature. We
support the Secretary-General’s recommendation to
renew the Mission’s mandate by continuing to reduce
its military presence by three battalions. The police
component should remain at the strength it is now.
That scenario is the result of lengthy evaluations and
exchanges. MINUSTAH’s evolution has not been
taboo for almost a year, and, in his previous report
(S/2014/162) issued in March, the Secretary-General
already provided a number of reconfiguration options.
The Secretary-General has today fine-tuned
his analysis, thanks to the findings of the strategic
assessment mission that was conducted on the ground
in June. According to the Force Commander, who
briefed us yesterday ina closed meeting, the reduction
recommended by the Secretary-General is a prudent
reconfiguration of MINUSTAH that would allow it to
retain its capacity to act in military terms.
Significant work lies ahead, in particular that of
satisfactorily defining MINUSTAH’s mandate within
the allocated resources. MINUSTAH’s transformation
should be a catalyst for our reflection on the international
community’s commitment in Haiti. The conditions for
its success are now known and they lie within a credible
time frame. We must also consider the United Nations
presence after the elections to consolidate our work.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the briefing made by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra
Honoré, and value her efforts and those of her team.
My delegation associates itself with the statement to
be made ​​by the Permanent Representative of Uruguay
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti.
We believe that, given the crucial moment in Haiti,
the international community should continue to play a
crucial supporting role that facilitates dialogue among
all Haitians. Since 2006, elections in Haiti have been
10/30

11/09/2014

held pursuant to an electoral cycle that has allowed for
a renewal of democratic institutions. We therefore urge
all Haitian political sectors to seek an understanding
that will enable the institutions to continue to operate
without interruption, which would sow uncertainty and
undo all the efforts of recent years.
For Chile, security, stability and development are
interrelated principles and, based on the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/617), the work of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
in that regard has been fundamental. The process of
consolidating and withdrawing the Mission should
therefore be gradual and adjusted at all times to the
changing Haitian reality with a concrete timetable.
Any downsizing should be done without undermining
the achievements made in security and be in keeping
with the electoral agenda, given its potential effects on
stability. Chile is therefore convinced that the drawdown
process and all reductions should begin gradually after
the presidential elections, and certainly not before the
inauguration of the new authorities.
The global financing needs of peacekeeping
operations are growing and face a dearth of resources.
However, budgetary considerations and external factors
should not affect the decisions that the Council takes
with regard to the Mission.
The Mission represents an enormous Latin
American effort. That commitment was reflected
recently in a letter sent to the Secretary-General and
signed by 11 Latin American countries, including Chile.
The letter reflects a common vision of the evolution of
the only peacekeeping mission in the Americas.
In the 10 years since MINUSTAH began working
in Haiti, the progress that has been made in stabilizing
the country is obvious, but its efforts to consolidate
the rule of law must continue. Making a success of the
2012-2016 strategic development plan for the Haitian
National Police is an urgent and high-priority task
for MINUSTAH, and a strategic one, in that it has a
measurable objective with quantitative and qualitative
indicators that can help Haiti become self-sustaining
in the area of public security throughout the country.
In order to achieve that, it is crucial to increase police
capacity as well as to reach numerical targets.
We commend the progress that Haiti has made in the
areas of security, economic growth, development, postearthquake reconstruction and institution-building, but
we know that there is still work to be done in improving

14-53169

11/09/2014

The question concerning Haiti

socioeconomic development and the people’s well-being
as well as security. One such challenge is the cholera
epidemic, and we note that the emergency measures
undertaken by the Government, with the international
community’s support, have enabled it to reduce the
number of new infections by more than 75 per cent this
year. We note the role that the United Nations Senior
Coordinator for the Cholera Response in Haiti plays in
this and urge the international community to strengthen
its collaboration in the efforts against cholera.
We believe that the role of the Mission in general,
and of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in particular, should not be restricted to a
mandate for security. It should also support dialogue
between the various political stakeholders aimed at
achieving consensus beyond party differences so as
to enable them to make decisions that strengthen the
country’s democratic institutions, political stability and
socioeconomic development for all Haitians without
exception, in the framework of a society that is fully
democratic, united and with a deep respect for human
rights. But MINUSTAH’s role should also be limited,
since Haitian society itself is responsible for solving its
own problems in sovereign independence.
In conclusion, I would like to recall that 10 years
ago, when, as it is today, Chile was a non-permanent
member of the Council, we supported and participated
in the deployment of the multinational interim force sent
to help deal with the plight threatening Haitian society.
Latin America and the Caribbean’s commitment to
and solidarity with the people and authorities of Haiti
continue to this day and will undoubtedly continue to
do so in future.
We measure the success of a peacekeeping mission
when its contribution to solving the problems for which it
was created makes its continued existence unnecessary.
That is what we hope for with MINUSTAH.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to add my voice to those of speakers before me in
thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Ms. Sandra Honoré,
for her briefing and for her and her team’s flawless
work to help Haiti.
The report of the Secretary-General covering the
period under consideration (S/2014/617) shows that the
situation has improved. The main State institutions
have been strengthened and the return and resettlement

S/PV.7262

of internally displaced persons has been 90 per cent
accomplished, while significant progress has been
made in combating the cholera epidemic. However,
there are a number of issues that make this improved
situation a fragile one.
On the political front, the problem of the composition
of the Electoral Council still divides the executive, the
political parties, the parliamentarians and the opposition.
Chad supports the efforts to maintain an inter-Haitian
dialogue process and commends the signing of the El
Rancho Accord, which is an encouraging development
and a sign of the political stakeholders’ willingness to
put an end to their differences. In order to strengthen
the rule of law, promote socioeconomic development
and restore lasting stability, Chad urges all the parties
concerned to redouble their efforts to hold local and
parliamentary elections in Haiti as speedily and as soon
as possible.
In spite of overall improvement in the area of
security, public order is still at risk, particularly by
problems with crime, gang violence and civil unrest
related to the continuing political and economic
crisis. Chad welcomes the forthcoming increase in the
numbers of Haitian National Police officers to 15,000
by 2016 and the reform of the prison system. As we
know, every security problem is ultimately rooted in
social inequality and poverty. Fighting those scourges
will help improve the underlying causes of insecurity.
In that regard, Chad encourages the country’s
Government and the United Nations to continue to aid
and support Haiti in the processes of stabilization and
peacebuilding.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, Chad
welcomes the fact that the number of displaced persons
has fallen by 90 per cent since 2010. However, critical
needs still have to be met in the areas of basic sanitation
and malnutrition. Overall, 70,000 displaced persons are
still living in very precarious conditions. Chad urges
the Government to seek solutions for these people based
on sustainable development. We commend the 82 per
cent drop in cholera cases compared to the same period
last year, and we encourage initiatives aimed at fighting
the disease, including the total sanitation programme
launched by the Secretary-General in July. We urge
donors to step up their efforts to find the financing
needed to completely eradicate cholera in Haiti.
After 10 years of MINUSTAH’s activity and 13
Security Council resolutions, we believe that Haiti is
at a turning point in its consolidation of stability and

14-5316911/30

S/PV.7262

The question concerning Haiti

democracy. The leadership, the political stakeholders
and the country’s population as a whole must seize this
historic opportunity to consolidate their achievements
and put the country on a path to sustainable stability
and economic development. This new responsibility
should be undertaken within the framework of a gradual
and progressive transfer of authority. In that context,
MINUSTAH should maintain a presence adequate to the
task of helping Haiti’s institutions confront risks to its
security, especially during the electoral period. In that
regard, Chad welcomes the extension of MINUSTAH’s
mandate through 15 October 2015, in accordance with
the drawdown plan and timetable proposed by the
Secretary-General.
In conclusion, we would like to congratulate and
thank all who have contributed to Haiti’s stabilization
and development, and we encourage the Haitian
Government, which, thanks to the support of all United
Nations entities and other relevant stakeholders, will be
taking over from MINUSTAH.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank Ms. Sandra Honoré, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), for her
comprehensive briefing.
We are all aware of the challenges facing Haiti. The
United Nations has supported it through the toughest of
times, and we should therefore approach the drawdown
of MINUSTAH with caution. We should also consider a
new restructuring aimed at intensifying efforts to deal
with the country’s current urgent problems, chiefly
those connected to the rule of law, human rights and
building judicial and security institutions. It is also
vital that the international humanitarian response be
strengthened and progress made in the area of essential
social and economic development, so that Haitians
see a concrete improvement in their living conditions.
Otherwise, the grievances of the public may become
entrenched and the violent demonstrations will spread.
The main responsibility for maintaining the progress
achieved in Haiti lies with its Government, leaders
and political elite. In the absence of such progress,
the efforts of the Government may not be successful.
All Haitian patries should resort to dialogue and give
priority to national interests and to improving the
general political climate. We join all calls that demand
the implementation of the provisions of the El Rancho
Accord pertaining to the electoral process. We call
for the holding of free, fair, transparent and combined
12/30

11/09/2014

legislative and local elections as soon as possible so
that democracy and stability can be achieved and a
backslide towards the violence and chaos that results
from the increased political tensions prevented.
We note the remarks of the Secretary-General in
his most recent report on the drawdown of MINUSTAH
(S/2014/617). I would like to point out that any reduction
should take into consideration the upcoming election
period, the surrounding circumstances and the need to
support the relevant security situation. The drawdown
must also be commensurate with building the capacity
of the Haitian National Police so as to maintain the
gains of the past 10 years. In that regard, it would
also be appropriate to focus on building the capacity
of the national police forces, in particular outside the
capital. The current ratio of police to residents is no
more than 0.5 per cent per 1,000 people. It should be
acknowledged that the world standard is a minimum of
2.2 per cent per 1,000 people.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ms. Honoré for her briefing. Over the past six
months, the political process in Haiti has registered
steady progress. The security situation remains stable.
The settlement of displaced people proceeds smoothly.
The response to the cholera has produced encouraging
results. However, at the same time, tensions remain
between the executive and legislative branches of the
Haitian Government. Differences between the two
branches over the elections remain unsettled. Given
the country’s weak economy and fragile humanitarian
situation, the peaceful reconstruction process remains
a challenge.
At present, Haiti is at a critical stage in consolidating
peace and stability. To help Haiti to achieve lasting
stability and development, China believes that the
international community should step up efforts in the
following three areas.
First, it should facilitate the election process to
achieve a peaceful political transition in Haiti. China
hopes that all stakeholders in Haiti will make the
country’s future and well-being a priority, resolve their
differences over the elections and other issues as soon
as possible through dialogue and negotiation and ensure
the smooth holding of elections by the end of the year.
The international community and the relevant regional
organizations can play a positive role in providing good
offices and facilitation.

14-53169

11/09/2014

The question concerning Haiti

Secondly,
it
should
accelerate
economic
reconstruction and enhance Haiti’s development
capacity. Underdevelopment has been one of the
underlying causes of the political and social problems
in Haiti. The international community should honour
its donor pledges and actively participate in Haiti’s
State-building process with a view to helping the
country to achieve independent development as soon
as possible. Haiti has the highest rate of cholera in
the world. China applauds Secretary-General Ban KiMoon’s efforts to eliminate the cholera epidemic and
hopes that the international community will continue
to provide support to the cholera control programme
in Haiti.
Thirdly, it should continue to fully support the
role of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH). Under the leadership of Special
Representative Honoré, MINUSTAH has made positive
efforts in supporting the political process in Haiti and
in maintaining social order. China appreciates such
efforts and hopes that MINUSTAH will continue to
discharge its duties effectively in accordance with its
mandate.
Ms. King (Australia): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Sandra
Honoré for her briefing on the situation in Haiti and
acknowledge the significant contribution of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
alongside the Government and the people of Haiti,
in rebuilding the country, in particular in the face of
natural disasters and the ongoing cholera epidemic.
While there is still much work to be done, significant
progress continues to be made, and the past six months
is no exception in that regard.
We believe that Haiti’s long-term stability depends
on three key factors: ensuring security, for which there
is a clear need; strengthening governance institutions
and the rule of law; and improving the lives of Haiti’s
citizens through an effective response to humanitarian
crises and the promotion of socioeconomic development.
On the development side, the Secretary-General’s
most recent report (S/2014/617) records encouraging
advances. We commend the Secretary-General’s
leadership of the United Nations efforts to eliminate
cholera in Haiti, and we note that rates are declining.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s recent visit
to Haiti, where he launched the $2.2-billion total
sanitation campaign with Prime Minister Lamothe,
which aims over 10 years to scale up sanitation and

S/PV.7262

hygiene interventions in rural areas, in particular. It is
important that the international community continue to
support the United Nations and humanitarian partners
to completely eradicate cholera in Haiti.
It is also pleasing to note that Haiti has nearly
reached several of the Millennium Development Goals
ahead of the 2015 deadline. Among other achievements,
Haiti has seen a steady boost in enrolment rates in
primary education from 47 per cent in 1993 to nearly
90 per cent, achieving equal participation by boys and
girls in education. Haiti has also halved the number of
underweight children under five years. Infant mortality
has decreased by 44 per cent since 1990. The percentage
of households that have access to water has increased
significantly but still only two-thirds have such access.
That is a vital need. Weak water, sanitation and health
systems are enabling cholera, acute diarrhoea or other
water borne diseases to persist. That will require
sustained attention.
The holding of elections remains a crucial step
towards the strengthening of governance in Haiti. In
that regard, we have not seen the progress that has been
sought. In January last year, the Council issued a press
statement (SC/10901) calling for the holding of free, fair,
inclusive and credible elections by the end of 2013. At
that point, elections were already long overdue. Almost
two years have elapsed since that statement by the
Council, and we are in the midst of our fourth Council
debate on Haiti during that period. On each occasion,
the Council has called for elections to be held. Yet the
people of Haiti are still waiting for them to take place.
The holding of elections by January 2015 is not only
essential for the continuity of Parliament but also critical
to Haiti’s recovery, reconstruction and development.
Prime Minister Lamothe’s refrain that “Haiti is open
for business” is not as credible as it might be while the
political process is stalled. Political stability is essential
to the long-term socioeconomic development of Haiti.
We strongly urge all political actors in Haiti, including
President Martelly and members of the Senate, to put
aside their differences and to ensure the holding of
elections by January 2015.
Some progress has been made on the security front.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s characterization
during his recent visit that the Haitian National Police is
the backbone of security in Haiti. The Haitian National
Police must continue to take on increasingly greater
responsibility for security in Haiti, with the United
Nations police focused on its mentoring role and acting

14-5316913/30

S/PV.7262

The question concerning Haiti

as backup only when essential, as Special Representative
Honoré has said. The use of MINUSTAH’s military
component to respond to security incidents should be
a last resort.
We commend MINUSTAH’s ongoing efforts to
train police officers to prevent and to respond to sexual
and gender-based violence and its efforts to extend that
training to judges and prosecutors. We urge the Haitian
Government to continue to work with MINUSTAH
to increase efforts to support the prevention of such
violence, to strengthen the judicial process and to
ensure respect for the rights of victims. The increased
capacity of the Haitian National Police has allowed the
Secretary-General in his report to recommend a twostep drawdown of MINUSTAH, with the first step being
a 53-per cent reduction in the military component. We
support the renewal of the MINUSTAH mandate for
one year at this level. Any further drawdown should be
conditional on further progress on the ground.
Australia agrees with the conclusions of the strategic
assessment review that it would be premature to end
MINUSTAH’s presence before presidential elections
have taken place in 2015 and a new Government
is in place. The Mission will continue to play an
important role even as Haitian authorities take on more
responsibility. We encourage MINUSTAH to continue
to work to assist Haiti in building on the security and
development gains it has made.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Sandra Honoré for introducing the
Secretary-General’s report before us (S/2014/617) and
for her assessment of the situation in Haiti.
We agree that national dialogue remains of
utmost importance to stabilizing the situation in
the country. Since the conclusion of the El Rancho
Accord, the Haitian leadership has taken a number of
important measures for its implementation, including
the modernization of public administration and the
creation of an open Government. An administrative
tribunal has been established, and a number of laws
adopted by Parliament have come into force. The
powers of governors and mayors of key cities have
been temporarily extended. The duties of a minister
of communications with political parties have been
defined. We believe that the parliamentary and local
elections will prove to be the main indicators of the
fruitfulness of national dialogue.

14/30

11/09/2014

It is therefore regrettable, as confirmed by the
report of the Secretary-General, that some important
steps necessary for the conduct of elections this
year have not yet been taken. The balance of power
emerging in Port-au-Prince remains fragile; as a result,
the overall domestic situation remains complex and
often unpredictable. The lack of agreement between the
executive and legislative branches threatens to block
the electoral process. We call on all political forces in
Haiti to overcome their remaining differences and to
ensure the holding of fair, just and transparent elections
as soon as possible. The normal functioning of State
bodies is urgently needed for the further stabilization of
the situation in the country, the genuine development of
democratic institutions, and the creation of conditions
conducive to sustainable socioeconomic development.
The security situation in Haiti is gradually
returning to normal. The professionalism of the
Haitian National Police has grown. We hope that the
goal set by the Government to increase the number
of police officers to 15,000 by 2016, with the support
of the international community, will be achieved. We
note the significant contribution of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to this
process. Assistance in training the Haitian police force
is one of the central tasks of its mandate.
Additional efforts are required to improve the
Haitian justice system. The entire legal and justice
system — from the police to corrections — must be
made to operate in a balanced and effective manner. We
also note the positive trends in the humanitarian field.
The country continues to face complex challenges
in rectifying the socioeconomic situation, resettling
internally displaced persons, ensuring food security
and fighting cholera. We welcome the steps taken by
the Government of Haiti in these areas, with the support
of the international community, including through the
United Nations funds and programmes.
We share the opinion of the Secretary-General
regarding the need to extend the Mission’s mandate
until 15 October 2015. At the same time, we believe
that in the medium and long terms, MINUSTAH will
continue to transfer responsibility for maintaining
law and order to the growing Haitian National Police.
We stand ready to consider the Secretary-General’s
proposals on the gradual drawdown of the military
component of MINUSTAH and other possible ideas
during the drafting of the resolution on this issue. In
that regard, key factors are the security situation on

14-53169

11/09/2014

The question concerning Haiti

the ground, as well as the capacity of national forces to
uphold law and order during the elections.
In conclusion, we emphasize once again that the
leading role in resolving the complex problems facing
the country should be played by the Government of Haiti
itself. At the same time, the international community
must continue to provide effective support to Haiti. In
this context, we note the efforts of both MINUSTAH
and regional organizations.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Honoré for
her briefing today and for her work in Haiti. Under her
leadership, the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) continues to make a valuable
contribution to ensuring stability and progress in Haiti.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2014/617) and agree that Haiti has reached an
important stage in solidifying the gains made so far
towards stability and democracy. But against that
background, it is disappointing to read in the SecretaryGeneral’s report that, once again, the political impasse
and failure to adopt the necessary amendments to the
electoral law mean that essential elections are unlikely
to happen this year. Failure to hold transparent and
inclusive elections will have serious consequences for
the provision of democracy, the rule of law and the
future of the country.
The United Kingdom therefore joins the SecretaryGeneral in calling for all leaders in Haiti to rise above
their differences, to consider the future stability and
security of their country above all else, and to work
together to ensure that the long-overdue elections,
which are so necessary for progress in Haiti, are held
without further unnecessary delay.
We are pleased that the security situation has
remained relatively stable, including in those parts
of the country in which MINUSTAH is no longer
present. We note the encouraging statistics cited in
her briefing today by Special Representative Honoré
about the overall downward trend of most criminality.
In addition, we welcome the Special Representative’s
positive assessment of the increasing professionalism of
the Haitian National Police. It is vital that the National
Police win the trust and confidence of the people. A
fully functioning, effective and well-paid National
Police force is essential to the future stability of Haiti,
and we are pleased to see that efforts to make advances
in recruitment, training and operational responsibility

S/PV.7262

continue. It is, however, of real concern that the police
are still reliant on MINUSTAH for logistical and
operational support, and that they lack the capacity and
equipment to contribute to operational patrols.
I echo the comments of the Special Representative
also in emphasizing the importance of continuing
to build up the justice sector, regionally and at the
institutional level, to complement the work of the police
and ensure that the rule of law is properly applied. In
particular, improvement in the administration of the
corrections institutions should be a priority.
The United Kingdom agrees with the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment that, while a supportive
presence of MINUSTAH continues to be required,
the improvements in the security situation in Haiti
over the past year demonstrate that a reduction and
restructuring of troops and the handing-over of tasks to
more appropriate authorities would be a sensible step.
This assessment is based on a detailed strategic review
involving consultation with relevant stakeholders. We
share the Special Representative’s confidence that
such a reconfiguration would result in an adequate
stabilization presence in Haiti.
As the Secretary-General says in his report, this
transition requires a comprehensive strategy to ensure
a joined-up approach between MINUSTAH, the United
Nations partners and, crucially, the Government of
Haiti. The Government continues to have primary
responsibility for ensuring stability and development.
The engagement of Haiti’s political leaders and
stakeholders is, as the Secretary-General reports, vital
to setting the country on a path towards lasting stability
and economic development.
As the United Kingdom highlighted in its
explanation of vote following the renewal of
MINUSTAH’s mandate last year (see S/PV.7040),
we remain concerned at the high number of tasks, in
particular quick-impact projects, being carried out by
the Mission, which we believe would be better managed
by other elements of the United Nations system and its
partners. We remain of the opinion that such projects
should be carried out during the initial stages of a
mission to build up public confidence and support, but
10 years into the life of a peacekeeping mission they
should not be used to mitigate the effects of a lack of
long-term development programming.
Meeting the benchmarks of MINUSTAH’s
consolidation plan is crucial to enabling the Government

14-5316915/30

S/PV.7262

The question concerning Haiti

and people of Haiti to take over responsibility for their
own peace and security. MINUSTAH has an important
role, but it should not remain foreever, and it is incumbent
on all Haiti’s political leaders and stakeholders to work
towards a future without MINUSTAH by establishing
the rule of law and preparing for elections. That is the
right way to safeguard the country’s future.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Honoré for her briefing and for her leadership.
I also thank all the dedicated women and men serving
in the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), who are working with her to build
a more secure and stable Haiti. The troop and police
contributors to Haiti, many of whom we have heard
from and several of whom we will soon hear from, have
made a world of difference in the lives of the Haitian
people. The whole international community is grateful.
When the Security Council met to discuss Haiti in
March (see S/PV.7147), there was cautious optimism
that the signing of the El Rancho Accord and the
dialogue mediated by the Episcopal Conference
would help break the country’s political stalemate and
lead to long-overdue elections. It is therefore deeply
disappointing, as other Council members have pointed
out, that five months later so little progress has been
made towards that goal. Haiti still does not even have
an electoral law, which led the country’s provisional
Electoral Council to declare recently that Haiti would
not be able to hold elections on 26 October, the date the
Government had set. Many of Haiti’s elected leaders
have worked tirelessly to seek a political compromise
and have offered meaningful concessions to that end,
including with regard to the composition of the Electoral
Council and the Cabinet. But a group of six Seantors
seems intent on holding elections hostage to partisan
concerns, even going so far as to prevent a debate on
the electoral law.
Legislators in a democracy have a responsibility
to defend their constituents’ rights. But when elected
officials take advantage of democracy’s checks and
balances to cynically block debates and elections
altogether, they stand in the way of addressing citizens’
real needs. And, as we all know, the needs of Haiti’s
citizens are very real.
Massive progress has been made to find homes for
the 1.5 million people displaced by the 2010 earthquake,

16/30

11/09/2014

but 70,000 people are still displaced and much work
remains to be done to provide for citizens’ basic needs,
such as electricity, quality schools and access to
doctors. Haitians expect their Government to provide
for those needs, and are understandibly frustrated when
they are not met.
Therefore, our message to all of Haiti’s politicians
is clear: come together to pass an electoral law and
hold free, fair and inclusive elections in respect of
constitutional deadlines. Every United Nations State
Member should join that call, and we are heartened that
so many have done so.
Despite the political deadlock in Haiti, there
has been encouraging progress on other fronts. We
welcome the onging expansion and professionalization
of the Haitian National Police. Police have shown
an increased capacity to maintain public order
while respecting people’s rights. We also recognize
MINUSTAH’s efforts to strengthen Haiti’s justice
sector, such as seeking to imporve the capacity of
judges and prosecutors and increasing access to legal
aid. Haiti’s prison system needs urgent fixing. Haiti’s
prisons, which have a capacity of approximately 6,000
people, currently house more than 10,000, and nearly
80 per cent of those people are awaiting trial.
Let us be clear: our work in Haiti is not finished.
But just because significant development and political
challenges persist does not make MINUSTAH the
solution to all of them. Nor does it mean that the
Mission should be kept just as it is. We have to rightsize MINUSTAH to fit Haiti’s evolving needs. We
agree with our colleagues that decisions about the size
and configuration of the force should be conditionsbased. Like our friends in the region who have given so
much to Haiti’s recovery, we are a neighbour of Haiti’s
and we have a deep and demonstrated interest in Haiti’s
security and the growth and success of its democracy.
The United States agrees with the SecretaryGeneral’s determination, based on a thorough
review, that conditions support further consolidating
MINUSTAH’s military component in the upcoming
mandate. We agree with the Special Representative that
support for MINUSTAH’s robust police component to
Haiti’s National Police is still critically necessary. A
smaller military component must stand ready to assist
on short notice anywhere that unrest overwhelms the
combined capacity of Haitian and United Nations police.
With continued robust MINUSTAH support, we look to

14-53169

11/09/2014

The question concerning Haiti

Haiti’s Government to assume greater responsibility for
security, including for elections.
We are committed to discussing with partners
how MINUSTAH should be adjusted. We belive that
the Secretariat, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Force Commander have
taken the facts on the ground into account, and they
have concluded that conditions support the adjusted
force levels recommended by the Secretary-General.
In conclusion, Haiti has real needs. It has been
through so much and it faces tremendous challenges. We
as the international community continue to experiment
and to learn and to adjust around the most effective
ways to help the Haitian people address those very real
needs. We will continue to do so as Haiti continues to
move along the path to self-sufficiency.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Régis (Haiti) (spoke in French): On behalf
of the Government of Haiti, allow me to commend
the Secretary-General on the quality of his report
(S/2014/617) on the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH). The report was submitted
pursuant to resolution 2119 (2013) and complements and
expands upon the one issued on 7 March (S/2014/162).
It focuses on key facts and developments in the past
five months and provides a balanced and objective
picture of the overall situation in Haiti in terms of
stabilization and security, political, economic, social
and humanitarian aspects, and on the recovery.
The rigorous assessment of MINUSTAH’s activities
undertaken by the Secretary-General provides accurate
insights into the many achievements and successes,
but also on the road still ahead towards consolidating
the rule of law and democracy and strengthening
institutions, including the Haitian National Police
(HNP). The report includes a set of quite sage
recommendations that were formulated on the basis of
a clear analysis of the situation on the ground and the
current and future challenges. They should enable the
Security Council to make a realistic decision as to the
possible reconfiguration of the mandate entrusted to
MINUSTAH 10 years ago.
The Haitian Government has considered with the
greatest interest the contents of the report, which is
all the more timely for having been issued on the eve

S/PV.7262

of crucial parliamentary and municipal elections that
everyone acknowledges constitute a major test not only
for MINUSTAH and Haitian institutions, but especially
for the future of democracy in Haiti.
The Government also took note of the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation to the Security Council
to renew the mandate of MINUSTAH for a specified
period, along with the reconfiguration made necessary
in the light of the achievements, improvements and
progress, but also the current and future challenges and
developments in the field.
I find it necessary, on behalf of the Government
of Haiti, to provide some information and additional
assessments that I think will be useful as part of this
debate when it comes to the evolution of situation in
Haiti, on the one hand, and the recommendations of the
Secretary-General on the extension and reconfiguration
of the mandate of MINUSTAH, on the other.
First of all, the Government of Haiti is overall
pleased with the general observation of the SecretaryGeneral, who was able to evaluate for himself, during
his visit on 14 and 15 July, the significant progress
in Haiti over the past 10 years. As he observed, the
situation in terms of security has improved. The
strengthening of key institutions continues. The
performance of the Haitian National Police continues to
improve. The relative stability in the security situation
is illustrated by the sharp downward trend in cases
of abduction. Many of the displaced as a result of the
most devastating earthquake in the country’s history
have now left the camps and have been resettled. With
regard to combatting the cholera epidemic, the report
stresses that Haiti is on the path to success, although we
cannot but deplore the high number of deaths — 8,570
cases — as well as the number of those afflicted by the
disease, which should give some idea of the breadth of
the tragedy.
In the legislative realm, the report notes a number
of laws that have been adopted as well as the ratification
of various international conventions, in particular with
respect to human rights, the rights of the child, women’s
rights, the protection of the most vulnerable members
of society and the fight to combat corruption.
The report provides irrefutable evidence of
progress in stabilizing the situation of Haiti since
MINUSTAH’s initial deployment, in 2004, We have in
particular acknowledged the report’s call to the Haitian

14-5316917/30

S/PV.7262

The question concerning Haiti

Government to continue strengthening the institutions
tasked with enhancing respect for the rule of law.
We have also noted the Secretary-General’s special
concern about possible backsliding in Haiti’s political
transition as a result of the delay in scheduling elections.
In that regard, I would like to stress that Haiti’s Head of
State and its Government remain faithful to their solemn
commitment, reiterated to the Secretary-General on
the occasion of his recent visit to Haiti in July, to hold
legislative, municipal and local elections within this
calendar year. Such elections are fundamental for the
continuity of the country’s democratic institutions. In
order to implement the El Rancho Accord, agreed in
March 2014 by the executive and legislative branches
along with political parties — in short, by all the
main actors in Haiti’s political life — at the end of the
inter-Haitian dialogue convoked by President Martelly
under the aegis of the Chair of the Episcopal Conference
of Haiti, the Government spared no effort to resolve
pending contentious issues, make up for delays and
assuage tensions among the parties, principally between
the legislative branch and the executive, with the goal
of holding unimpeded, honest, democratic, transparent
and inclusive elections.
Today, however, as we must acknowledge, the
electoral process is at a standstill. The SecretaryGeneral’s report says as much, indicating that opposition
parliamentarians consistently opposed any attempt by
the Senate to vote on the amended electoral law by
repeatedly preventing the required quorum from being
reached. The Haitian Government is well aware that
Haiti is at an important juncture in the consolidation
of stability and democracy” as the Secretary-General
quite rightly stresses, and that the holding of inclusive
elections in 2014 is essential for the continuity of the
Parliament in 2015, for the consolidation of democracy
and the rule of law and to promote socioeconomic
development, which is necessary to improve the living
conditions of the population and achieve enduring
stability.
Conscious of the serious stakes involved, President
Michel Joseph Martelly and Primer Minister Laurent
Lamothe fully share those views. For that reason,
they continue to invest all possible effort to establish
consensus. With the strong support of the Haitian people,
which eagerly awaits the opportunity to participate in
elections that have been deferred for too long, they
are determined to fulfil their solemn commitment by
assuming their full responsibility with respect to the

18/30

11/09/2014

electoral process. They call upon the United Nations,
the Security Council and all Haiti’s partners to support
their efforts to that end, in order to overcome the
remaining hurdles on the road to the elections, whose
first round, initially expected to be held on 26 October,
must, without question, take place this year.
With regard to stabilization and security, the
Government welcomes the operational support that
MINUSTAH’s forces have given the Haitian National
Police and the progress achieved in its professionalization.
On the matter of renewing MINUSTAH’s mandate,
the Government of Haiti shared its views and its own
assessment of the situation with the United Nations
assessment mission to Port-au-Prince during the past
summer. It fully shares the Secretary-General’s analysis
with respect to the indisputable gains achieved along
the priority tracks of the Stabilization Mission, and
the need to consolidate those gains. In the light of its
own assessment of the risks and threats to the country’s
internal and external security, and in full agreement
with the conclusions of the study of the overall stability
of the situation, the Haitian Government agrees with
the recommendation to the Security Council to extend
MINUSTAH’s mandate by one year, until 15 October
2015, with the understanding that this extention should
take place within the framework of a progressive
disengagement of the Mission and the gradual transfer
of its responsibilities to the Haitian national authorities.
Along the same line of reasoning, the Haitian
Government
supports
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendation for a two-step drawdown of
MINUSTAH, which would have a reduced presence on
the ground but would maintain an appropriate military
component that would assist Haitian institutions only
when a situation exceeds their capacity to maintain law
and order. We hope in particular that the reconfigured,
renewed mandate will allow the Mission to ensure a
presence that meets Haiti’s real needs and current
demands. We are convinced that its presence will
continue to provide valuable support to Haitian
institutions, above all in the context of the upcoming
electoral cycle, which, along with this year’s legislative
and municipal process, includes presidential elections
in 2015, as the Secretary-General’s report points out.
In that spirit, the Haitian Government will continue
to lend its full support to the Security Council and the
Secretary-General with a view to developing a plan for
consolidating the achievements of the past 10 years and
for articulating a new vision for MINUSTAH’s scope

14-53169

11/09/2014

The question concerning Haiti

S/PV.7262

of action beyond 2016. The Government also reiterates
its commitment to ensure that national institutions
assume their full role and responsibilities within the
new configuration to be implemented, which, alongside
national institutions, will require consolidation as the
foundation of democracy, the rule of law, security and
sustainable development in Haiti.

has endeavoured to improve numerous spheres, such as
economic growth, food security, good governance and,
in conformity with the Muskoka Initiative, launched by
Canada in the framework of Group of Eight, maternal,
newborn and child health. However, much still
remains to be done to ensure stability and sustainable
development in the country.

We express our gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his report, which will certainly guide the Council’s
work. I would also like to reiterate the determination of
the Haitian Government to continue to collaborate with
the Security Council towards fully achieve the mandate
with which MINUSTAH was tasked.

(spoke in English)

In conclusion, I would also like to reiterate the
gratitude of the Haitian people and their Government
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Honoré for her unwavering commitment to the cause
of peace and to dialogue among all sectors of Haitian
society. President Martelly, Prime Minister Lamothe
and the entire Haitian Government are grateful to all the
Member States that, in the best spirit of international
solidarity and international cooperation, continue to
support the Haitian people in its long march towards
the irreversible process of building the rule of law and a
truly democratic society by their generous contribution
in troops and human, financial, technical and material
resources to MINUSTAH over a decade.
On behalf of the Government, I take this opportunity
to commend the staff of MINUSTAH, which is carrying
out a huge, complex and often difficult task, as well as
the staff of the United Nations working both in New
York and in the field in Haiti.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French):
I would like to take this opportunity to greet and
welcome the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ambassador Honoré, as well as to thank her for
the excellent report (S/2014/617) that she presented to
the Security Council today and for her efforts and those
of the team at the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) in the field.
For decades, Canada has had a unique partnership
with Haiti. Since 2006 Canada has devoted more than
$1.4 billion for development and humanitarian aid.
Those efforts aim to complement and support the steps
taken and the efforts made by our partners, including
multilateral and regional institutions, in Haiti. Canada

Canada is particularly concerned by the continued
delay in holding the senatorial, local and municipal
elections in Haiti. Under the Haitian Constitution,
democratic elections should have taken place three
years ago — in 2011. Holding elections in 2014 is an
essential and necessary step towards maintaining the
legitimacy of State institutions, as well as advancing
and reinforcing democratic stability in Haiti. We call
upon all political actors in the country to move forward
and ensure that credible, fair and inclusive elections
can indeed take place this year.
(spoke in French)
A Government must reflect the will of its people.
In order for the Government of Haiti to reflect that will,
the voice of citizens must be heard. Canada is ready
and willing to support the elections. Canada recently
announced $8.7 million in financing in support of
elections through the United Nations Development
Programme and the National Democratic Institution.
That contribution, added to those of our partners,
will complete the Government of Haiti’s funds for the
organization of the elections. Canada also takes note of
the efforts of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti aimed at providing electoral assistance and
logistical support for the elections, and it is grateful to
MINUSTAH for that.
We wish to underline to importance of reinforcing
the status of Haitian institutions, including their
capacity to play an ever increasing role in the future.
(spoke in English)
Transparency,
accountability,
economic
competitiveness and diversification are essential
to Haiti’s sustainable economic growth. Private
sector development will create jobs and establish a
local economy that will create resilience not only in
communities, but across the country, thereby promoting
stability. Stakeholders must prioritise actions that will
improve the business environment, which in turn can
transform Haiti’s economic potential into concrete

14-5316919/30

S/PV.7262

The question concerning Haiti

socioeconomic benefits for the Haitian people. Canada
welcomes the anti-corruption law that was adopted
in May, and we encourage its full implementation.
Addressing the issue of corruption is essential for Haiti
to modernize the business environment in the country
and facilitate national and foreign investments.
(spoke in French)
Canada welcomes the progress made by the
Government of Haiti, with the support of the
international community, in order to continue to reduce
the number of Haitians that live in camps due to the
earthquake of January 2010. But much more needs to
be done to resolve certain problems that exist in Haiti
regarding individual rights. The general weakness in
the justice sector continues to concern us, in addition
to undermining the protection of individual rights. A
large number of Haitians, up to 70 per cent of the prison
population, according to certain sources, are detained in
horrific conditions during long periods while awaiting
their trial. It is time to tackle that problem. Canada
welcomes the efforts of MINUSTAH in the framework
of judicial reform. International cooperation and the
efforts of Haitian authorities to strengthen institutions
are essential to improve the current situation in an
effective and long-lasting manner.
(spoke in English)
Canada continues to appreciate and support the
important work of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti. For 10 years, MINUSTAH has worked
to improve security conditions and contribute to lasting
stability in the country. It has made considerable
progress. Canada notes MINUSTAH’s forward
planning, including the gradual reduction of the United
Nations footprint in Haiti. It is important that such
decisions be based on the situation on the ground, in
particular the capacity of the Haitian State to deliver
security to its people. We should avoid reduction
scenarios that could jeopardize the results achieved to
date, and take into account the role MINUSTAH should
play in contributing to stability and ensuring security
during significant national events, such as the 2015
presidential elections.
The Haitian National Police (HNP) must also
continue to be strengthened. We commend both
the Government of Haiti and the Mission’s efforts
towards the reform and developments of the HNP, an
organization that has demonstrated increasing capacity
in recent months. Canada is proud to be among the

20/30

11/09/2014

top contributing nations in terms of strengthening the
police in Haiti, and we salute our fellow Member States
with whom we are working in that effort. We urge the
Haitian Government to continue that work and further
build upon it, while prioritizing both the police and an
independent and strengthened judicial sector so that the
Haitian people can rely on an accountable Government
and the rule of law.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that in
these large international forums we must never forget
the Haitian people. The women who walk miles on foot
every day to go to the market of Pétionville; the tuktuk drivers who transport their passengers on the roads
of Cap-Haïtien; the fishermen docked at the island
of Gonâve under the blistering rays of the sun — all
they want is to earn their daily bread in a secure and
propitious environment, as well as to give a chance to
their daughters and sons to have a better future and
greater possibilities. The future of the children depends
on the local economy, democratic governance, stability
and security.
I wish to assure everyone that Canada is determined
to achieve such a future and to maintain its commitment
in regard to Haiti.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I would lik to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this debate. I also thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Sandra
Honoré for her briefing. I reiterate my Government’s
appreciation and respect for her leadership and consistent
support for the consolidation of peace and democracy
in Haiti. I also wish to acknowledge the contribution
of the Permanent Representative of Haiti, Ambassador
Régis, and I am pleased to see the Force Commander
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), Major General Jaborandy, among us.
The latest report of the Secretary General
(S/2014/617), based on the findings of the strategic
assessment mission and his own recent visit to Haiti,
gives us reason for both optimism and caution. The
challenge before us is to balance these two — optimism
and caution — in a way that does not jeopardize the
fulfilment of the aspirations of the Security Council
when it established the peacekeeping operation in Haiti
10 years ago.

14-53169

11/09/2014

The question concerning Haiti

Since the earthquake, Haitian gross domestic
product has been growing at an average of 4 per cent a
year, with impressive gains in areas such as agriculture,
as highlighted by the representative of Nigeria earlier
today. Although significant progress has been made
towards stabilization in the country, Haiti still
deserves careful assistance to successfully overcome
the remaining obstacles on the security and political
fronts in particular. The legacy of MINUSTAH, and
thus of the United Nations in Haiti, depends on a
correct, responsible and informed balance between
the preservation of the immense investment and gains
made in stabilization and institution-building, on the
one hand, and the recognition that the Mission should
not stay in Haiti in perpetuity, on the other.
Brazil wishes to underline the centrality of ensuring
the holding of free, fair and inclusive elections. We
urge Haitian leaders to work together to allow for
the organization of the overdue legislative and local
elections as soon as possible. We expect the political
dialogue to lead, in the near future, to new concrete
commitments and to promote national reconciliation
and the institutional strengthening of all branches of
the Haitian State, thus allowing for the normalization
of democratic life in the country.
But it would be short-sighted for Haitian leaders to
assume that in the absence of their clear commitment
to institutional stability, elections and the consolidation
of democracy, the international community would
be willing to sustain the presence it has had for the
past 10 years through MINUSTAH. Brazil concurs
with the understanding expressed by the SecretaryGeneral that “a conditions-based deepening of the
current consolidation process” (S/2014/617, p.56)
would be viable, responsible and adequate. We support
his recommendation of a two-step drawdown of
MINUSTAH, as it is based on a military assessment
that deemed a force of two battalions and of 2,370
troops to be consistent with the realities on the ground
and on the assessment of the ability of the Government
of Haiti to assume a greater responsibility for security.
The driving forces behind the reduction of
MINUSTAH’s presence in Haiti should be the holding
of elections and the overall Haitian security sector’s
ability to perform, including the Haitian National Police,
not financial considerations or artificial budgetary
ceilings. As per the military evaluation conducted,
we agree that the troop reduction recommended
by the Secretary-General allows for the necessary

S/PV.7262

capability to face upcoming challenges and tensions
that may occur associated with political campaigns and
elections, while avoiding the risk of a security vacuum
due to a premature departure of MINUSTAH. A
further decrease in troop levels should not be presumed
on the basis of today’s realities, as it is contingent on
developments that are still some time ahead of us,
mainly the presidential elections.
Even if the proposed drawdown strategy is adequate,
we must still increase our efforts to ensure that stability
gains secured so far become sustainable. To that end, a
lighter military presence should be accompanied by a
stronger role played by national institutions, especially
the Haitian National Police, the judiciary and the
corrections system. We encourage the Haitian National
Police to benefit from MINUSTAH’s efforts to ensure
a successful handover of responsibility for security
in critical areas and to continue to participate in joint
operations with the Mission.
A successful consolidation strategy leading to longterm stability in Haiti would also involve recognizing
that development assistance, both from the United
Nations system and other actors, should be scaled-up
to at least the same pace as the military disengagement.
Job creation, income generation and investment in
education should be high on the list of all stakeholders.
That process must be guided by the Government’s
priorities and, in an inclusive way, owned by Haitians
themselves.
MINUSTAH should continue to contribute to an
environment of stability through social and economic
progress by keeping its mandated tools to develop quick
impact and community violence reduction projects,
as well as an adequate engineering capability. As
MINUSTAH’s drawdown strategy unfolds, we highlight
the importance of enhancing the Mission’s civilian
component, in particular its ability to coordinate, with
the support of the Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations Development
Programme Resident Coordinator, the activities of the
United Nations system and the United Nations country
team on the ground. In that connection, we stress the
importance of further integrating the activities of the
United Nations family in Haiti with MINUSTAH’s
activities towards promoting the strengthening of the
State institutions directly associated with the core areas
of its mandate, including in the domain of access to
justice and the rule of law.

14-5316921/30

S/PV.7262

The question concerning Haiti

(spoke in French)
Brazil welcomes the initiatives of the Government
of Haiti and MINUSTAH to fight the cholera epidemic.
In that context, the reduction of the number of
people affected by the disease by 82 per cent is very
encouraging. The Haitian Government and the United
Nations are certainly not alone in those efforts. The
tripartite cooperation of Brazil, Cuba and Haiti recently
opened three hospitals intermediary-level hospitals and
a rehabilitation centre in the Port-au-Prince area and
has trained hundreds of community health workers
to support, among others, cholera treatment and
prevention measures.
In conclusion, Brazil renews its commitment to
and long-term solidarity with Haiti, which is reflected,
among other initiatives, in its technical cooperation,
economic assistance and 10 years of dedicated
contributions to MINUSTAH. Haiti must be able to
count on the international community in addressing
complex challenges related to security, stability,
democracy and development. The time is not ripe
for international disengagement. However, we must
redouble our confidence in Haitians’ abilities to meet,
with international support, the challenges in a climate
of dialogue and cooperation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Koncke (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of Friends of
Haiti, which includes Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, France, Guatemala, Peru, the United States
and my own country, Uruguay.
I would like to commend you, Madam President,
for organizing this debate to discuss the recent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2014/617) on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
The Group of Friends welcomes the presence among
us of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré, and wishes to
thank her for her comprehensive briefing and for the
hard work she is doing.
The strengthening of the rule of law and democratic
institutions, establishing a political culture conducive to
democratic stability and improving the socioeconomic
conditions are key elements needed to achieve a greater
and sustainable stability and prosperity in Haiti. In that
regard, the Group of Friends encourages all political

22/30

11/09/2014

actors in Haiti to deepen their dialogue and cooperation
with a view to consolidating their country’s democracy.
The Group reiterates the importance of holding this
year free and fair legislative, municipal and local
elections as an essential and urgent step towards lasting
stability, recovery and development in Haiti. The Group
welcomes the efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to facilitate a climate for dialogue
among all the national actors in order to strengthen
Haitian democratic institutions.
The signing of the E1 Rancho Accord marked
an important milestone in a Haitian-led process and
represented the will of Haitian political stakeholders
to move forward with the planning of elections. When
the Security Council met to discuss Haiti in March (see
S/PV.7147), the Group of Friends encouraged Haiti’s
political leaders to maintain their spirit of cooperation
and to act promptly to fulfil the Accord’s provisions
on amending the 2013 electoral law, establishing the
provisional Electoral Council and establishing an
electoral calendar. It is therefore with great concern that
the Group of Friends notes that, after so many months,
Haiti still does not have an amended electoral law and
that, as a result, the Electoral Council concludes that it
will not be possible to organize elections on 26 October.
The Group of Friends shares the SecretaryGeneral’s view that the holding of inclusive elections in
2014 is essential for the continuity of the Parliament in
2015, for the consolidation of democracy and the rule of
law, and to promote socioeconomic development, which
is necessary to improve people’s living conditions and
achieve lasting stability. The Group calls upon all
Haitian political actors to fulfil their obligations to the
Haitian people, through dialogue and action taken, to
ensure that elections take place within 2014.
The Group of Friends takes note of the SecretaryGeneral’s report and is carefully considering it.
According to the report, the security environment in
Haiti remains relatively stable, although it has seen
increases in homicides and demonstrations triggered
by socioeconomic grievances, along with a steep drop
in kidnappings and other crimes. The Group of Friends
commends the improved response of the Haitian
National Police (HNP) to demonstrations around the
country, while noting that the number of its requests
to MINUSTAH as a second line of response has also
increased.
The Group notes the progress that has been made
in executing MINUSTAH’s 2013-2016 consolidation
14-53169

11/09/2014

The question concerning Haiti

plan, with the goal of enabling the Haitian authorities to
assume full responsibility for their country’s security
as soon as conditions permit. We recommend a gradual
approach to transferring security responsibilities and
emphasize the importance of basing future action on
conditions on the ground. We should avoid decisions
that could jeopardize the results achieved so far and take
into account the role that MINUSTAH should continue
to play in contributing to stability and security during
significant national events such as elections, including
the 2015 presidential elections.
The Group of Friends stresses the importance of the
Government of Haiti’s commitment to strengthening
the rule of law and making further progress in the
judicial and security sectors. In that regard, we would
like to emphasize the fundamental role of the Haitian
National Police in Haiti’s security and stability and the
importance of completing its ongoing strengthening,
professionalization and reform so that it will be in a
condition to assume full responsibility for Haiti’s
security. In that context, the Group of Friends stresses
the importance of building up the HNP’s capacity
outside Port-au-Prince, and ensuring its adherence to
the highest standards of respect for human rights. At
the same time, the Group believes that strengthening
the police alone is not enough to solidify the rule of
law in Haiti. The judicial system needs improvement,
which also includes the urgent necessity of addressing
the serious issues of pre-trial detention and prison
overcrowding and which will require the Government
to provide sufficient budgetary resources and qualified
personnel.
The Group of Friends of Haiti reiterates its
commitment to the zero tolerance policy of the United
Nations on sexual exploitation and abuse, and expects
all United Nations personnel to adhere to the highest
standards of conduct in this area. We urge all actors
involved to shoulder their responsibilities for ensuring
that such cases are prevented, allegations investigated
and those responsible held accountable.
We welcome the significant progress made
during 2014 in resettling people displaced by the 2010
earthquake. However, we are also concerned about
the living conditions in the remaining camps, where
uneven access to water and functioning toilets, along
with malnutrition, particularly regarding the situation
of women and children, are examples of the persistent
humanitarian challenges that Haiti faces.

S/PV.7262

The Group of Friends notes the ongoing work by the
Government of Haiti, MINUSTAH and others to protect
vulnerable groups and urges that all stakeholders focus
intensively on preventing and reducing violent crime,
particularly against women and children, and including
rape and other crimes of sexual violence.
We welcome the great progress made in reducing the
incidence of cholera in Haiti since the initial outbreak.
The ongoing efforts to eliminate the cholera epidemic
are a reminder of the importance of maintaining
cooperation between the international community and
the Government of Haiti in order to meet the Haitian
people’s needs. In that regard, the Group welcomes the
United Nations support for the 10-year National Plan for
the Elimination of Cholera and the work of the Senior
Coordinator for the Cholera Response in Haiti. We also
acknowledge the efforts of the donor community and
call on donors to make good on their pledges without
delay. We commend the Secretary-General’s visit to
Haiti on 14 and 15 July, when, together with Prime
Minister Lamothe, he launched the total sanitation
campaign as a key initiative against cholera. And we
note with appreciation the creation of the High-level
Committee for the Elimination of Cholera, which has
already met twice.
The Group of Friends of Haiti believes that
security, respect for human rights and the rule of law,
and development are interdependent and reinforce
stability. We therefore underscore the importance of
systematically addressing the issues of unemployment,
education and the delivery of basic social services, and
of ensuring the economic and political empowerment
of women. At the same time, we emphasize that there
can be no genuine stability or sustainable development
in Haiti without fair and open elections, strengthened
democratic institutions and a credible democratic
process.
In that context, the Group emphasizes the importance
of promoting the rule of law by strengthening Haitian
institutions and reaffirms M1NUSTAH’s responsibility
for supporting the Haitian State by promoting improved
governance structures, the extension of State authority
and the promotion and protection of human rights, in
accordance with its mandate. In that regard, the Group
emphasizes how much MINUSTAH’s quick-impact
projects contribute by strengthening the rule of law
and good governance, mitigating cholera, improving
security in vulnerable neighbourhoods with better

14-5316923/30

S/PV.7262

The question concerning Haiti

11/09/2014

lighting, public infrastructure, civic education, and
training civil society representatives.

avoid actions that could jeopardize the proper conduct
of elections.

Finally, the Group of Friends reaffirms its solidarity
with and commitment to the people and Government
of Haiti in their pursuit of stability, reconstruction,
recovery, social and economic development and
democratic consolidation. We recognize MINUSTAH’s
important role in ensuring stability and security in Haiti,
and we support the women and men of M1NUSTAH
and acknowledge their dedication and tireless efforts in
support of recovery and stability in Haiti.

The report of the Secretary-General and the
recent meeting with troop-contributing countries
(see S/PV.7261) show that operational support for
the MINUSTAH forces is still needed. It should be
remembered that we are in the Mission’s consolidation
phase. The process of reconfiguration and restructuring
should start only once that phase is complete. We must
act carefully on the basis of the conditions on the ground
and in close consultation with the Government of Haiti,
as well as with the troop-contributing countries.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Bolaños Pérez (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): We would like to thank Ms. Sandra Honoré
for her introduction of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2014/617) and the Permanent Representative of Haiti
for his valuable comments.
Some months ago, Guatemala was pleased to hear
the announcement of the consensus forged in Haiti with
the signing of the El Rancho Accord, which we believe
showed how the country’s political culture had evolved.
We therefore regret the fact that the Accord has yet to be
implemented, as well as the existence of an atmosphere
of mistrust that has not only hindered the holding of
parliamentary elections for 2015 but is also delaying the
reconstruction process. We urge the country’s political
leaders to resume their dialogue and overcome this new
impasse. Holding inclusive elections in 2014, as the
Constitution requires, is crucial to the consolidation of
democracy and the rule of law and to promoting the
socioeconomic development needed to improve the
people’s living conditions and achieve lasting stability.
In that regard, Guatemala fully shares the SecretaryGeneral’s concerns, outlined in paragraph 62 of his
report, about the consequences of further delays in
holding elections.
If the hoped-for electoral process is to succeed,
security and confidence must rule, something that
can be achieved only with a significant and deterrent
military and police presence. Experience has shown that
the United Nations must maintain an adequate presence
in the country, which is why we are carefully mulling
over the Secretary-General’s recent proposal to reduce
the Mission’s military component by half. For now, we
are viewing the proposal with some scepticism, since
we continue to believe that for the time being we should

24/30

With regard to strengthening security across the
country, we note the progress in the professionalization
of the Haitian National Police. In fact, the understanding
has always been that any significant reduction of the
military component of MINUSTAH should not only
be undertaken steadily, gradually and responsibly,
but must also be linked with the necessary capacitybuilding and increased strength of the Haitian National
Police. That is not a matter of quantity but due to the
fact that the professionalism of the police is linked to
progress in the judicial and correctional fields required
for strengthening the rule of law in order to achieve a
police force that is also of quality.
In short, we clearly understand that without the
strong political will of the leaders and all the people
of Haiti to achieve a democratic security, no military
presence or international pressure can overcome the
impasse facing the country. At the same time, it is
also true that without the support of the international
community, the people of Haiti may not by themselves
achieve the stability for which the Mission was
established.
In conclusion, I would like to acknowledge
Ms. Sandra Honoré for her work as the head of the
MINUSTAH at a time marked by challenges and
difficulties. She has carried out outstanding work, as she
has showed us once again today with the presentation
of the report of the Secretary-General. Guatemala will
continue to support her leadership.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Madam President, and all
Security Council members for the dedication and for
having chosen to convene this debate on the situation

14-53169

11/09/2014

The question concerning Haiti

in Haiti. We also thank Special Representative Sandra
Honoré for her detailed briefing to the Security Council
and her tireless commitment, to which many of us have
borne witness in the field itself. We also thank you,
Madam President, for your part in the invitation of
the Secretary-General, who recently visited us in the
region.
Colombia associates itself with the statement made
by the Ambassador of Uruguay on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Haiti.
Security, stability and achieving more dignified
conditions for the people of Haiti, as well as strengthening
the institutional capacities of its democracy, must
remain the priorities of the international community’s
commitment to Haiti. It is the only country on our
American continent that still has a United Nations
stabilization mission, as its Permanent Representative
Ambassador Régis, whom I welcome, has just recalled.
We therefore share the concern of the Secretary-General
about the impasse in adopting the electoral law in the
Senate and the holding of the long-awaited legislative,
municipal and local elections elections in October, as
was planned.
Colombia joins its voice to the urgent call of all
participants to the Haitian political actors to discharge
their duty towards their citizens, who elect them, and to
ensure stronger democracy in Haiti.
As has been said, it is clear that there has been
progress in areas such as ensuring security, reducing
violence and relocating many displaced persons to
camps. There has also been clear progress in increased
economic growth and a positive gross domestic
product, as well as efforts to attract foreign investment
and to develop agriculture. We have witnessed that in
person on the ground. However, there are still many
challenges. With regard to an accelerated reduction of
MINUSTAH, which could also mean setbacks in the
achievements made, in particular the necessary support
for the holding of elections to reaffirm the democratic
vision of Haiti that we have historically seen in our
region, we are concerned that the decision must not
be made solely on the basis of the conditions on the
ground, but also taking into account budgetary factors.
The upcoming elections on 14 October and the
presidential elections of 2015 represents an enormous
challenge that requires the due support and ongoing
backing of the international community and of
MINUSTAH and its military and police components,

S/PV.7262

in which Colombia actively participates. We should not
lose sight of the fact that a reduction in MINUSTAH is
not limited solely to troop numbers — for example, to
one or two contingents. On the contrary, it would affect
many more areas of the mission, which undertakes
invaluable efforts in areas such as institution-building,
decentralization, and disaster mitigation and response
in a country that we have seen to be extremely
vulnerable to such disasters, including technical
electoral assistance and stronger support for the Haitian
National Police.
We therefore raise a voice of caution against
possible further reductions in MINUSTAH. Such a
decision should always be linked to strengthening the
conditions to enable the Haitian people to restore full
democratic normality, as well as stronger and improved
economic and social conditions. That is ultimately what
the international community seeks.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. MayrHarting.
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting: In the interests of time,
I would refer representatives to the written version of
my statement. I will deliver a shortened version.
(spoke in French)
I have the honour to take the floor on behalf the
European Union, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2014/617) and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for her
briefing. I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Haiti for his presentation.
The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland
and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and
Armenia, align themselves with this statement.
The strengthening of democratic gains is essential to
ensuring stability and to meeting the huge socioeconomic
and development challenges facing the vast majority of
the Haitian society. The European Union is determined
to act in line with the other partners to ensure that that
progress remains irreversible. For the past few months,
the European Union has pursued its contacts with the
various institutional actors to promote dialogue and to
find the necessary compromises to meet the electoral
timeline that was determioned by the decree signed
by President Martelly on 14 July. It is therefore with

14-5316925/30

S/PV.7262

The question concerning Haiti

regret and concern that we see continuing difficulties
in the implementation of the El Rancho Accord. That
impasse makes it unlikely that the elections can take
place before the end of the year on the basis of a revised
electoral law.
The European Union believes that respect for
the time frame provided for by the Constitution and
the need to ensure the functioning of democratic
institutions should be a goal shared by all the political
forces in Haiti. Given the real risk of a legislative and
judicial vacuum from January 2015, the European
Union calls for a permanent solution to ensure the
continuity of the legislative mechanisms that would
enjoy the broadest possible consensus among the
relevant political and institutional actors. The dispatch
of an election observer mission to Haiti is not planned.
However, in addition to the contribution of €5 million
to the electoral fund managed by the United Nations
Development Programme, the European Union could
consider sending an electoral expert group, as was done
during the 2011 elections.
The European Union welcomes the continuing
decrease in the number of displaced persons still
living in camps. Still, such families continue to live
in deplorable conditions. It is therefore crucial for the
Government of Haiti to redouble its efforts to ensure
adequate living conditions and the fundamental rights
of those affected. Cognizant of the persistent needs,
the European Union plans to continue its humanitarian
commitment in 2015.
The European Union has just signed a planning
instrument with the Government of Haiti for the period
2014 to 2020, with an allocation of €420 million.
That demonstrates the European Union’s continued
commitment to supporting the Government in
its strategy for the country’s development and
socioeconomic recovery.
The European Union also welcomes the significant
drop in the number of cholera cases recorded between
2013 and 2014, as noted in the Secretary-General’s
report. A number of sectors covered by European
assistance for the period 2014 to 2020, such as urban
renewal, education and support for structural reforms
to State administration, could well contribute to the
United Nations plan for the eradication of cholera. The
European Union remains ready to explore concrete
possibilities for cooperation with the relevant United
Nations agencies.

26/30

11/09/2014

We take note of the Secretary-General’s
recommendations envisaging a substantial reduction
in the military component of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) by 2015,
with an additional decrease following the presidential
elections. Within the context of an overall improvement
in the security situation, we also note a 30 per cent
rise in demonstrations with a socioeconomic cast and
a two-fold increase in the number of demonstrations
accompanied by violence, while the number of
demonstrations of a political nature has remained
stable. That leads to the conclusion that, rather than a
polarization of the political sphere, there continue to be
grave social and economic inequalities that represent
a real threat to Haiti’s stability and security. In that
regard, the European Union would like to stress the
importance of continuing to work with determination
on the root causes that underlie those inequalities.
For its part, the European Union intends to pursue a
process of consideration and consultation with the Club
of Madrid aimed at a vast number of institutional and
civil society actors.
In conclusion, allow me to express the appreciation
of the European Union for MINUSTAH’s important
contribution, 10 years on, to stabilizing the security
situation and consolidating democracy and the rule of
law in Haiti. The European Union remains determined
to support the Haitian authorities, the United Nations
and the international community in order to ensure a
better future for all of Haiti’s people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the President for convening this debate. I would
like to begin by thanking Ambassador Sandra Honoré,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
her presentation of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2014/617), as well as for her work as Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
In addition, I would like to acknowledge the presence
of the Permanent Representative of Haiti to the United
Nations.
Spain is a strong ally of Haiti, as evidenced by the
fact that, simply put, Haiti is far and away the biggest
recipient of Spain’s official development assistance. I
think that fact speaks for the warm feelings of sympathy
and regard that the Spanish people feel for Haiti.

14-53169

11/09/2014

The question concerning Haiti

While I align myself with the statement just made
by the observer of the European Union, I would like
to add some remarks in my national capacity with
respect to a number of issues that concern the political,
security and humanitarian situation. I will then add
some thoughts on the future of MINUSTAH.
Spain shares the concern with regard to the political
situaution expressed by the Secretary-General in his
report. The current political impasse in Haiti could
jeopardize the elections planned for the end of this year.
Spain therefore believes that the only possible option is
a dialogue among the parties.
With regard to the security situation, we note
with satisfaction that there was progress between
2013 and 2014, due in no small part to institutional
strengthening of the Haitian National Police and the
role of MINUSTAH. However, we need to do more. We
need to work harder. We share the Secretary-General’s
suggestion, as put forth in his report, that there needs
to be a greater commitment by the Haitian Government
for an expansion of the Haitian police force.
On the humanitarian front, I would like to
acknowledge and greatly appreciates the efforts of
MINUSTAH. We also commend the efforts carried out
by the entire international community to effectively
curb the tragic cholera epidemic.
Spain supports the consideration under way for
some time now by the Secretary-General on the future
of MINUSTAH. However, in the current political
context, which has been well explored in today’s
meeting, Spain shares the Secretary-General’s analysis
in the sense that the timeline for a reconfiguration
of the components of the Mission should take into
account the political and security situation, and that it
should have greater flexibility based on both short- and
medium-term analysis of the situation. I would like to
underscore the word flexibilitly.
On the other hand, we believe that MINUSTAH’s
role will be fundamental in guaranteeing the normal
development of a secure and transparent electoral
process, as well as the establishment of a new
Administration. Therefore, Spain welcomes the
recommendation to extend the Mission’s mandate
by one more year, until October 2015, on the terms
proposed by the Secretary-General.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.

S/PV.7262

Mr. Lasso Menzoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like, at the outset, to recognize the presence
of Ms. Sandra Honoré, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I would
also like to express my gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral for his report on MINUSTAH (S/2014/617).
My country assigns the utmost priority to the
situation in Haiti and has, over the years, offered all its
available support to help that brother country overcome
adversity, both through bilateral channels as well as
multilateral ones such as MINUSTAH, for example,
without mentioning the assistance that has been
provided by the Union of South American Nations.
The situation in Haiti is a priority for all of Latin
America. Haiti’s recovery constitutes a unifying
element and grounds for Latin American solidarity. In
that context, it is understandable that our region should
contribute more than 75 per cent of MINUSTAH’s
military contingents.
The development of Latin America in recent
years, at every level, has allowed the Heads of State
and Government of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States to proclaim the region of Latin
America a zone of peace. In that sense, I would like
to express my country’s hope that we will one day be
able to refer to MINUSTAH as the last peacekeeping
operation that was established in the zone of peace
known as Latin America. To that end, it is is essential
to preserve its successful management and proper
administration in the present so as to ensure the success
of its final phase.
In this context, the decisions that are carried out
around MINUSTAH with a view to its legacy should
ensure the sustainability of the progress achieved,
which will require a strategy of gradual, progressive
and responsible withdrawal that responds to the
changing conditions on the ground and not just to
budgetary factors. Considerations made on the basis
of information not gathered from the situation on the
ground could have undesirable consequences for Haiti
and the United Nations.
More specifically, my delegation believes that
the assessment of conditions on the ground of a
multidimensional mission like MINUSTAH must take
into consideration, in addition to the humanitarian
and security situation, issues that are critical to the
future stability of Haiti, such as the development of

14-5316927/30

S/PV.7262

The question concerning Haiti

11/09/2014

the capacities of the Haitian National Police and to the
electoral processes of 2014 and 2015.

advance the restoration of stability and harmony in the
country.

In this context, while recognizing and appreciating
the work of the strategic assessment mission to
Haiti, my delegation considers it relevant to recall
the importance of maintaining the limits originally
proposed and contained in the strategic plan 2013-2016,
unless field data allow us to act differently. However,
we are concerned that the Security Council could
decide to accelerate the consolidation of MINUSTAH
while uncertainty persists about the electoral process
in 2014 and the necessary amendments to the electoral
law, as reported by the head of MINUSTAH. We are
also concerned by talk of a speedy consolidation in
circumstances in which we still have a long way to go
to reach the recommended minimum number of police
personnel, as stated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral.

In his most recent report, the Secretary-General
indicates that “Haiti is at an important juncture in the
consolidation of stability and democracy” (S/2014/617,
para. 68), but warns us most importantly that major
challenges remain in the economic, social and political
fields, where deep differences continue to hinder
the necessary stability in that country. Against this
background, Mexico hopes that the commitment of and
political dialogue among the relevant actors will create
an opportunity to successfully unblock the pending
elections that will facilitate a peaceful transition and
the normalization of democratic life in Haiti. That
view has been expressed by most speakers today. We
appreciate the resolve of the Haitian Government to
advance its democratic stability. The creation of the
Electoral Council and the enactment of measures to
amend the electoral law are decisive steps in the right
direction.

In light of the foregoing, we believe that the
decision or decisions to be made by the Security
Council on strengthening MINUSTAH must also, as
always in such cases, be taken with a sense of caution,
as the information available continues to be the cause
of some troubling uncertainty and prevents us from
forming a clear picture of the feasibility of another year
of consolidation of MINUSTAH.
Finally, I wish to pay due tribute to the men and
women of MINUSTAH, whose selfless work deserves
our ongoing appreciation and gratitude.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. Montaño (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the delegation of the United States for convening this
debate and Ms. Sandra Honoré for introducing the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/617) to us
today.
My country is pleased to note that the situation
in Haiti shows signs of progress in security, the
strengthening of the rule of law and the training of
the National Police. It is clear that these gains could
not have been made without the continued presence
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and the support of the United Nations
system and others international organizations, in
cooperation with the Haitian Government. Thanks to
the intrinsic link among development, security and
human rights as the cornerstones of the mandate of the
Mission, happily we have been able to take measures to
28/30

In addition to these challenges, my delegation is
concerned about the cholera epidemic, which, although
it seems to be in retreat, remains a challenge to the
future of Haiti and to the coordination of the efforts of
the international community. According to the Haitian
Ministry of Health, as of 5 August the epidemic had
claimed the lives of 8,000 people and infected more
than 800,000. We must not lower our guard. In that
regard, the Government of Mexico has followed the
situation very closely and is cooperating with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Mexico reiterates its commitment to continuing
to promote actions in priority areas for Haitian
development, such as agriculture, health, socioeconomic
development, the environment, and education areas.
Some days ago, we welcomed 100 young Haitians who,
in the framework of the 300 Scholarships for Haiti
programme, began their studies in various Mexican
institutions of higher education. This cooperative
venture will contribute to the training of Haitian
human capital for the benefit of the development of that
country.
Another issue that continually arises in these
discussions is defining the presence of MINUSTAH
in Haiti. We support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General for a reconfiguration of the
Mission, which must be gradual and based on the
premise of the overall stability, safety, training and
increasing capacities of the Haitian National Police.
14-53169

11/09/2014

The question concerning Haiti

This strategy will allow us to continue to strengthen
and professionalize the police, and open the possibility
of supporting the Haitian Government with a rapidreaction force when an emergency exceeds the capacity
of the national authorities.
Mexico agrees with the Secretary-General that
the drawdown of MINUSTAH must be progressive but
prudent, and based on a transition plan coordinated
between the Mission, the States Members of the United
Nations and the Haitian Government. History has
clearly shown us how on some ocassions our timetables
have not always been the most optimal. We should be
prepared to make the adjustments that are necessary.
Our delegation believes that an abrupt withdrawl of the
Mission could lead to the return of political instability,
with untold consequences. It is essential to consolidate
the progress made without undermining security.
In conclusion, I should like to pay tribute to the
men and women deployed in MINUSTAH, who contiue
to do outstanding work to establish the foundation for a
prosperous and peaceful Haiti.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra Velásquez (Peru) (spoke in
Spanish): I should like to commend the initiative of
the presidency of the Security Council to convene this
debate on the situation in Haiti. I am also pleased to
welcome the presence of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré. I
am grateful to her for her briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Haiti (S/2014/617).
My delegation associates itself with the statement
by the delegation of Uruguay on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti, especially with regard to recognition
of the important work accomplished the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
We believe that the presence of MINUSTAH in
Haiti continues to be essential to provide the Haitian
authorities the security and support needed to facilitate
the process of democratic consolidation in the country.
Peru is committed to achieving and consolidating
security, stability and sustainable development and
to strengthening institutions in Haiti. That is why my
country has actively participated in MINUSTAH since
2004, with a military contingent comprised of 372
soldiers, including female staff in the field as well as
military officers among Mission headquarters staff.

S/PV.7262

According to the report of the Secretary-General,
the situation in Haiti has not changed substantially since
last March. We see that mainly in the political aspect,
an area in which we lament the lack of concrete progress
in holding the long-delayed legislative, municipal and
local elections. We are concerned that the elections will
not be held as scheduled on 26 October, as this further
delay could lead to a climate of political instability and
lack of governance in Haiti. My delegation therefore
reiterates its call to all Haitian political forces to achieve
the necessary agreements to allow the holding of the
elections, which represent an important milestone in
the process of democratic consolidation in Haiti, which
also includes the presidential elections scheduled for
2015 and an orderly handover 2016.
While the security situation in Haiti remains stable
thanks to the crucial work of MINUSTAH, there has
been an increase in protests, mostly caused by political
tensions, socioeconomic problems and a lack of basic
services. That serves to remind us that the cooperation
of the United Nations system with Haiti should be
comprehensive.
While I reiterate our appreciation for the work of
the military component of MINUSTAH in ensuring
stability and security in Haiti, I also wish to reiterate
our support for the MINUSTAH consolidation plan for
the period 2013 to 2016, by which it was established
that decisions on the future of the Mission would be
taken on the basis of the conditions on the ground — an
approach that has been incorporated in the report of the
Secretary-General. Although my delegation welcomes
the progress made by Haiti in implementing the
five-year development plan for the Haitian National
Police, the report of the Secretary-General notes that
the institution does not yet have the capacity needed to
maintain public order and the safety of its population
throughout the country’s entire territory. It must
therefore rely on MINUSTAH’s support.
In that regard, we believe that accelerating the
process of reducing the number of MINUSTAH
uniformed personnel could pose a risk in the
consolidation of internal security and to the stability
and sustainability of the democratic process in Haiti.
For Peru, a possible reduction in the military component
should be done gradually and responsibly in order to
ensure the sustainability of the progress made.
My delegation is aware of the growing challenges
facing the Organization in its efforts to maintain

14-5316929/30

S/PV.7262

The question concerning Haiti

international peace and security. However, we believe
that when the time comes to renew the mandate of a
peacekeeping mission, those needs should not take
precedence over the situation on the ground.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that the
important achievements of MINUSTAH to date
should not lead to the false impression that the task is
completed, or even close to it. Experience has taught
us the serious consequences suffered in the past when
the Organization decided to withdraw its presence from
the ground before it should have. My country therefore
hopes that MINUSTAH will be able to conclude the
positive work it has been doing in Haiti successfully
and without undue haste.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Honoré
to respond to the comments made.
Ms. Honoré: I would like contributors to rest assured
that I have taken careful note of their observations, as
well as those made by Council members, other Member
States, including Haiti, and the multilateral organization.
Those observations and recommendations, based on
the mandate entrusted by the Council to the Mission
to support security and stabilization in Haiti have

30/30

11/09/2014

focused on the Mission’s core functions of support for
the Haitian National Police, the strengthening of the
rule of law and the promotion of human rights, and
increased electoral management capacity. I have also
taken note of the Council’s expectations of the Mission
with respect to important governance issues, such as
elections and institution-building.
On behalf of the Mission’s staff — military, police,
civilians, both international and Haitian, and United
Nations Volunteers — I thank everyone for the many
expressions of support for the Mission’s efforts. We
look forward to continued service in the interests of the
people of Haiti, in collaboration with the Government,
its international partners and the United Nations
country team, on the basis of the mandate of the
Security Council.
The President: I thank Ms. Honoré for her
clarifications.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

14-53169
