UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1999/27
3 September 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 4042nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 3 September 1999 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in East Timor", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the successful popular consultation of
the East Timorese people on 30 August 1999 and the letter from the
Secretary-General to the President of the Council of 3 September 1999
(S/1999/944) announcing the ballot result. The Council expresses its
support for the courage of those who turned out in record numbers to
express their views. It regards the popular consultation as an accurate
reflection of the views of the East Timorese people.
"The Security Council pays tribute to the extraordinary work of the
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General. It also commends the
courage and dedication of the Special Representative for the East Timor
popular consultation and of the staff of the United Nations Mission in East
Timor (UNAMET) in organizing and conducting the popular consultation in
extremely difficult conditions.
"The Security Council calls on all parties, both inside and outside
East Timor, to respect the result of the popular consultation. The Council
urges the East Timorese people to work together to implement their decision
as freely and democratically expressed in the ballot and to cooperate in
the building of peace and prosperity in the territory. The Security
Council now looks to the Indonesian Government to take the necessary
constitutional steps to implement the result of the ballot, in accordance
with the Agreements of 5 May 1999 (S/1999/513, annexes I-III).
"The Security Council recognizes that the Agreements of 5 May 1999
which led to the popular consultation of the East Timorese people would not
have been possible without the timely initiative of the Government of
Indonesia and the constructive attitude of the Government of Portugal. It
commends the sustained efforts of the Governments of Indonesia and
Portugal, through the good offices of the Secretary-General, to find a
just, comprehensive and internationally acceptable solution to the question

99-25506 (E)

030999

/...

S/PRST/1999/27
English
Page 2

of East Timor, and expresses its appreciation to the Government of
Indonesia for its cooperation with the United Nations in the process.
"The Security Council condemns the violence in East Timor which both
preceded and followed the ballot of 30 August 1999. It expresses its
condolences to the families of United Nations local staff and others so
tragically killed. It underlines the need for the result to be implemented
in an atmosphere of peace and security without further violence and
intimidation. In accordance with its responsibility for maintaining peace
and security under the Agreements of 5 May 1999, it is for the Government
of Indonesia to take steps to prevent further violence. It also looks to
the Government of Indonesia to guarantee the security of UNAMET personnel
and premises. The Council is ready to consider sympathetically any
proposal from the Secretary-General to ensure the peaceful implementation
of the popular consultation process.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to report as soon
as possible on the implementation of the ballot result, including
recommendations on the mandate, size and structure of the United Nations
presence in East Timor in the implementation phase (Phase III).
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
