S/PV.7727

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7727th meeting

Wednesday, 29 June 2016, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Bessho
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. De la Calle García
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2016/498)
Letter dated 20 June 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/550)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-20007 (E)
*1620007*

The situation in Mali

S/PV.7727

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

Adoption of the agenda

The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2295 (2016).

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.

Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2016/498)
Letter dated 20 June 2016 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/550)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Mali to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I warmly welcome His
Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, International Cooperation and African
Integration of Mali, who is joining today’s meeting via
video-teleconference from Bamako.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2016/576, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the following countries: Angola, Egypt,
France, Japan, Malaysia, Senegal, Spain, Ukraine, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/498, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali. I wish also
to draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2016/550, which contains a letter dated 20 June 2016
from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain
2/9

29/06/2016

Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to welcome Minister Dioup. I reiterate
that Egypt stands ready to cooperate with Council
members to provide assistance and support to the
people of Mali so as to overcome the current challenges
at this critical juncture of Mali’s history. We will spare
no effort to strengthen regional and international
cooperation so as to confront the threats that are facing
the people of Mali.
Resolution 2295 (2016), which we have just
adopted and of which Egypt is proud to be a sponsor,
takes into consideration the critical situation on the
ground and the emerging and unique challenges
that are facing the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
Unfortunately, MINUSMA has become one of the most
dangerous operations on the ground. The resolution
contains numerous elements that take into consideration
the situation on the ground without undermining the
necessary requirements of peace operations according
to agreed standards.
The resolution gives MINUSMA a balanced
mandate in line with current challenges. It strengthens
the capacities of Blue Helmets so as to enable them
to better protect the Mission, fully discharge their
mandate, including the protection of civilians, and
provide the necessary assistance and support to
the Malian Government and other parties so as to
implement the provisions of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation.
I commend the French delegation’s efforts aimed at
reaching a consensus-based agreement and resolution,
in the light of the shared objectives of our delegations.
Indeed, the French delegation was able to close certain
gaps in terms of fulfilling those objectives.
In conclusion, Egypt would once again like to stress
the need to preserve our relationships with our partners
in Mali in order to provide them with the international,
16-20007

29/06/2016

The situation in Mali

regional and bilateral support they require. We believe
that stability in Mali is the cornerstone of peace,
well-being and prosperity in the Sahel region, whose
proximity to North and West Africa directly links it to
the stability of the African continent in general.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation voted in favour
of resolution 2295 (2016), given the importance of
maintaining unanimous Security Council support for the
peace process in Mali and the actions of peacekeepers
in the country. In so doing, we have taken into account
the aspirations of the Government of Mali, which is
seeking to accelerate the stabilization of the country’s
northern territories. We remain concerned, however,
that peacekeepers there are risking their lives as they
have become targets for terrorists. We express our
deepest condolences to the Governments of countries
whose nationals have died in fulfilling their duties
in service to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
At the same time, in the course of negotiating
the text of the resolution, some delegations tried to
take advantage of the situation by imposing certain
ambiguous language into the MINUSMA mandate.
We feel it necessary to express our concern about the
vague references in the text to the level of asymmetric
threats that would justify the use of force. We will
leave the burden of responsibility for that imposition
to the conscience of the informal coordinators of the
Mali dossier, who once again have abused their position
and demonstratively disregarded the views of their
colleagues.
Our position is that the relative flexibility that has
been given to MINUSMA — and the possibility of the
use of force — means that peacekeepers still have to
act on the basis of peacekeeping principles. The use of
force should only be considered if a serious threat has
been assessed. Erroneous strikes against civilians carry
additional risks and could lead to threats to the Blue
Helmets themselves, thereby endangering the peace
process as a whole.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Uruguay
voted in favour of resolution 2295 (2016) to renew
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
convinced of the importance of ensuring the continuity
of the crucial work the peacekeeping operation is doing
on Mali. It is clear that we have to work to improve the

S/PV.7727

security conditions of the Mission, since the security of
the peacekeeping personnel affects the effectiveness of
the Mission in fulfilling its mandate, in force generation
and in its task of protecting civilians.
MINUSMA is the peacekeeping operations
that has had the sad record of the largest number of
peacekeepers to have lost their lives as a result of direct
attacks. Given that scenario, there can be no doubt
that it must be a priority to improve the security of the
personnel deployed in MINUSMA, not only in order
to prevent further losses, but also for the Mission to be
able to better fulfil its mandate.
The United Nations peacekeeping personnel is
being deployed in increasingly complex situations. The
use of terrorist tactics, also known as asymmetrical
tactics, represent serious threats to the safety of
civilians — and of peacekeepers, giving rise to the
need for additional tools to allow them to effectively
protect civilians. Now, within the need to adapt to the
terrorist threat, for Uruguay, peacekeeping operations,
owing to their composition and character, are not suited
to engage in military counter-terrorism operations. In
the cases where asymmetrical threats are present in
the operational environment peacekeeping operations
must of course adopt security measures, in particular to
protect United Nations personnel and civilians.
Through today’s resolution, the Security Council
has this year allowed MINUSMA to adopt a more
proactive and firmer posture in carrying out its
mandate. Sub-paragraph (d) of paragraph 19, on
countering asymmetrical attacks in active defence
of MINUSMA’s mandate, calls for engaging direct
operations pursuant to serious and credible threats. In
the opinion of my delegation, the proactive nature of a
peacekeeping operation should not lead to preventive
actions or attacks when it comes to fighting terrorism
because that would be changing the nature and meaning
of what a peacekeeping operation actually is.
I would very briefly like to quote the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations,
“the Panel believes that United Nations troops should
not undertake military counter-terrorism operations”
(S/2015/446, summary). The report continues,
“[w]here a parallel force is engaged in offensive
combat operations it is important for United
Nations peacekeeping operations to maintain a
clear division of labour and distinction of roles”
(ibid.).

16-200073/9

S/PV.7727

The situation in Mali

Likewise, the Secretary-General’s report on the
implementation of the recommendations of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations states,
“[a]s the Panel rightly recognizes, United Nations
peace operations are not the appropriate tool for
military counter-terrorism operations” (S/2015/682,
para. 15).
Even though Uruguay voted in favour of resolution
2295 (2016), it would like to state that we do not feel
it is appropriate to mandate MINUSMA, or any other
peacekeeping operation, to carry out military counterterrorist activities or to fight asymmetrical threats.
Finally, Uruguay wishes to point out that the
type of mandate adopted in today’s resolution is of an
extraordinary nature, given the very particular situation
that MINUSMA is facing on the ground. The solution
it provides does not mean that it can be transferred to
other peacekeeping operations.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would like
to start by expressing the condolences of the Republic
of Senegal to Turkey following the terrorist attack that
struck that brotherly country yesterday.
Senegal would also like to commend the efforts of
the penholder of resolution 2295 (2016). We welcome
and thank Foreign Minister Abdoulaye Diop’s for
participating in today’s meeting.
Senegal co-sponsored and voted in favour of
the resolution, as we are convinced that through it
the Security Council is giving the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) a much more robust and effective
mandate, in line with the wish that was clearly expressed
by the States members of the Economic Community
of West African States at the summit meeting held in
Dakar on 4 June 2016. The Council gives MINUSMA
the means to provide all necessary support to the
Government of Mali in its efforts to re-establish its
sovereignty throughout its territory and also in its
efforts to deal with the asymmetric threats the country
is facing. That is why my Government would like to
thank all Council members for their cooperation, which
has made it possible to produce this resolution. Senegal
would also like to take this opportunity to reaffirm
its full support for Mali’s territorial integrity and
sovereignty over its entire territory.
Senegal would also like to express its full support for
the efforts of the Armed Forces of Mali to re-establish
4/9

29/06/2016

the country’s sovereignty over its entire territory
and combat the terrorist groups that pose a threat to
all countries in the region. We therefore welcome the
efforts of the Malian Government to implement the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, and
take this opportunity to call on the parties to be more
committed to the implementation of the agreement,
particularly by providing the necessary information on
cantonment and joint patrols.
Senegal remains committed and will spare no effort,
as it has done until now, making every contribution
to the effort to restore security and stability to this
country, which is our neighbour, brethren and friend.
That explains the additional effort provided by my
country through the redeployment of the quick reaction
force. I take this opportunity to once again call on the
Security Council and the international community as a
whole to spare no effort in continuing to guarantee its
full support to Mali, which is in need of that support
in this particularly critical period, during which it is
coping with extremely serious threats that imperil not
only Mali but the entire region and the world.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2295 (2016). I would
like to thank France for taking the lead in preparing
this resolution. Japan is pleased to have cosponsored
the resolution. One year has passed since the signing
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali. Japan commends all the Malian signatories, who
remain committed to implementing the agreement. We
must not lose momentum. In that regard, it is crucial for
all Malian parties to accelerate the implementation of
the agreement with renewed determination, so as not to
allow spoilers to jeopardize the peace process.
Together with international partners, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) continues to support
Mali in that process. As a bilateral partner, Japan also
provides assistance to Mali to build the capacities of
its security sector and to spread the dividends of peace
throughout the entire population. Above all, allow
me to underscore the fact that the principal actors
in the implementation of the peace agreement are
the Malians themselves. Two weeks ago, the Prime
Minister of Mali, His Excellency Mr. Modibo Keita,
reaffirmed before the Council that his Government was
determined to expedite the successful implementation
of the agreement (see S/PV.7719). Japan looks forward
to the strong leadership of the Government of Mali.
16-20007

29/06/2016

The situation in Mali

S/PV.7727

Finally, Japan pays tribute to MINUSMA personnel,
who work every day in severe security conditions. I would
like to express my sincere condolences to those who
have lost their lives in the line of duty. Resolution 2295
(2016) increases the authorized number of MINUSMA
troops by 20 per cent and clarifies its mandate to ensure
the security of personnel. Japan strongly hopes that
these measures will bring tangible results in improving
the mission’s security and its capacity to implement its
mandate on the ground. Japan reiterates its full support
for MINUSMA and for the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif.

The Security Council took an important step today
by reconciling the current MINUSMA mandate with its
security environment and by calling on the SecretaryGeneral and Member States to urgently give MINUSMA
the capabilities it needs to enable the Mission’s more
mobile, proactive and robust posture in pursuit of its
mandate. The resolution emphasizes that MINUSMA
must anticipate, deter and counter threats, including
asymmetric threats, to protect civilians and United
Nations personnel. This means that MINUSMA must
take robust and active steps, including direct operations
if necessary, against serious and credible threats.

Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
would like to begin by expressing the United States’
deepest condolences to the victims and the families of
those killed in the heinous terrorist attack at Istanbul’s
international airport yesterday. We remain steadfast in
our support for Turkey and all of our friends and allies
as we continue to confront the scourge and threat of
terrorism. The United States welcomes the Security
Council’s unanimous vote today to extend the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) for an additional year.
This decision comes at a critical time in Mali’s history
and for the future of United Nations peacekeeping.

When MINUSMA is attacked or threatened as it
carries out its mandate, MINUSMA is expected to act,
and we are expected to ensure that MINUSMA has the
ability to do so effectively. This is not ambiguous, as
some have suggested; it is rational, and it is necessary
when a mission is deployed in this kind of environment.
It is a critical step forward for this peacekeeping
mission.

Over the past year alone in Mali, 27 MINUSMA
peacekeepers have been killed. Over the past year
alone, 112 have been wounded. Ten of those attacks used
improvised explosive devices that targeted MINUSMA
convoys. United Nations peacekeepers are increasingly
being called upon to fulfil complex mandates in
dangerous environments that include asymmetric
threats. This requires more prompt, effective and
agile responses by the United Nations system and
Member States deploying or providing capabilities
to successfully operate in such environments. It also
requires clarity from the Security Council.
In light of the volatile security situation,
particularly in central and northern Mali, the Security
Council’s decision to reinforce the mission’s vital
protection of civilians and stabilization mandate should
help to rationalize the mission’s posture with the
prevailing security environment. The Security Council
is also requesting that the Secretary-General enhance
MINUSMA cooperation with regional security
initiatives, such as the Sahel Group of Five, so that the
Mission has greater awareness of the broader regional
security dynamics in which it operates.

Today, the Security Council also affirmed
that the gradual restoration and extension of State
authority across Mali — and particularly the reformed
and reconstituted Malian defence and security
forces — would contribute to the stability that all
Malians seek. This would also help to deter the
terrorist threat, which continues to claim the lives of
Malian security forces and those supporting the Malian
people, namely, the French forces and MINUSMA
peacekeepers, to achieve the peace they have so long
desired. We certainly pay tribute to their sacrifices in
Mali.
The Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
was signed over a year ago, and yet today it remains
largely unimplemented. Failure to move forward and to
take the political risks necessary for the greater good of
Mali’s enduring peace creates openings for spoilers and
for terrorists. While the United States is encouraged
by the recent agreement among the signatories on the
interim authorities, as well as by President Keita’s
decision to appoint a high-level representative on
implementation, we continue to urge — as resolution
2295 (2016) rightly underscores — that all the
signatories immediately implement the broad range
of institutional, security, development and defence
provisions of the agreement. Too much time has passed,
patience is wearing thin, political will is dissipating
and implementation is urgently necessary.

16-200075/9

S/PV.7727

The situation in Mali

Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes today’s unanimous adoption of resolution
2295 (2016) and thanks the French delegation in
particular for the continuing leadership it has shown on
Mali, in close consultation with the African members
of the Council.
We support a mandate for the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) that enables troops to take robust
action to defend themselves and protect civilians in a
security environment characterized by asymmetric
threats. The losses taken by MINUSMA over the past
year have already been graphically referred to by others.
We agree that troops should be enabled to undertake
proactive defence by taking action to address threats to
civilians and United Nations personnel in their area of
operation.
We pay tribute to the high number of peacekeepers
who have risked their lives and in all too many cases
lost their lives in Mali. We continue to be concerned
at the lack of key capabilities of the Mission to enable
it to effectively carry out its mandate. We support the
intent to send a clear message about how we expect the
mandate to be carried out. We wish to reiterate New
Zealand’s view that this mandate clarifies MINUSMA’s
mandate and does not broaden the Mission’s
authorizations specifically by granting any ability to
engage pre-emptively in counter-terrorism activities.
In our view, the mandate was not really the
problem that needed addressing in this case. The
powers of MINUSMA are clearly stated in paragraph
17: the words “all necessary means” should mean
what they say. Adding complicated language around
complex operational issues, such as force posture, risks
exacerbating the problem of less clear mandates and
may raise unhelpful implications for other mandates.
As noted in the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (S/2015/446), United Nations
missions currently have significant shortcomings that
make them poorly suited to such rolls. Mandating such
tasks to any mission would require a much greater
degree of consideration and discussion in the Council.
We welcome the inclusive approach taken in
the lead-up to the adoption of the resolution, and we
particularly welcome the engagement with troopcontributing countries and the opportunity to discuss
the situation in Mali with the Prime Minister and
6/9

29/06/2016

Foreign Minister in the informal interactive dialogue
with the Council on 16 June.
Mr. De la Calle García (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain welcomes the adoption of resolution 2295 (2016),
which it co-sponsored. The resolution is the Security
Council’s response to the unanimous request received
from the Government, the signatory parties of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, civil
society, troop-contributing countries and the political
stakeholders during the Council’s visit to Mali in
March. It is a request for the strengthening of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
In this resolution, the Security Council has tried
to define an appropriate framework and authorization
of force in a peacekeeping operation in a climate
of asymmetric attacks. Blue Helmets will now be
able to carry out operations to anticipate, deter
and combat asymmetric threats against civilians in
legitimate defence and in defence of their mandate.
This is an important step. It demonstrates the
Council’s commitment to peace in Mali. It is also an
acknowledgement of troop-contributing countries,
whose men and women risk their lives and who now
have a mandate that will put them in a better position to
act in an extremely hostile environment.
However, the resolution is not the end, but rather
the beginning of what should be a new chapter. If
we want to be successful, this mandate should be
accompanied by a significant strengthening of the
capacity and equipment of the Mission; in particular,
however, it is essential for the parties to accelerate the
implementation of the Peace Agreement, which we
continue to consider the best opportunity for Mali to
achieve peace and security in a lasting way.
Finally, I would like to thank France for its
leadership and efficiency in helping the Council reach
an agreement on such a solid text. We would also like
to highlight the importance we attach to the inclusion
of a focus on women and peace and security in a
crosscutting way throughout the text. That inclusion
fulfils the promise that the Council members made to
the Malian women’s organizations that we interviewed
in March.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Like others, allow
me to begin by expressing my sincere condolences to
the Government and people of Turkey for the appalling
attack on Istanbul International Airport.
16-20007

29/06/2016

The situation in Mali

Very briefly, with regard to Mali, I welcome
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2295 (2016).
It provides the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
with the capabilities and terms to carry out its mission
successfully. As well as providing additional troops,
the resolution clearly states that peacekeepers will take
robust action to defend themselves against attacks from
groups that are intent on disrupting the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Therefore, this
mandate strengthens MINUSMA’s ability to tackle
asymmetrical threats, for example by providing an
enhanced intelligence capability for the Mission.
The mandate is fully in line with the principles of
peacekeeping. The Mission is authorized to take action
in self-defence and in defence of the mandate.
I pay tribute to the peacekeepers risking their
lives in Mali. This mandate demonstrates the shared
commitment of the Council to help create a more stable
and secure Mali. The Government of Mali and northern
signatory groups must now use this opportunity to
implement the terms of the Peace Agreement without
delay.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of France.
I would like to begin by extending France’s
condolences to and solidarity with Turkey after the
terrible attack that took place in Istanbul yesterday,
which we vigorously condemn.
By adopting resolution 2295 (2016) today, the
Security Council has decided to move in two major
directions. First, the Security Council requests the
Malian Government and the signatory armed groups
to accelerate the practical implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. The
Government and the signatory armed groups are now
engaged in a race against time against the terrorists who
want to derail the peace process. The signatory parties
have a historical responsibility to come to an agreement
to finally provide the people, especially in the north,
with the dividends of peace. Through resolution 2295
(2016), the Security Council has set a strategic priority
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) of
supporting the implementation of the Peace Agreement,
especially the restoration of State authority throughout
the entire territory of Mali.

S/PV.7727

The Security Council strengthens MINUSMA to
enable it to adapt to its unique security environment.
The Security Council has heard the urgent request made
by the Malian President and the Heads of State of West
African States, whose soldiers are risking their lives
as peacekeepers in Mali. MINUSMA is addressing
the threat of terrorist groups. This is an exceptional
environment for a United Nations peacekeeping
operation, and we are aware of that. In that regard, I
reiterate our condolences for all those who have given
their lives in their commitment to MINUSMA.
Through resolution 2295 (2016), we have decided
to provide MINUSMA with all means necessary to
enable it to adapt to this environment. The protection of
civilians and the safety of the peacekeepers in Mali is
our top priority. More specifically, the Security Council
is strengthening MINUSMA on two levels. First of
all, with respect to the means at its disposal, we have
decided to deploy 2,500 additional troops and police
within MINUSMA. This major increase in the force
will make it possible to deploy specialized European
military units. The Security Council also asks for
a reinforcement of MINUSMA’s contingent-owned
equipment, including medical evacuation helicopters,
drones and armoured vehicles. It is crucial that countries
with those capabilities respond to that appeal. With
regard to its mandate, through resolution 2295 (2016)
the Security Council has given MINUSMA the most
robust mandate possible in a terrorist environment. It
authorizes MINUSMA to use all necessary means to
prevent and counter asymmetric threats to civilians and
peacekeepers themselves.
By adopting resolution 2295 (2016), the Security
Council is fully exercising its responsibility for
international peace and security. The Security Council
is assuming its responsibility by reminding the people
of Mali that it stands alongside them on the path to
peace. The Security Council has supported Mali, whose
very existence was threatened, since the beginning of
the crisis in 2012. It will continue to do so until the
Malians can permanently live in peace.
The Security Council has assumed its responsibility
by giving the peacekeepers all the means to fulfil their
noble and essential mission under the most difficult
conditions. Thanks to MINUSMA, the Security
Council has helped peacekeeping to evolve on the
ground. France has an ambition and hope for the United
Nations — France wants the United Nations to protect
civilians wherever they are threatened.

16-200077/9

S/PV.7727

The situation in Mali

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Diop.
Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I take this opportunity to express the condolences
and solidarity of the Government of Mali to the
Government and the people of Turkey, a brotherly and
friendly country, following the deadly attack in Istanbul
yesterday. I also extend wishes for a speedy recovery to
all the wounded, and reiterate the firm condemnation of
the Government of Mali of such terrorist attacks.
My schedule does not allow me to attend this
meeting in person at this historic adoption of resolution
2295 (2016), which renews the mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). The adoption of the
resolution is a vital issue for Mali, as expressed by the
Prime Minister and Head of Government, Mr. Modibo
Keitа on 16 June (see S/PV.7719) on the occasion of the
consideration of the Secretary-General’s report on the
situation in Mali (S/2016/498).
In his address to the Security Council and during
the Council’s spirited debate, Mr. Keita recalled the
expectations of Mali and the tremendous hope that the
people and Government of Mali pinned on MINUSMA’s
future mandate. These expectations consist of a more
robust and proactive MINUSMA mandate, with
strengthened operational capacities and adequate
equipment; increased support to the armed and security
forces of Mali, which, I recall, are on the front lines
of this fight, as well as operational coordination with
international forces; and support for regional counterterrorism initiatives, including those of the Sahel Group
of Five (G-5 Sahel), the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union.
The Government of Mali is pleased to note
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2295 (2016),
extending the mandate of MINUSMA until 30 June
2017. I thank all Council members for the consensus
reached regarding my country. The new MINUSMA
mandate incorporates the expectations of the
Government of Mali, providing innovations that will
enable the Mission to fully accomplish its mandate and
assume its role in supporting the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and
all stabilization efforts within Mali, to which Council
members have contributed significantly.
8/9

29/06/2016

We all know that this new strengthened and robust
mandate provides the Mission with the means to fulfil
its mandate in an environment of exceptional security
challenges, characterized by asymmetric attacks.
Mali welcomes the adoption of the resolution, whose
strategic objective remains the restoration of State
authority throughout our national territory, particularly
in the northern regions affected by the crisis.
I should like, on behalf of the people and
Government of Mali, to extend to all States members
of the Security Council our heartfelt gratitude not only
for this historic act, but also for the important progress
which its adoption represents and above all for sending
a strong signal to all the enemies of peace that the
United Nations, Mali and the forces of peace will not
roll over and will respond in kind in order to continue
along the path for peace.
In this regard, I commend the courage and sense of
responsibility of the Security Council, which continues
to fully assume all its responsibilities in meeting
threats to peace, security and international stability.
On behalf of Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, President
of the Republic of Mali, I should like to express our
appreciation to President François Hollande and
France, in its capacity as President of the Security
Council, for their unwavering commitment to Mali
and their efforts to promote peace and stability in the
Sahel. The gratitude and deep appreciation of Mali also
go to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and our brother,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mahamat Saleh Annadif, for their tireless efforts on
behalf of peace and stabilization of our country.
I would be remiss if I did not thank Algeria,
Chairman of the Monitoring Committee for the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali ,
ECOWAS, the African Union, the countries of the G-5
Sahel, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the
European Union, the United States of America and
all troop-contributing countries for supporting the
necessary adaptation of MINUSMA’s new mandate
to the security environment in which it operates. I am
also duty-bound to honour the memory of all the Blue
Helmets who have lost their lives in Mali, and recognize
all the sacrifices that have been made for the stability
of my country.
I conclude by reiterating the firm commitment and
determination of the President of the Republic of Mali,
Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, to make every effort to
16-20007

29/06/2016

The situation in Mali

expedite the full implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, the outcome of the
Algiers process. The Government of Mali has played
and will continue to play its part, and with the help

S/PV.7727

of the Council, will assume its full responsibilities in
bringing peace and stability to Mali, to the benefit of
all its citizens.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

16-200079/9
