S/PV.7670

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7670th meeting

Thursday, 14 April 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Seck
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Countering terrorism
Letter dated 1 April 2016 from the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/306)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-10469 (E)
*1610469*

S/PV.7670

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

General, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Countering terrorism
Letter dated 1 April 2016 from the Permanent
Representative of China to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2016/306)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil,
Cambodia, Canada, Colombia, Cuba, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Georgia, Germany, Hungary, India, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Maldives, Mexico, Morocco, the
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, the Philippines,
Poland, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Saudi
Arabia, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sweden,
Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Tunisia and Turkey to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
to participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. João
Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; His Excellency Mr. Téte
António, Permanent Observer of the African Union to
the United Nations; and His Excellency Mr. Ahmed
Fathalla, Permanent Observer of the League of Arab
States to the United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/306, which contains a letter dated
1 April 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
China to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary2/32

14/04/2016

I would like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, Secretary-General of the United Nations, and
to give him the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank His Excellency
Ambassador Liu Jieyi, President of the Security
Council, for convening today’s open debate on
countering terrorism. It is clear that both terrorism
and the violent extremism that can be conducive to it
are at the top of the international agenda. I have just
returned from Switzerland, where, together with Swiss
Foreign Minister Didier Burkhalter, I co-chaired the
Geneva Conference on Preventing Violent Extremism.
It was encouraging that many ministers and heads of
regional and United Nations organizations, as well as
civil society, came together to focus on solutions.
Two weeks ago, the Nuclear Security Summit in
Washington, D.C., adopted an important action plan
in support of the key role that the United Nations can
play in mitigating the threat and managing the response
to the possible use by terrorists of nuclear, chemical,
biological and radiological materials. Recent attacks
around the world have destroyed lives, heightened
fear and defied all norms of international law and our
common humanity. Terrorism and violent extremism are
global threats, transcending cultures and geopolitical
boundaries. They should not be associated with any one
religion, nationality or ethnic group.
While recognizing the importance of measures to
counter terrorism, we also need to engage earlier and
address the drivers of violent extremism. We know
that violent extremism flourishes when groups are
marginalized, political space shrinks, human rights
are abused and people lack prospects and meaning
in their lives. My Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism asks each country to develop a national plan
that engages key communities and focuses on conflict
prevention. The Plan also calls for the resolution of
long-standing conflicts, which would give hope to
those enduring oppression and eradicate the breeding
grounds of violent extremism and terrorism.
Da’esh is adept at raising funds through nefarious
activities and has shown an ability to radicalize and
recruit disaffected youth, including women and girls,
through strategies involving the Internet and social
media. More than 30,000 people from all over the world
have joined Da’esh’s campaigns in Iraq and Syria.
16-10469

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

These foreign terrorist fighters also pose a significant
security threat to their home or third countries when
they return.
We need to focus on implementing the relevant
provisions of Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001),
2178 (2014), 2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015), and other
resolutions and measures that sanction terrorist groups
and individuals. We also need to implement all four
pillars of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in a
comprehensive and balanced manner, recognizing that
security and respect for human rights are mutually
reinforcing. Member States need to take more concrete
steps to stop fundraising through the smuggling of oil
and gas, the illicit trade in cultural artefacts, kidnapping
for ransom and donations from abroad.
We must also curtail the ability to abuse and
misuse the Internet and social media to radicalize and
recruit young people by identifying global and regional
solutions that involve Governments, private enterprise
and civil society. Strategies to counter the threat of
online radicalization will also require legislative and
law enforcement measures at the national level. We also
need an effective approach to strategic communications,
moving beyond counter-narratives to reinforcing the
values of peace and tolerance. The United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre has made this a priority area
in its new five-year programme.
To stem the flow of foreign terrorist fighters, we
need to intervene at all stages — from their initial
radicalization to their travel and return. Resolution
2178 (2014) called on all Member States to cooperate
in this effort and, at the request of the Security
Council, the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force (CTITF) developed the United Nations Foreign
Terrorist Fighters Capacity-Building Implementation
Plan, which includes 37 mutually reinforcing project
proposals to be carried out by 12 CTITF entities.
The Security Council also called on Member States
to provide the needed financial assistance. While the
Counter-Terrorism Centre will support several of these
projects with catalytic funding, more funding will be
required for implementation.
We must also be sure that our approaches to
preventing violent extremism and countering terrorism
respect our shared values, as reflected in the Charter
of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and international human rights and
humanitarian law. Too often, this basic understanding

S/PV.7670

has been broken or ignored. We must also have the
courage to address certain difficult situations, such
as the support that violent extremists and terrorists
may receive — directly, indirectly and perhaps even
unintentionally — from Governments. We must also
recognize that, too often, Government counter-terror
strategies are so heavy-handed and discriminatory
that they end up being counterproductive, generating
further alienation among targeted communities and
even more terrorists than there were beforehand.
Through the Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism and the Capacity-Building Implementation
Plan, the United Nations system has come together
through an all-of-United Nations approach to provide
support to Member States in their struggle. As we
look ahead to this year’s General Assembly review
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy on its tenth
anniversary, I hope that Member States will find
consensus on a strong outcome resolution that reinforces
international unity in the face of the divisions that
terrorist groups and violent extremists seek to create.
The Security Council has a key role to play, and I
look forward to continuing our shared efforts to address
this global menace.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank China for having convened
this very important debate at a time when the world
and humankind as a whole are facing the very serious
challenge posed by the threat of abject terrorism.
Egypt has had broad experience in fighting
terrorism since the 1920s, and we therefore reiterate
the importance of adopting a global approach to that
struggle. We must address all the causes of terrorism
and extremism that unleash violence. These causes may
be political, economic, social or ideological, including
Islamophobia, or linked to policies that exacerbate
marginalization, race-based discrimination and ethnic
alienation in certain countries. Another cause is the
ongoing foreign occupation that violates human rights,
annexes territory and tramples upon the dignity of
people living under occupation. Other issues remain
unresolved.

16-104693/32

S/PV.7670

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Furthermore, a global approach also encompasses
the fight against all terrorist organizations or groups,
wherever they may be, without distinction and within
the framework of the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. We have to bear
in mind that those terrorist groups adopted the same
ideology and approach, based on the use of force and
violence, in order to achieve their ends. Given such
a vision, we have seen the development of the tools
used by terrorist groups to propagate their ideas and
crimes, recruit their affiliates and obtain financing.
Furthermore, those terrorist groups work very quickly
and have an unprecedented ability to manoeuvre,
and, in the future, we will have to concentrate on the
following points.
First, we must make sure that the resolutions and
recommendations adopted at the United Nations are
reflected in concrete measures that will have an impact
on the ground. We also have to implement projects
aimed at strengthening the capabilities in several
countries, while still observing the principle of national
ownership.
Secondly, we have to fight globally against the
messages and ideology of terrorist organizations, in
particular Da’esh, Al-Qaida and all other affiliated
terrorists groups.
Thirdly, we have to fully implement the resolutions
of the Security Council with regard to the financing of
terrorism. We need the political will on the part of the
international community to force countries that finance
and support terrorism to stop such activities and to help
countries strengthen their capabilities, so that they are
able to fulfil their obligations within the framework of
those resolutions.
Fourthly, the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters is one of the most serious dimensions of the
terrorist threat. It is a multifaceted threat and can
be attributed to several causes and is an example of
the problems that we need to resolve. Efforts at the
national level, as well as joint efforts and coordination,
are therefore important. In that connection, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2178 (2014), the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
published several relevant reports, and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) adopted guidelines for combatting the
phenomenon in July 2015. Despite all of those efforts, the
most important component remains the implementation
4/32

14/04/2016

of all of the relevant instruments. That must also be
accompanied by a political will focused on ending the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters in conflict zones and
the adoption of a firm stand against enabling parties.
Fifthly, the international community is trying
to deal with a major problem, while at the same time
stressing the need to respect the principle of the freedom
of expression. The Internet and social media have
become some of the most sought-after means used by
terrorist organizations, including Da’esh and Al-Qaida,
for the very purpose of terrorism. The international
community cannot remain indifferent and silent in the
light of that problem, given the differences between
domestic laws and the criteria in other countries.
We must reach a common understanding in order to
confront that dangerous problem, without undermining
the principle of the freedom of expression.
Sixthly, it is important that the United Nations
fulfil the role expected of it in confronting terrorism,
given that the Organization is the framework within
which work in that area is to be undertaken. That role
will be discussed in full detail at the fifth review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. I
would like to say that among the most important points
in that the area is the improvement of coordination
among United Nations entities involved in the fight
against terrorism and the coordination between the
United Nations and regional organizations, as well as
efforts agreed upon outside of the framework of United
Nations to share experiences and avoid countervailing
or redundant efforts. That must also be mirrored in the
structure and responsibilities of the Secretariat. It is
also essential to mobilize the necessary resources to
finance capacity-building projects within States aimed
at fighting terrorism and the violent extremism that
leads to terrorism.
Finally, I reiterate that ending terrorism first
requires political will and respect for international law
with a view to achieving effective implementation of the
resolutions of the Security Council and the promotion,
coordination and mobilization of the necessary
financial resources. Within that framework, Egypt,
in its functions as Chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, is working to achieve tangible results to
the extent possible with regard to all aspects involved
in fighting terrorism. As an example, I will mention
some extremely useful and valuable meetings that were
held to achieve that goal, such as the joint meeting that
was just held and those that will be organized with the
16-10469

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities, and the meeting held in order to obtain
adequate support for implementing technical capacitybuilding in the area of counter-terrorism in Iraq.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I want to thank
China for initiating this open debate, which provides
an important opportunity to consider one of the most
serious and complex challenges facing the international
community. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing.
Global terrorism is not a new phenomenon. But the
threat that it now poses is unprecedented in its scale,
reach and human cost. The past two years have been
among the bloodiest on record. Around the globe, on
a nearly daily basis, indiscriminate attacks have been
destroying the lives of everyday people, leaving trauma
and fear in their wake. And while a relatively limited
number of States continue to bear the brunt of that
carnage, the rise of new pernicious global networks
and their sophisticated use of modern communications
technology mean that no country can consider itself
safe from that menace. There are no quick or simple
solutions.
What is clear, however, is that, now more than
ever, international cooperation is vital to keeping our
communities safe. The United Nations has a central role
to play in ensuring that we remain united in our resolve
and in supporting a coordinated and effective approach
at the national, regional and global levels. Over the
years, a range of measures, such as the designation
of terrorists and terrorist organizations and steps to
suppress the financing of terrorism have been adopted
to address the threat. More work is needed to ensure
that those measures are implemented effectively.
While the Council has a key role to play, including
through its sanctions committees, Member States
and other actors, such as the Financial Action Task
Force, are crucial to those efforts as well. Today’s
joint briefing by the Chairs of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, which is
being held in another room at Headquarters, provides a
further opportunity to consider those issues. Security

S/PV.7670

cooperation has an important role to play, particularly
in countering groups such as Da’esh, Al-Shabaab and
Boko Haram that seek to impose their will through fear
and force.
New Zealand is playing its part through its support
to the Iraqi Government in its efforts to combat the forces
of Da’esh within its territory, but security responses
alone are not an effective and enduring solution to the
terrorist threat. A comprehensive approach remains
critical — one that also addresses the underlying drivers
of violent extremism. As the Secretary-General has just
reminded us, this year’s biennial review of the United
Nations Global Counter-terrorism Strategy presents
an opportunity to assess whether the structures,
information-sharing mechanisms and resources
currently in place are sufficient to support effective and
efficient cooperation within the United Nations, among
Member States and with relevant actors in the private
sector and civil society.
It also is timely for the Council to consider what steps
it can take to strengthen the United Nations counterterrorism architecture, catalyse necessary action and
ensure that all parts of the system are working together
and without unnecessary duplication, while facilitating
effective capacity-building. The Council also has an
important role to play in identifying and addressing
critical gaps in international counter-terrorism efforts.
In that regard, I wish to highlight two specific areas
that we feel warrant particular attention in the months
ahead.
First, we need to ensure an effective response
to the challenges posed by the increasing flow of
foreign terrorist fighters returning to their homes or
travelling to third countries. The Council took decisive
steps in resolution 2178 (2014) to address the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters into conflict zones. With
an estimated 30,000 foreign fighters from more than
100 countries currently active and as the tide in the
battle for territory turns, we must have strategies to
address the enormous social challenges and security
risks that will be posed by returning former fighters.
Security- and law-enforcement measures will be
important, but rehabilitation and reintegration also
need to form a significant part of our response, if we
are to prevent further alienation and radicalization. We
must also ensure that our response is compliant with,
and deeply grounded in, the values that are central to
the Organization: respect for the rule of law and for
fundamental human rights. International cooperation in

16-104695/32

S/PV.7670

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

the form of information-sharing, the exchange of good
practice, judicial cooperation and targeted capacitybuilding also has a central role to play. Those countries
most at risk cannot be left to face these challenges alone.
Secondly, the Council needs to play its role in
taking forward recommendations from the SecretaryGeneral’s recent report on preventing violent extremism
(A/70/674). We cannot hope to meet the unprecedented
terrorist threat we currently face without reducing the
appeal of terrorist narratives and addressing the factors
that drive vulnerable young people to join such groups.
That is long-term work across decades and generations
that requires a commitment to building social cohesion
and engagement and to fostering inclusive, tolerant
communities. We need national responses targeted to the
circumstances of specific countries and communities.
The Council also needs to consider what role it can
play in supporting such efforts and how its actions,
statements and decisions can support our collective
response to countering these insidious narratives. Those
are issues that we consider warrant serious reflection
by the Council.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): We thank you,
Mr. President, and the Chinese presidency of the
Council for convening this important meeting and
for the concept note (S/2016/306, annex) to guide this
open debate, which offers the entire United Nations
membership an opportunity to renew its commitment
to the fight against terrorism — a scourge that the
international community in its entirety must contain
and destroy if we are to live in and build a more just and
peaceful world. We also thank the Secretary-General
for sharing with the Council his insights on an issue
that has become a matter of extreme concern for us all.
In fact, terrorism is a serious threat to international
peace and security and an unprecedented challenge,
due to the characteristics it has assumed, with
ambitions of conquering and administering territories
under a programme aimed at bringing the peoples
under the yoke of darkness and obscurantism in total
contravention with the norms of civilized existence
and in total denial of diversity, be it cultural, racial or
religious. Contemporary terrorists, with their backward
interpretation of religion, are turning the present world
into a dangerous place in which to live.
In Africa, terrorism is spreading widely and
dangerously. Boko Haram in Nigeria, Al-Qaida and
its affiliates in the Islamic Maghreb, Ansar al-Sharia
6/32

14/04/2016

and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in
Libya and Al-Shabaab in Somalia spread misery, death
and terror without mercy. The Sahel region, Mali, the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo are also targets of terrorist groups in a
rampage of evil and destruction. This is a troubling
situation that threatens peace, stability and security
throughout the continent.
In recent years, a disturbing development has
emerged, linked to the growing number of individuals
involved in conflicts worldwide. It feeds a new type
of so-called international terrorism, giving rise to the
unprecedented phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters.
Terrorist groups such as Al-Qaida, the Al-Nusra Front,
ISIL, Boko Haram and others continue to recruit
adherents and to viciously abduct young people to be
transformed into terrorist fighters all over the world.
The situation has put the international community
under alert on the need to identify and address the
root causes of the phenomenon and to apply the best
approaches to counter this worrying trend.
It is understood that the resolution of ongoing
conflicts, fundamentally in Syria, Iraq, Libya and
Mali, would have a direct impact on the driving forces
of ISIL terrorism, in the Sahel region and elsewhere,
where terrorists have pledged allegiance to the selfproclaimed caliphate of Syria and the Levant.
The Secretary-General’s report on the threat
posed by ISIL to international peace and security
and the range of United Nations efforts in support of
Member States in countering the threat (S/2016/92)
makes relevant recommendations on the measures
States and the United Nations should take to counter
such unprecedented threats. The report reminds us
that States, while bearing the primary responsibility
to counter terrorism, are unable to do so when acting
in isolation. The global dimension the terrorist threats
have assumed requires global responses for which the
United Nations and other international organizations
play a critical role by adopting a comprehensive,
concerted and coordinated approach.
Such a strategic approach aims at strengthening the
capacity of States to counter the financing of terrorism
by preventing and disrupting terrorism financing,
implementing in full the sanctions regimes imposed by
the Security Council against the terrorist organizations,
strengthening regional cooperation in the application of
instruments related to transnational organized crime,
16-10469

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

given its organic link with terrorism, and strengthening
financial intelligence in the investigation of terrorist
activities. It also aims to counter the recruitment of
would-be terrorists through the Internet and to use
the Internet in fighting radicalization and violent
extremism; to prevent, disrupt and criminalize the
travel of foreign terrorist fighters; to address the issue
of terrorist fighters who return to their countries of
origin; to disrupt the capacity of terrorists to plan and
carry out attacks; and to protect the cultural heritage so
disgracefully destroyed by terrorist groups.
We reiterate Angola’s full commitment to
combating the threat posed by terrorism. The Angolan
Government established the National Anti-Terrorism
Observatory, under the coordination of the Ministry of
the Interior, comprising a group of multisectoral experts
from various Government departments, including
defence and security, with the task of monitoring any
potential or current terrorist threats.
Resolution 2178 (2014) sets up concrete action to
mobilize the international community to fight foreign
terrorist fighters, including by adopting relevant
national legislation. Angolan legislation applies heavy
prison penalties for anyone collaborating with a terrorist
group, either through the provision of information or
material means, including weapons, ammunition, tools
for committing crimes, shelter, meeting places or by
helping to recruit members for terrorist organizations.
International cooperation is a fundamental tool in
countering the threat of terrorism, and in that context
resolution 1373 (2001) provides guidelines to promote
cooperation in combating terrorism. In applying
those guidelines, Angola cooperates with member
States of the Community of Portuguese Language
Countries and of subregional organizations, namely
the South African Development Community and
Economic Community of Central African States, in the
exchange of information, administrative and judicial
cooperation in preventing and fighting terrorism. A
Regional Early Warning Centre was established to
improve communication among the 14 member States
of the Southern African Development Community.
The Committee of Intelligence and Security Services
of Africa operates, at the African Union level, as a
mechanism for cooperation, coordination and exchange
of information. Bilaterally, Angola cooperates with
the African Centre for the Study and Research on
Terrorism, based in Algiers.

S/PV.7670

Regarding the financing of terrorism, the Angolan
Parliament adopted a law on the prevention of and fight
against terrorism and the African Union Convention
on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism.
Additionally, a number of legal measures were put in
place ratifying the International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and the
Anti-Terrorism and Money Laundering Law. In order
to centralize and process all the information related
to money laundering and terrorist financing, Angola
created the Financial Intelligence Unit within the
National Bank.
To conclude, I would like to renew the commitment
of Angola to continue working with the United Nations
in the implementation of the relevant resolutions,
programmes and plans of action aimed at effectively
preventing and fighting the threat posed by terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this very important
debate and for the clarity of purpose in the concept note
(S/2016/306, annex). I thank the Secretary-General for
sharing with us the growing concerns on the increasing
terrorist acts in may trouble spots and the capacity of
terrorism to lurk unsuspectedly in many parts of the
world. We look forward to the upcoming review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
our discussions today are useful in articulating our
common concern on why we need to act together to face
this scourge of humankind.
We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
Since 1972, the United Nations has invested many
resources in and devoted much attention to addressing
the challenges to international peace and security posed
by terrorism and the perpetrators of terrorist acts. We
have witnessed the many faces of international terrorism
and their perverted cost. Our response over the years,
whether by the Council, the General Assembly or other
organs has resulted in a solid and meaningful corpus of
international law, norms and standards. Those include
the many legal and other instruments ranging from
declarations, conventions, resolutions, strategies and
plans of action, not to mention the establishment of and
ongoing work undertaken by institutions and structures,
such as the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive

16-104697/32

S/PV.7670

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Directorate, the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre and the Committees established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and
the Taliban and associated individuals and entities,
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism,
and resolution 1540 (2004), among others.
The efforts at the international level are increasingly
mirrored at the regional level. Particularly in SouthEast Asia, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
saw the necessity for the region to act collectively as
one and has in place its own convention on counterterrorism, which is an integral part of the region’s
legal and normative framework. Despite all the focus
and attention that we have given and the positive
momentum we have created to provide the framework
for international and regional cooperation, terrorist
attacks and instances of violent extremism have
unfortunately risen in recent years. It is increasingly
disturbing that many recent attacks indicate evidence
of a greater degree of sophistication, complexity and
coordination in the planning and execution of attacks,
but also with regard to recruitment and radicalization
activities by the terrorists. Terror has become a
horrifying enterprise.
We do not need to be reminded of the horrifying
barbarity perpetuated by known terrorists, such as
Al-Qaida, Da’esh and Boko Haram and their affiliates
and supporters in parts of Africa, the Middle East,
Europe and even in South-East Asia. We saw their
capacity for destruction of our common heritage.
We saw their abuse of human dignity and rights. We
saw their heretical belief and apocalyptic visions and
we have seen enough. Our focus on combating and
eradicating this menace must be on our collective
resolve to share responsibility and join coordinated
efforts at all levels. We must deconstruct their narrative
and we must not help them to provide air time for terror.
Our response must be robust. It must be targeted and we
must not be lured onto their ideological turf or provide
reasons for them to win more recruits. Our response
must be premised on the full respect of international
law, including human rights and international human
rights law. We must also deny them the sources through
which they fund their activities.
Although it is not my intention to delve into a
theological debate, it is unfortunate for the majority
of Muslims that we are unjustly and wrongly
misrepresented by these heretics who claim that their
actions are sanctioned by Islam, a faith of peace and
8/32

14/04/2016

compassion, which ironically they purport to profess.
It is gratifying to note that the world is not persuaded
by their outrageous misrepresentations of the faith that
many peaceloving Muslims profess. It is therefore of
utmost importance that peace-loving Muslims and
moderates from the Muslim world begin to work in
earnest to provide the right narrative to the vulnerable
and disenchanted youth and address the root causes
in order to stem terror groups recruitment drives for
both local and foreign terrorist fighters. The path to
salvation is through righteous deeds and not through
harnessing miseries and self-annihilation.
Malaysia’s fight on terror began during its
formative years as a nation. In the early pages of its
modern history, Malaysia had some experience to share
particularly encountering the political or ideological
aspects of terrorism. From 1947 to 1989 during the
insurgency, Malaysia was embroiled in an ideologically
driven conflict perpetuated by unspeakably brutal
terrorists seeking to impose their unacceptable
political construct on the peaceloving multi-ethnic and
multiracial Malaysians. Against that threat, Malaysians
of all races and creeds had to learn hard lessons in
resilience and unity in order to triumph over terror.
In the early years of the conflict, the Government was
especially mindful and sensitive to the needs of the
populations, who, through no fault of their own, were
caught in the middle of an essentially political conflict
characterized by violent extremism, not unlike what we
are seeing in parts of the Middle East and Africa today.
In Malaysia’s experience, peace was ultimately won
through the Government’s approach of seizing the moral
high ground from the terrorists primarily by providing
safety and security and opportunity for socioeconomic
development. Additionally no effort or resources,
including through international assistance, were
spared in supporting the Government’s commitment
to ensure a better future for all nations and a common
space for all under the Malaysian sun. Moreover, any
claim to legitimacy or popular support by the terrorists
was ultimately denied due to their own brutality and
despicable actions.
I am justifiably proud that Malaysia stands out as
an example where the strategy of winning hearts and
minds was scrupulously pursued and successfully
implemented. Clearly, in order to provide an effective
response and enjoy wide support and legitimacy among
those we seek to protect, utmost care must be taken so
16-10469

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

as not to play into the terrorists hands. That will require
political wisdom and dexterity.
In conclusion, Malaysia remains committed in
its final fight against global terror and international
terrorism and will continue to play a constructive role
in preventing terrorist groups from becoming a menace
to society. We shall spare no efforts in this collective
endeavour to challenge, expose and unmask terrorists
for the vile criminals and violent extremists that they
are. God willing, together we shall prevail.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank the People’s Republic of
China for convening this debate, which, unfortunately,
is timely and necessary. Terrorism is not only one of
the main threats to international peace and security, but
it is also something that affects us all. It is a global
phenomenon and, therefore, it requires a united and
collective response. This debate is therefore timely,
as will be the review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, to which the SecretaryGeneral referred.
The review this year has a very particular
importance. First of all, due to the unfortunate
prominence that terrorism has acquired on the
international agenda and the oft-mentioned changing
nature of its threat, terrorists’ capability to adapt
requires of us swiftness, decisiveness and flexibility.
We therefore have to tackle negotiations on the Global
Strategy with a determination to strike at terrorism in a
way that will defeat it and with sufficiently nimble and
flexible tools, which would make it possible to respond
immediately to terrorist attacks.
A few new elements have already been considered
by the Security Council, such as the issue of foreign
terrorist fighters, which were the subject of resolution
2178 (2014), and the Madrid guidelines for its optimal
implementation. Also at issue are new sources of
financing, which we have considered in a series of
instruments that led last year to resolutions 2199 (2015)
and 2253 (2015). Another new element in 2015 was the
presidential statement on the fight against terrorism at
the national level.
Hence we are gradually closing in on terrorism. We
are not going to be able to eliminate it once and for
all, with a decisive blow. That would be difficult, but
not, however, impossible. But we can try to eliminate
it by asphyxiating it. It is vital that we not let down our
guard. In some areas, such as cybersecurity, we still

S/PV.7670

have some leeway to develop new instruments. Another
important area is that of justice, where we can bring
more pressure to bear in order to eradicate terrorism.
Spain, during its upcoming presidency of the
Council, in December of this year, intends to explore
the possibilities of increasing international judicial
cooperation. Also in December we will review
resolution 1540 (2004), which calls for preventing
weapons of mass destruction from falling into the
hands of non-State actors with terrorist objectives.
We need hardly stress the importance of this threat,
and therefore I would like to ask all Member States
to participate to the fullest, so that we can make this
review a truly effective instrument. Various measures
have also been adopted by States at the national level,
and as a whole, we have enough individual experience
and good practices in order to become a formidable
opponent of terrorism.
I would like to turn once again to the review of the
Global Strategy to make a few comments.
With respect to prevention, which is the first
pillar, we have at our disposal an instrument that Spain
greatly values: the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action,
referred to in General Assembly resolution 70/254, of
12 February. Let us not get bogged down in Byzantine
discussions about what is or is not violent extremism.
We all know that there is an aspect of extremism that
facilitates and leads to terrorism, and it is those aspects
on which we should take action. In that context, we
deem it important that the Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism be carried out in the framework
of a comprehensive approach that is also reflected in
the concept of tackling the life cycle of radicalization,
which the Global Counter-terrorism Forum has given
priority to in its work.
Within this comprehensive approach, I would
underscore, for the sake of brevity, just two specific
aspects: the need to include all social sectors, and the
need to develop effective counter-narratives. States,
in the face of violent extremism, must promote a
mechanism to include all and to conduct a dialogue with
all, including communities that are susceptible of being
radicalized at the State, regional or local level. But
this will not happen by itself, and so we have to create
mechanisms and devise national plans and possibilities
for cooperation, as rightly stated in the Plan of Action.
I will give the example of two initiatives that have
been put into practice by my country. We set up a centre

16-104699/32

S/PV.7670

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

14/04/2016

for the coordination of information on radicalization,
and five months ago we launched an initiative on
stopping radicalization. To promote civic cooperation,
citizens have access to a webpage and an e-mail
address, as well as a toll-free phone line, that guarantee
confidentiality as well as total anonymity. There is
also a special icon on the AlertCops application for
smartphones. In five months, we have received 150
communications, of which 45 per cent have proved to
be worthy of police investigation.

significantly to strengthen our societies in the face of
this scourge.

Along those lines, I will speak about the narrative
that we must develop in the face of violent extremism.
It should not be limited to negative aspects but should
also have a positive dimension, underscoring elements
that all of the members of the international community
agree on: pluralism, coexistence, respect for differences
and an invitation to all to participate. In this respect,
the participation of victims, with their example of not
seeking revenge and their call for justice, offers us one of
the most authoritative voices against violent extremism.

I would like to conclude with a saying that the
terrorist threaten us with repeatedly: that they need to
be lucky only once, and we need to be lucky all the time.
What they overlook is that our societies and our ways
of life are robust and deeply rooted in our consciences,
and cannot be defeated. We have demonstrated this,
because one, 10 or 100 times, terrorists can be lucky,
but we can work to prevent them from even having the
option of trying to be lucky.

That is why Spain, along with the United States, last
October brought for the first time before the Security
Council the voices of victims of terrorism. I should like
also to underscore the importance of the role of women
in the fight against radicalization and terrorism, as can
be seen in resolution 2242 (2015), adopted last October,
also during the Spanish presidency.
Furthermore, the implementation of the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action makes clear the need, and
this also represents an opportunity, to strengthen
the structure of international cooperation. Thus we
reiterate the idea that we should create a high-level
post of representative of the Secretary-General against
violent extremism.
With respect to the second pillar, I have already
expressed a few ideas on the need to react quickly,
decisively and nimbly. I will simply stress that we ask
the Member States during negotiations not to lose sight
of the fact that the objective of the Global Strategy is to
defeat terrorism; that is its only objective.
With respect to capacity-building, which is
the third pillar, the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force and the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre offers us ways to
strengthen those capabilities where it is most necessary.
The commitment and participation of States will help
10/32

I cannot but close with a reference that bears
repeating, even though it is quite obvious: the need
to respect human rights, which is the fourth pillar,
because they are an essential element of the DNA of our
societies, such that if we fail to protect human rights,
even indirectly or temporarily, we would be altering the
essence of our way of life and coexistence; hence we
would be handing terrorists their first victory.

Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this debate,
and the Secretary-General for his briefing.
Terrorism is the scourge of our time. We are
reminded almost daily of the brutality and human
cost of terrorist attacks and violent extremism. They
strike indiscriminately, in everyday places, an airport
in Belgium, a school in Pakistan, a university campus
in Kenya, a market square in Syria. And behind each
headline lie shattered lives. So many of these stories
start and end with the actions of Da’esh, with its warped
ideology and false claims of statehood. They are a
challenge to the core United Nations values that bind
us together.
Faced with this and other threats, countering
terrorism and preventing violent extremism has become
a priority for us all — a collective challenge that needs
a collective response. The United Nations is playing
its part. The Council is leading the fight, adopting
ground-breaking new resolutions to tackle Da’esh.
The Secretary-General has provided a crucial basis
for international action through his Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism, and the General Assembly
continues to build consensus on the way forward under
the auspices of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. Those efforts, together with the
actions of the Global Coalition to Counter the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Levant, are bearing fruit. Da’esh
has lost 40 per cent of the territory it once controlled in
16-10469

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Iraq and has lost significant territory in Syria. We must
now sustain that pressure. To do so, I believe that there
are two top priorities — stopping the flow of money to
Da’esh and silencing its message of hate.
When our Finance Ministers met in the Council last
year (see S/PV.7587), we committed to choking off the
sources of funding that Da’esh needs to survive. Our
efforts are working. Its finances are being squeezed. Its
fighters’ salaries are being cut. We all have a role to play
in sustaining that pressure. The United Kingdom has
joined global efforts to degrade Da’esh-controlled oil
resources so that we can deprive it of that illicit revenue.
We are helping partners in the region to reinforce their
border-control capacities, cutting off Da’esh access to
resources and recruits. We have the strongest legislation
against kidnap-for-ransom payments in the Coalition so
that we can prevent this most heinous of acts being used
to finance even more hatred.
But to truly shut down Da’esh’s finances, all States
must work to a common purpose, implementing the
resolutions adopted by the Council and the provisions
of the Da’esh and Al-Qaida sanctions regime. Our
actions need to be targeted resolutely and consistently
against those terrorist groups. In parallel with targeting
their money, we need to silence their messages of hate.
Da’esh and other groups use the Internet to spread their
views and draw in support at a pace and scale that we
have never seen before.
The United Kingdom takes the threats from online
terrorist and extremist propaganda extremely seriously,
and we have taken significant steps to address them.
We work in partnership with industry and police
to remove terrorist and extremist material online.
We disrupt the circulation of extremist and terrorist
ideology through direct referrals to a dedicated referral
unit and by supporting civil society groups in providing
effective online counter-narratives. Since 2010, United
Kingdom referrals have led to a 150,000 pieces of
terrorist-related content being voluntarily removed by
industry. Removal requests now average 1,000 a week
and approximately 70 per cent of them are Da’eshrelated. This voluntary partnership is one of the many
ways of addressing terrorist use of the Internet without
resorting to excessive restrictions. We will continue
to work with industry to improve that approach, and I
hope other members will play their part, too.
Let me close with this final thought. The Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy is now 10 years old. In the

S/PV.7670

past decade, terrorism has evolved, with new levels of
barbarity and new tactics for advancing its cause. In
order to sustain our efforts, we need to make sure that
we have the most up-to-date approach possible, shaped
by emerging trends. That is why the United Kingdom
supports an ambitious, forward-looking review of the
United Nations strategy this year. To remain relevant,
we must consider how best to structure and manage
United Nations resources and ensure that new agendas,
notably preventing violent extremism, get the resources,
structures and focus that they require. We look forward
to debating options and ideas with all Member States
during the review of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy this summer.
Through collective action, we can and will address
the threat of terrorism and violent extremism to
international peace and security.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank you
personally, Mr. President, and China for organizing this
important debate. I also thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing and for his continued leadership on that
critical issue.
On a warm spring evening just over two weeks
ago, families packed into one of the largest parks in
Lahore, Gulshan- i-Iqbal. It was Easter Sunday and the
crowd included Christians celebrating the holiday. At
around 6.30 p.m., a suicide bomber walked through the
gates and blew himself up near a children’s swing set.
Seventy-five people were killed, including 29 kids. At
least 300 were wounded. At a hospital later, a woman
named Nasreen Bibi was waiting for an update on her
wounded two-year-old daughter and she told a reporter,
“We were just here to have a nice evening and enjoy the
weather. What kind of people target little children in a
park?”
That horrific attack occurred less than a week after
three bombs exploded in Brussels, killing 32 innocent
people. A day before, that a bomb in Istanbul killed
four tourists. This past Saturday, a suicide bomber
targeted a restaurant in Mogadishu, killing at least
three Somalis at lunchtime. Those attacks remind us
that the threat posed by terrorists is not limited to one
country or one region; it is not limited to members of
just one faith. The thousands of Muslim victims attest
to that. Even in the Lahore attack the vast majority of
victims were Muslims. And the threat contained to any
one battlefield; rather the enemy seeks to attack all of
us wherever it can.

16-1046911/32

S/PV.7670

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Our response to that threat must be just as
comprehensive and far-reaching as their ambition. That
is why the Security Council has met so frequently to
address different elements of the threat and to build a
more comprehensive approach to effectively counter
terrorism. In the past two years, we have adopted
resolutions to counter Da’esh in Syria, Iraq and Libya to
cut off the flow of foreign terrorist fighters to and from
conflict zones and to target key funding sources for
terrorist groups, such as oil, antiquities and kidnapping.
We have also importantly expanded the conversation
beyond diplomats by convening the first-ever Security
Council meeting of Interior Ministers to strengthen
border security (see S/PV.7453) and the first ever session
of Finance Ministers (see S/PV.7587) to restrict Da’esh
access to funds. In the General Assembly, we will
begin negotiations in June on how to better implement
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
informed by the Secretary-General’s important Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. Those are key
steps, but this is a long-term battle and more must be
done. We have to double down on efforts to prevent
terrorism groups from recruiting, radicalizing and
inspiring others to their cause by better addressing key
drivers of violent extremism.
Violent extremist groups purport to offer an
alternative to corrupt or authoritarian regimes, an
antidote to cultural marginalization, and a path of
greater purity. We must counter their propaganda and
expose the hollowness and hypocrisy of those claims,
while engaging those communities most susceptible to
their advances.
At the same time, the international community
must also take every measure to degrade and destroy
the terrorist groups that threaten our collective security.
That goal has been at the heart of the Council measures I
described earlier. On the battlefield, coalition air strikes
have targeted Da’esh forces, its cash-storage sites, its
energy infrastructure and other revenue-generating
facilities. Recent military advances, such as those
in Iraq and Nigeria against Da’esh and Boko Haram,
respectively, have dealt further blows to terrorist groups.
As we remain on the offensive, we must continue to
strengthen our defence, including through increased
information-sharing and international cooperation, so
as to further disrupt those groups’ access to foreign
terrorist fighters and revenue. Such cooperation is also
essential to preventing terrorist access to chemical
weapons through collaborative efforts such as resolution
12/32

14/04/2016

1540 (2004), whose tools we must strengthen through
the comprehensive review process.
Let us be clear, though, that this shared commitment
to preventing terrorist access to chemical weapons in
no way lessens our determination to identify the State
actors responsible for their use. There is no mistaking
the severity of the terrorist threat, the barbarism of its
perpetrators or the need to employ every tool in our
respective arsenals. However, let us be clear: doing so
need not and cannot require the abandoning of the core
convictions enshrined in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.
Let us consider one of the issues that have been
raised today. There is no doubt that terrorist groups
have become dangerously adept at using the Internet
and communications technologies to propagate their
hateful messages, recruit adherence and urge followers
to violence. That is why all Governments must work
together to target the online criminal activities that
facilitate terrorism, such as illicit money transfers,
attack planning and coordination, criminal solicitation
and the provision of material support to terrorist
groups. It is also why Governments must work closely
with private companies, which define the terms under
which they will allow customers to use their services.
Such targeted efforts must not be conflated with
calls to restrict access or censor the Internet or even,
as some have suggested, to effectively shut down
whole corners of the web. Such measures would not
advance our security. Recruitment and radicalization
to violence continue to occur through person-to-person
interaction. Such restrictions would cut off the free
flow of information and alternative ideas and would
therefore restrict one of the best antidotes available
to the hate and lies propagated by terrorist groups. As
President Obama has said,
“Ideologies are not defeated with guns. They
are defeated by better ideas — a more attractive
and compelling vision.”
The challenge before us is real. We must use the
Internet as effectively as our adversaries do in order
to highlight that vision and to reveal the fallacies of
their ideologies. Imposing wide-ranging limits on
the Internet, though, would mean abandoning our
foundational commitments to freedom of expression
and opinion. Here in the United States, incitement
to eminent violence is not protected speech, but
most content on even the most vitriolic websites and
16-10469

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

social media accounts is protected from Government
suppression by our Constitution, and that is by design.
As Supreme Court Justice Robert Jackson put it,
“Freedom to differ is not limited to things that do not
matter much. That would be a mere shadow of freedom.”
Justice Louis Brandeis argued,
“Freedom to think as you will and to speak as
you think are means indispensable to the discovery
and spread of political truth.”
It is the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
Al-Qaida that are most afraid of the truth. Depriving
people of opportunities to discuss, debate and express
themselves online is not going to increase our security.
It will increase division among different countries
and different people and between citizens and their
Government.
The threat that terrorists like Da’esh pose to all of
our citizens is clear, and the urgency with which we
must counter them could not be greater. But in today’s
debate we must recognize not only the danger they
pose to our safety and security, but the danger that
we might overreact, to the detriment of our societies
and to our security. We must not deprive our citizens
of core freedoms like expression, peaceful assembly,
association or religion just because terrorists have taken
advantage of them. Doing so would fall precisely into
their trap. The international community’s victory over
terrorism will come through its determined efforts to
counter violent extremism and to defeat terrorist groups.
The terrorists in the Lahore park I described earlier
were targeting Christians, and they hoped to drive a
wedge between them and their Muslim neighbours.
However, in the days that followed, that did not happen.
Instead of being driven apart, Pakistanis of all faiths
came together to queue up in long lines to donate blood at
hospitals and to voice outrage and solidarity. A canteen
owner who had been serving food near the bombings
said, “It is wrong this is happening. Christians are like
our brothers and sisters.” Their reaction mirrored the
shows of solidarity witnessed after other recent attacks
and points to the final reason why these terrorists will
never win. However despicable and barbaric, their
attacks do not leave us scattered in fear. Rather, as I
think this Council has proven, they unite us ever tighter
in our determination to defeat them.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, let me thank you, Sir, for organizing this open

S/PV.7670

debate, and to endorse, in advance, the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
Today I would like to focus on three main themes
that should, from my country’s viewpoint, be priorities
for the international community and our Organization.
The first is violent extremism, which feeds the
foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon. I would like to
begin by thanking the United Nations and Switzerland
for having organized a high-level conference on this
subject in Geneva on 7 and 8 April. It produced fruitful
exchanges, as the Secretary-General just highlighted.
Just who are these individuals who go to Syria
and Iraq to join the ranks of jihadist groups, foremost
among them Da’esh? They are young people, with
varied profiles — men, women, converts, minors,
and so on, from more than 100 countries. In France,
this phenomenon has reached extremely alarming
proportions, with 600 individuals present in the area,
including 217 women and 18 minors. To adapt to this new
face of the threat, we have taken some important steps.
In April 2014, the French Government adopted
a plan to combat terrorist networks and violent
radicalization. An interministerial committee is
responsible for coordinating the strategy to prevent
and treat radicalization. The Government has also
established a territorial mechanism to monitor persons
that have been reported and to assist families in order
to respond appropriately to each case. Finally, the law
of 13 November 2014 introduced into our law several
major innovations. It instituted a ban on leaving the
territory and a prohibition on entry into and residence in
national territory for foreigners not residing in France
that constitute a danger to national security.
At the international level, it is essential that the
United Nations remain committed to stemming the flow
of foreign terrorist fighters and to preventing violent
extremism. The full implementation of resolution 2178
(2014) and following up the Secretary-General’s Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism are the two
primary axes of that action. The Secretary-General’s
Plan in particular aims to unite and better coordinate
efforts that we all undertake, Member States and United
Nations, at the national, regional and international
levels to prevent radicalization, which is an essential
aspect of the fight against terrorism. That Plan makes
concrete the strategic role of guidance and coordination
that the United Nations should play in this area.

16-1046913/32

S/PV.7670

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

I take the opportunity provided by this debate to
announce that in September, France will co-organize
with UNESCO a seminar in Paris on the prevention of
violent extremism through education. Preventing the
radicalization of youth will also be one of the topics
discussed at the sixteenth Summit of la Francophonie,
in Madagascar in November 2016.
The second priority for us all is the fight against
terrorist financing and the full implementation of
resolutions 2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015). The funding
of Da’esh was greatly affected by the strikes of the
coalition, forcing the group to decrease the salary that it
pays its fighters. However, we will manage to drain the
finances of that organization only through increased
international mobilization. We call on all our partners to
implement the United Nations resolutions and to adopt
robust measures. I welcome the holding, at this very
moment, of a joint meeting of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities, on
terrorist financing, with the presence of the President of
the Financial Action Task Force on Money-Laundering.
At the national level, France has a plan to combat the
financing of terrorism. The plan has three objectives.
to reduce anonymity in the economy in order to better
trace financial transactions; to improve monitoring,
through the mobilization of financial actors in the fight
against terrorism; and to strengthen the capacity to
freeze assets held by the actors of terrorism.
France is also fully mobilized in the fight against
the trafficking in works of art and antiques. We have
drawn the attention of antique dealer associations to the
trafficking of works of art from Syria and Iraq and to the
fact that such trafficking may contribute to the financing
of Da’esh. Customs has enhanced the surveillance of
imports of cultural property, particularly items from the
Middle East. The President of the Republic announced
at UNESCO the introduction by France of a customs
control of the importation of cultural property and the
creation of safe havens in France to hold endangered
cultural property. These provisions have been included
in a bill currently being debated in Parliament.
Finally, the third area of work, combating
terrorist propaganda, which is undertaken pursuant
to resolution 2253 (2015), is another fundamental area
where mobilization of the international community
14/32

14/04/2016

is indispensable. The ease with which terrorists use
the Internet and social networks so as to spread their
messages of hate is particularly worrisome. We stress
that any initiative in this area should respect the
freedom of expression. Upholding human rights and the
rule of law, as well as education, inclusion and social
harmony, will be key factors in the long term in any
strategy to prevent or of fight violent extremism. It
is our shared responsibility to ensure that combating
terrorism, which is so crucial to the safety of our fellow
citizens, necessarily goes hand in hand with upholding
human rights.
Given a threat of this scope, we have no other
choice but to strengthen international cooperation.
Specific progress is possible, as was demonstrated by
the adoption today of the passenger name registry by
the European Parliament. In each of these areas, the
United Nations has a great added value to provide, be
it in the creation of standards, strategic guidelines or
mobilizing the international community. The review of
the United Nations global strategy in May would be a
time to continue these discussions on how to strengthen
international cooperation in counter-terrorism and
preventing violent extremism. France will play its full
part in these debates.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, the delegation of Senegal thanks you and
welcomes your initiative to convene this public debate
on counter-terrorism. It cannot come at a better time,
given the almost metronomic recurrence of terrorist
attacks across the globe.
International terrorism, which continues to spread,
has reached hitherto unseen proportions and remains
of utmost concern for the international community,
including for the countries of West Africa and the Sahel
that have been struck hard by attacks, kidnappings,
summary executions and unprecedented violence
perpetrated by armed groups with such names as
Al-Shabaab, Al-Mourabitoun, Ansar Dine, Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haram and others, but their
methods are as similar as they are barbarous, sowing
the seeds of destruction, terrorism, massacres and
desolation within our communities.
Given this threat, it is urgent that the international
community provide its support to the West African and
the Sahel-Saharan regions in the implementation and
operationalization of action plans and other subregional
initiatives, including the United Nations integrated
16-10469

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

strategy for the Sahel, the African Union initiative to
create an African force to fight against terrorism, the
Nouakchott process and Group of Five for the Sahel
force project.
To be effective, any initiatives to counter terrorism
or fight violent extremism should first address both
the structural and contextual factors that lead to the
rise of terrorism, including ignorance, marginalization
and discrimination as well as poor governance and
the lack of socioeconomic prospects, the erroneous
interpretations or the instrumentalization of religion
and the abuse religious vocabulary. My point is that
authoritarian repression or a military approach is not
enough in and of itself.
It is therefore key that, on the one hand, we
ensure the effective implementation of development
programmes and that, on the other, we also support
initiatives that give priority to dialogue, tolerance and
understanding among civilizations, cultures, peoples
and religions. In all these cases, intolerance should never
be associated with a religion, nationality, civilization
or ethnic group. This is a global scourge that affects
the international community as a whole, placing it in a
state of emergency — indeed, a state of siege.
In its efforts to implement measures to counter
international terrorism and violent extremism, Senegal
has adopted an approach that combines prevention,
cooperation and quick response with, inter alia, the
adoption, in 2007, of two laws that provide for severe
punishment of perpetrators of terrorist acts and, in
2009, a law that combats the financing of terrorism.
These measures strengthen the Senegalese reality,
which is characterized by a successful ethnic blending,
religious harmony — religious symbiosis, even — in a
State where the rule of law, democracy, human rights,
good governance and the fight against the impunity are
cardinal values.
Terrorist groups are masters in the art of using the
Internet and social media to incite violence, recruit
fighters, and finance and plan terrorist acts. In this
respect, the relevant provisions of resolutions 2178 (2014)
and 2253 (2015) must be implemented in a coordinated,
methodical and effective manner by Member States, in
particular through pursuing cooperation in intelligence
and better collaboration with private organizations that
provide these services, all of this in order to improve
enforcement systems.

S/PV.7670

To finance their activities, terrorist cleverly — or I
should say, cynically — exploit gaps in financial systems
and regional, national and international legal instruments
to collect funds, including through the illicit
exploitation and sale of such natural resources as oil
and precious stones, as well as through kidnappings
for ransom, trafficking in human beings and weapons,
various forms of extortion, looting and sale of valuable
cultural artefacts.
To counter these activities, it is necessary to
readapt the international financial system by making it
more secure, calling upon Member States to apply the
standards set by Financial Action Task Force rules on
terrorist financing and strengthen partnerships with the
private sector, in particular charitable organizations,
so as to identify suspicious activity. In this regard, we
think it important to recall the Secretary-General’s
recommendations made in his report (S/2016/92)
on the implementation of resolution 2253 (2015),
while working to keep the fight against terrorism
and its financing from having a detrimental effect on
migrants, refugees and displaced persons. Nor should
the countries of origin of these migrants be penalized,
as they benefited in 2014 from around $400 billion in
remittances by emigrants, which is more than three
times official development assistance.
The recruitment by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and other extremist groups, foreign terrorist
fighters from a hundred different countries and whose
number exceeds 30,000, according to United Nations
statistics, is another major challenge that we have to
face in an urgent, effective and coordinated manner.
These combatants constitute a real threat to countries
of origin, transit countries and destination countries. To
eradicate these phenomena better cooperation in border
control is imperative. However, measures to be taken in
this context should not undermine the principle of the
free movement of people and goods. It is in this spirit
and in this framework that a subregional workshop
will be held in Dakar in May 2016 on border control in
West Africa, Central Africa and the Sahel. Promoting
dialogue and preventing conflicts, involving the people
by mobilizing youth, empowering women, education,
strengthening competencies and improving access to
jobs are just as important to a good strategy for countering
violent extremism, the radicalization of young people
and recruitment by extremist organizations.
Considering how difficult it seems to be for the
international community to come up with successful

16-1046915/32

S/PV.7670

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

strategies, it is crucial that we take an inclusive and
united approach with a view to the long term that
strengthens cooperation at all three of the subregional,
regional and international levels. In that regard, it
helps when Member States, acting in full sovereignty,
devise national strategies and plans of action that are
based on local realities and therefore better adapted to
their own socioeconomic and security contexts. The
international community as a whole and the United
Nations in particular should assist in strengthening
States’ capacities in that regard.
We believe that the upcoming June review of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy will be an excellent
opportunity for deeper reflection on the effectiveness
of the United Nations counter-terrorism architecture
and on the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism. We should take advantage
of the event to ensure the relevance of the Strategy,
which has to be able to adapt to today’s new challenges
and realities.
I would be remiss if I did not commend the outstanding
work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force, which has united 34 international entities in
the fight against this scourge and plays an essential
role in coordinating United Nations efforts in the
area. Similarly, the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) and
effectively chaired by the Egyptian delegation, deserves
all our support and cooperation for its numerous
activities implemented under the leadership of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
whose recommendations in its country visit reports
should receive regular follow-up and evaluation as well
as information exchange with the countries concerned.
Lastly, I would like to reiterate Senegal’s
willingness and unwavering commitment to making
every effort in our shared fight against terrorism,
including in the as yet unfinished task of drafting an
international convention on combating terrorism, and
especially in view of the fact that Africa already has
a regional convention on the subject in place, with a
dedicated research centre headquartered in Algiers.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to join other delegations in commending you,
Mr. President, on your initiative in holding today’s open
debate and for the concept note (S/2016/306, annex). I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing.
16/32

14/04/2016

Inevitably, I will be revisiting some issues that
have already been covered by previous speakers, and
I will therefore try to modify my statement somewhat.
Uruguay firmly condemns terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. Terrorism demands no exceptions
to its barbarous brutality. There is no political,
ideological, philosophical, religious, ethnic, racial or
any other justification for it. We are extremely worried
by the disturbing frequency of these devastating acts
around the world. Terrorism today has transcended
national and regional boundaries to become a global
phenomenon, and no State or person can be considered
safe from it. We are horrified by the levels of barbarity
and cruelty we see in the criminal acts perpetrated
by groups such as Da’esh, Al-Qaida, Boko Haram,
the Taliban, Al-Shabaab and others. Terrorists do not
distinguish between combatants and civilians. Their
attacks, whether targeted or indiscriminate, are aimed
at innocent populations and individuals.
The threat is global and our response must be global,
too. More than ever, the international community must
stand united if it is to reject and combat terrorism, and
that requires coordinated action. Terrorism takes many
forms and evolves in time and space, which makes
it difficult to fight, and its enormous capacity for
destruction and grave violations of human rights makes
it a serious threat to international peace and security.
The complexity of this issue, and the frequency and
atrocity of its acts and their terrible consequences
should goad the international community to redouble its
efforts to protect its citizens. We must strengthen and
increase our cooperation at every level, between States
and among international, regional and subregional
organizations, in order to share best practices and to
strengthen States’ national capacities for preventing
and suppressing terrorism in all its forms.
We must also consider the participation of
organizations that represent civil society, the private
sector, academia, educational institutions, community
and religious leaders, young people and women. We
would especially like to emphasize the importance of
the role of women in the fight against terrorism and
violent extremism, as the Security Council recognized
in resolution 2242 (2015). We share the belief in the
importance of ensuring women’s empowerment as
a central factor in strategies to combat terrorism and
violent extremism. We would also like to highlight
the crucial role that religious leaders should play in
fighting violent extremism, without ignoring the fact
16-10469

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

that political and social unrest, economic problems and
cultural decadence create fertile ground for terrorism
to grow.
We appreciate the Organization’s efforts and
actions conducted through the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and all the United Nations
entities that go to make it up, as well as those of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate and the various sanctions committees. We
support the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and await the results of its review in June. We
are committed to the efforts aimed at strengthening its
implementation and we understand the importance of
acting collectively. We would also like to emphasize
that the fight against terrorism must be conducted with
respect for and in accordance with the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law,
particularly international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law.
Prevention must be a key element in any strategy
for combating terrorism, along with the pursuit and
prosecution of the perpetrators of terrorist acts. Every
State has a responsibility to prevent the emergence
internally of extremist ideologies that can incite
terrorist speech or methods. It is important to formulate
national prevention strategies with the support of the
United Nations and by sharing best practices and
technical assistance where necessary.
We appreciate the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. We join the
General Assembly in urging States to refrain from
financing or encouraging terrorist activities, and from
supporting them in any other way or by providing
training for them. We know that States must also
focus on combating domestic complicity with terrorist
groups, wherever they may be.
The fight against terrorism must be won in the
realm of ideas and with respect for the law. We therefore
emphasize the importance of the role of education and
public debate as a means of combating extremism and
intolerance. We must raise awareness of the value of
human life and banish indifference. We stress how
crucial it is that States have judicial frameworks and
stable, functional institutional structures. It is also vital
to develop and strengthen international cooperative
judicial instruments and effective mechanisms for
border controls and financial oversight regimes.

S/PV.7670

Uruguay expresses its great readiness to contribute
within its abilities to the fight against this scourge. In
that respect, it is developing a national strategy and
striving to closing the identified gaps in its institutional
capacity. Uruguay recognizes that in combating
terrorism, it is essential to attack its funding sources
and its involvement in organized crime, which threatens
the transparency of the economic and financial system
and undermines public order and security.
Uruguay actively participates in regional and
multilateral entities related to security issues in
general and terrorism in particular, and maintains
bilateral exchanges of information and good practices.
It has also made progress in its accession to various
instruments relating to the international fight against
terrorism, most recently the International Convention
for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, which
came into force in my country on 3 April.
Uruguay also seeks to increase its deterrent
capacity against terrorism and organized crime, in
which border control is key. Uruguay recently installed
the most up-to-date passenger control systems in its
airports for immigration purposes and used by Interpol
under the rubrics automated border control, passenger
name recorder and advance passenger information.
The task of combating and eliminating
international terrorism is large and complex. The onus
lies with all members of the international community.
Multilateralism is a fundamental principle of Uruguay’s
foreign policy and the keystone of its international
relations. In that regard, Uruguay approaches this vital
challenge with commitment, solidarity respect for
international law and human rights.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I want to thank you, Sir,
for convening this open debate to discuss one of the
most pressing issues on the Security Council’s agenda.
Ukraine condemns the phenomenon of terrorism
unreservedly in all its forms and manifestations. We
support the central role of the United Nations and the
Security Council in promoting international cooperation
in fighting terrorism, including in the framework
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. Ensuring its effective implementation
requires closer cooperation among Member States, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and other United Nations
family agencies and bodies.

16-1046917/32

S/PV.7670

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Ukraine is a party to all counter-terrorism treaties
and is closely engaged in this endeavor with relevant
international and regional organizations, including
the United Nations, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Council of Europe, the
Financial Action Task Force, and the Organization for
Democracy and Economic Development.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
Al-Qaida, Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and others are
not just a regional menace but a global challenge
whose violent ideologies constitute a threat to the
entire international community. My country strongly
condemns the crimes and acts of mass violence that
these terrorist groups are committing against civilians
from Syria and Iraq to France and Belgium. We are
fully committed to the international coalition’s efforts
to combat this global threat.
The escalation of conflicts nowadays is directly
influenced by the influx of foreign terrorist fighters.
We believe that the primary obligation to prevent the
movements of foreign terrorist fighters lies primarily
with the source countries, which have to spot and
stop them at the earliest stages. Ukraine is actively
contributing to global and regional efforts aimed
at stemming the flow of foreign terrorist fighters by
countering the recruitment and transit of terrorists, in
line with the relevant resolutions.
During the past year alone, eight ISIL transit
points have been identified in Ukraine and shut down
by the national security services. Twenty-one ISIL
supporters have been detained and deported to their
source countries. Over the past two years, about 600
foreign citizens have been denied entry into Ukraine
on the basis of information about their involvement in
ISIL activities.
International terrorism and violent extremism
threaten our core values and principles, including
human rights, the rule of law, democracy, equal
opportunity and freedom. It goes without saying that
fighting these threats only through military means does
not have a long-lasting effect. Eliminating their visible
manifestations without removing their root causes
propagates continuous outbreaks of terrorist attacks all
over the world. In this regard, Ukraine would like to
extend its full support for the Secretary-General’s Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, which has
capped international endeavours in this field.
18/32

14/04/2016

Combating the activities of individual terrorists
and terrorist groups will be insufficient if the problem
of terrorist financing, including of State-sponsored
terrorism, is not properly addressed. We underline
the particular importance of effective efforts at
both the international and national levels to prevent
and counteract the financing of terrorist activities
and terrorist organizations, as well as to ensure the
ultimate prosecution and punishment of individuals or
organizations that provide such funding in any form
and by any methods. These efforts should be based on
relevant United Nations legal instruments and those
elaborated within the framework of the Financial
Action Task Force.
Ensuring the genuine — and not merely
declarative — cooperation of States and the mutual
assistance of their law enforcement agencies in
preventing the financing of terrorism is the key to
overcoming this phenomenon, which has become
rampant at the regional and global levels. Any link
between this crime and Government agencies or
officials must trigger the international responsibility of
States to prosecute the crime of financing terrorism.
In this very context, I cannot fail to mention the
topicality of this issue for Ukraine, which has been
dealing with the challenge of terrorist activities in the
Donbas region, carried out with the direct support of
the Russian Federation, since 2014. The policy of terror
against Ukrainian civilians in the Donbas is one of
the dreadful hallmarks of Russian aggression against
Ukraine. The terrorist component in the undeclared
war against Ukraine is clearly visible and has become
a fact of life of the occupied areas of the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions of Ukraine.
During the past two years, Ukraine has received
irrefutable evidence of the terrorist nature of the
organizations known as the Donetsk People’s Republic
and the Luhansk People’s Republic, and of the direct
involvement of the Russian Federation in the fmancing,
support and coordination of these terrorist groups,
which have perpetrated numerous crimes and carried
out terrorist activities against civilians, in particular in
Mariupol, Volnovakha, Kramatorsk, Donetsk. Kharkiv
and many other Ukrainian cities. The shocking reality
is that foreign terrorist fighters, primarily from Russia,
constitute a significant part of the approximately
40,000-strong illegal armed group fighting against the
Government of Ukraine in the Donbas.
16-10469

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Weapons and manpower continue to flow from
Russia to Ukraine’s east through uncontrolled sections
of the Ukrainian-Russian border. The observer mission
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe at the Russian checkpoints on the border has
continuously reported high numbers of persons in
military-style clothing crossing the border in both
directions. In particular, since the beginning of the
Mission’s operation in July 2014, over 26,000 crossings
of this category have been reported by the mission
from only two border crossing points. The Russian
military continues to train terrorists and the fighters
of illegal armed groups at the military camps set up in
the occupied Crimea and parts of the Donbas, as well
as in the Rostov, Belgorod and Tambov regions of the
Russian Federation.
Having been directly involved in all these terrorist
activities, the Russian Federation is clearly violating
its commitments undertaken in accordance with
a set of legally binding international instruments
on the prevention of and combating international
terrorism, including the International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism
and the International Convention for the Suppression
of Terrorist Bombings, as well as relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Apart from that, Russia has launched a massmedia campaign aimed at the radicalization of the
population in the occupied territories of the Donbas,
which creates fertile ground for the spread of terrorist
narratives. Moreover, the Russian media and nationalist
circles glorify the Russian terrorist fighters as they
depart to Ukraine and return to Russia, instead of
being prosecuted.
As for Crimea, yesterday the Russian occupation
authorities adopted a decision to suspend altogether, and
with immediate effect, the activities of the Majlis of the
Crimean Tatars — their only legislative body. This is
not just one more crime in the genocidal spree launched
by Russia against the Crimean Tatars. This outrageous
act by the aggressor country has a direct bearing on
our debate today, for it will but further radicalize the
already desperate and highly charged fabric of Crimean
Tatars — the youth first of all — with consequences
that are hard to predict. We call on the Security Council
and the Secretary-General to unequivocally condemn
this lawless act. We therefore consistently urge the
international community to put additional pressure on

S/PV.7670

the Russian Federation to stop war and terrorism in the
heart of Europe.
In recent decades, the international community
has registered remarkable achievements in adopting
legally binding instruments to counter terrorism.
However, more should be done to prevent and combat
this scourge. Our major task is to conclude the work on
a comprehensive convention on international terrorism,
which would supplement the existing international
legal counterterrorism framework and provide States
with a useful tool.
One of the major obstacles on this course is finding
a clear definition for the act of terrorism. Resolving
that problem would allow the international community
to address more efficiently some outstanding issues
related to bringing to account not only individual
terrorists and organizations but also those States
responsible for organizing, financing, encouraging,
providing training or otherwise directly or indirectly
supporting terrorist activities. Our view is that certain
principles of the Geneva Declaration on Terrorism,
adopted in 1987 by the International Conference on
the Question of Terrorism, as well as the proposal put
forward in 2007 in the Sixth Committee of the General
Assembly, could be taken as the bases for a new legally
binding instrument.
Another aspect that increasingly warrants
our close attention is the protection of critical
infrastructure against terrorist attacks capable of
disrupting the functioning of banking and finance,
telecommunications, emergency services, air and
rail transportation, energy and water supplies, and of
causing numerous civilian casualties. Ukraine is of the
opinion that the Security Council should expeditiously
address this problem by mobilizing international
efforts aimed at diminishing the mere possibility of
such attacks.
Ukraine strongly believes that one of the most
important aspects of countering international terrorism
is to commemorate its victims. Unless it remembers
the lessons of the past and educates the generations
to come about them, humankind will be doomed to
repeat the dark chapters of its history. In this vein, I
would like to recall the initiative of Ukraine with
regard to the establishment of the international day
of commemoration of the memory of the victims of
terrorist acts.

16-1046919/32

S/PV.7670

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Finally, we see great merit in having the Council
address the issue of the terrorism scourge on a regular
and systematic basis, including this coming September
at the highest possible level.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the initiative of the Chinese
delegation to lead discussions on the most topical
aspect of fighting terrorism in the framework of an
open debate. We believe that it is very timely.
Right now, with the fight against terrorism in
Syria and Iraq in full swing, there is a clearer picture
of the whole range of issues facing international
counter-terrorism cooperation. We call for a frank and
open discussion of those issues and a determination
of where the capacities for their resolution lie. The
steadily increasing activities of terrorist organizations
is at the centre Council’s attention. Resolutions 2178
(2014), 2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015) adapted United
Nations mechanisms to the most recent threats
from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
Jabhat Al-Nusra, Al-Qaida and affiliated groups. The
obligation of Governments in the implementation of
sanctions regimes and in the suppression of illicit flows
of financing and human resources to terrorists was
stressed.
At the same time, despite the declared convergence
of positions and the existence of necessary tools for the
Security Council, in practice, combatting international
terrorism is far from ideal. The reasons lie largely in
the unprecedented spread of that scourge in the Middle
East and North Africa. In that region, carrying out
external geopolitical schemes, accompanied by gross
interference in the internal affairs of its States, led to
an erosion of Government institutions and pumping
resources into opposition forces and the uncontrolled
spread of weapons and ammunition. It was triggered
by an unprecedented surge in radicalization of local
populations. Several countries are ready to use terrorists
and extremists as a means of pressuring legitimate
Governments, and double standards in appraising the
activities of radicals have in the last analysis led to an
outburst of groups such as ISIL and Jabhat Al-Nusra.
These double standards are, unfortunately, obvious
in the implementation of counter-terrorism decisions
taken by the Security Council.
The largest portion of oil products, artefacts and
other items exported by ISIL from the territories it
controls continues to be sold through Turkey, owing to
20/32

14/04/2016

its complacency or inaction. Turkey’s borders with Iraq
and especially with Syria are the main transit routes for
foreign terrorists fighters and weapons, most of which
fall into the hands of the terrorists. In that regard, we
believe it is relevant, in the name of counter-terrorism,
to consider closing the Turkish-Syrian border. We
might also want to consider levying a comprehensive
economic and trade embargo against ISIL.
If Turkey believes that it is doing everything
necessary to curtail the flows of supplies to terrorists,
that could be corroborated by independent monitors. We
call on the Turkish Government to invite international
observers to the Syrian border and the Ceyhan port, on
a voluntary basis, for that purpose. To date, we have not
seen any explanation for the bad-faith implementation
by Turkey of its obligations under Security Council
resolutions, other than Ankara’s desire to carry out its
own agenda in Syria and Iraq.
In future joint work, we need to take into account
the specifics of terrorist threats, especially as they have
taken shape in recent years. In that regard, we would
necessarily underscore the threat of chemical terrorism.
Fighters from various radical groups, as recently as
this year, have used toxic chemical agents on several
occasions. There is a known case of ISIL having used
mustard gas in Deir ez-Zor.
Russia has long expressed concern that terrorist
groups, which are rampant in the Middle East, have
obtained a formidable capacity to wage war using
toxic substances. We believe that the Council has
yet to exhaust all of its options to combat that threat.
Yesterday, with our Chinese partners, we circulated a
draft resolution to the Security Council, clarifying the
counter-terrorism portion of the mandate of the joint
investigative mechanism of the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
for incidents involving the use of chemical weapons in
Syria, pursuant to resolution 2235 (2015). We hope that
there will be a speedy adoption of the draft resolution
by the Council.
As of now, the main phase of the operations of
Russian air forces against ISIL and other terrorist
groups in Syrian territory has been completed. The
objectives of the mission set out for the forces have been
carried out successfully. The terrorists have suffered
considerable damage and have been removed from a
number of areas in the country. A striking symbol of
16-10469

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

ISIL’s retreat was the liberation of the ancient city of
Palmyra by Syrian forces, with Russian support.
However, to fully defeat the terrorists, much
remains to be done. We once again call for strengthening
of coordination and cooperation among States to defeat
ISIL, Jabhat Al-Nusra and affiliated groups. That
is necessary and should be done by dispensing with
double standards, with the United Nations playing a
central coordinating role and on the sound footing of
international law.
I necessarily have to comment on the statement
made by the representative of Ukraine. Unfortunately,
the Ukrainian delegation is once again using the
Council to diffuse its anti-Russian propaganda.
I believe that several of the statements made are
absolutely scandalous. The Security Council does
not benefit from that, and neither does the image of
Ukrainian diplomacy. There is a need to stick to the
agenda, which today does not contain an item on the
settlement of the situation in Ukraine. The full-scale
hostilities were begun in 2014 against the civilians in
the eastern part of the country by the Kyiv politicians
who came to power after a bloody coup d’état, and they
continue to try to justify their actions unsuccessfully.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to begin
by expressing my sincere appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for raising this timely and important
topic. I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his insightful briefing.
We witness almost every week terrorist attacks
all over the world. In March alone, they occurred in
Pakistan, Belgium, Turkey, Nigeria, Côte d’Ivoire
and Tunisia. I express my deepest sympathy and
condolences to the victims and their families, as well
as to the Governments and the peoples of each of
those countries.
Japan condemns terrorism in the strongest terms,
and we are determined work with the international
community to overcome terrorism. On Monday this
week, in Hiroshima, the Group of Seven Foreign
Ministers expressed their determination to stand united
in countering terrorism in all its forms and wherever
it occurs.
The fight against terrorism requires diverse efforts.
Today, I would like to focus on two issues. The first
is foreign terrorist fighters. It is estimated that around
30,000 fighters, from more than 100 Member States,

S/PV.7670

are attracted to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and their associated groups. In order to stem the flow of
such fighters, it is important to implement all relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular, resolution
2178 (2014). Today, many of those fighters travel from
their countries of origin to another country before
travelling on to the final destination, which helps them
avoid detection; that is called “broken travel”.
In order to detect broken travel, it is necessary
not only to obtain passport details through the
Advance Passenger Information System (APIS), but
also to obtain passenger name records (PNR), which
contain passengers’ booking information, such as
their itineraries, the names of travelling companions
and payment methods. The Permanent Representative
of Uruguay already pointed out the importance of
those systems. The Security Council recommends
that Member States utilize both the APIS and the
PNR systems as outlined in resolution 2178 (2014) and
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/23, respectively.
To my knowledge, only about a quarter of the 193
Member States have introduced APIS, and even fewer
have introduced the PNR system. Only a small number
of Member States have adopted those systems, which is
not effective enough to detect broken travel. I therefore
urge all Member States to introduce the systems as soon
as possible. In that connection, I was very encouraged
to hear from the delegation of France that the European
Parliament approved the introduction of the PNR
system today.
No country is immune from terrorism. Japan is on
high alert for the risk of terrorist attacks in preparing
the upcoming important events that Japan will host,
such as the Group of Seven Summit in May this year,
the Rugby World Cup in 2019 and the Tokyo Olympic
and Paralympic Games in 2020. We are committed to
enhancing counter-terrorism measures, so that people
from around the world can feel safe and will be secure
when visiting Japan on those occasions.
The second aspect that I would like to address is
the importance of tackling the root causes of terrorism.
Many previous speakers, including my neighbour
Malaysia, have also highlighted the importance of that
aspect. Among the root causes, I wish to focus on how
we can prevent violent extremism that can be conducive
to terrorism.
One possible way to prevent violent extremism is
to provide assistance aimed at creating a society that

16-1046921/32

S/PV.7670

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

does not give in to violent extremism. In that context,
Japan attaches great importance to supporting women
and girls so as to make societies more resilient. By
empowering women, we can empower other members of
their families and communities. To that end, Japan has
continuously funded projects of UN-Women, as well
as those of the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
One of this year’s projects seeks to reinforce women’s
leadership through their engagement in political
dialogue in the Sahel region. I hope that women’s
participation in political dialogue will contribute to
building communities that are resilient against violent
extremists, such as Boko Haram.
Finally, I would like to stress that violent extremism
has broad aspects in its nature, and so, preventing
it requires a comprehensive approach, utilizing all
the knowledge and experience of all United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes. Japan commends
and strongly supports the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674), which
provides the basis for an all-United Nations approach.
The Plan of Action and an all-United Nations approach
should be reflected in the review of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy to be held in June in the General
Assembly. I wish to conclude by expressing Japan’s
willingness to participate constructively in that debate.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
your delegation’s initiative to convene this open debate
to address this issue to which my country attaches
particular importance, namely, the threats posed by
terrorism to international peace and security. We also
value the concept note (S/2016/306, annex) prepared by
your delegation, which contains key elements for the
discussion of this problem of global scope, with a view
to intensifying international efforts to prevent, combat
and eliminate this scourge.
We also welcome the presence of and briefing by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and thank him for his
valuable contribution to the topic of our deliberations
today. As usual, my delegation supports the statement
to be made shortly by the Permanent Representative of
the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.
Terrorism is not a new phenomenon, given the
fact that its use has been a constant feature in various
22/32

14/04/2016

political conflicts in our modern history. However, in
recent years, terrorism has assumed new dimensions,
which greatly affect the manner in which it can be
combatted. Terrorism in the Middle East has become
an insurgency on the part of a sector of the population
that uses terrorist methods to achieve their political
goals. Those groups, actual armies, have been able to
take advantage of unprecedented military and logistical
capacities, which has enable their expansion into
significant countries in the Middle East, North Africa
and the Sahel, with significant impact even on other
parts of the world, including Europe and Asia.
The acts committed by terrorist groups endanger
the territorial integrity and political unity of States,
thereby contributing to the destabilization of legitimate
Governments and violating their constitutional order,
with the ultimate aim of overthrowing them. All of that
not only produces adverse outcomes for the economic
and social development of peoples, but also includes the
destruction of their infrastructure and institutions. In
that regard, we should ask ourselves what conditions
are conducive to the spread of terrorism and violent
extremism. The situation experienced today by the
brotherly peoples of the Middle East and North Africa
is no coincidence. It is due, in our opinion, to the
military intervention by major Powers in Iraq in 2003
and in Libya in 2011, directed towards overthrowing
the Governments of sovereign countries, which, in turn,
created the conditions for Da’esh, Al-Qaida and Ansar
al-Sharia, among others, to develop in those regions in
order to implement their strategy of destruction, based
on terror and denial of the Other.
Today, the violent actions of these terrorist groups
and their associated entities have inflicted sectarian
violence on several African and Middle Eastern
countries, leaving in their wake a trail of destruction,
which is worsened by the fact that, shielded by a
sectarian interpretation of religion, they are carrying
out ethnic cleansing of vast areas of Iraq, Syria and
Libya, among others. It is important to consider the
effect that the military interventions in the wars since
2003 have had on the societies of those countries.
Children who at the time of the interventions were six,
seven or eight years old are the young people today,
who are 20 or 25 years of age and have joined terrorist
groups en masse. They were children in societies that in
those years experienced a culture of death, a contempt
for life, sectarianism and intransigeance.
16-10469

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Terrorism and violent extremism are problems of
a global scope that threaten international peace and
security. This is reflected in the unprecedented threat
represented today by the self-proclaimed Islamic
State, which has been joined by at least 34 terrorist
organizations from different regions of the world — not
only in the Middle East and North Africa — and is
exacerbated by the grave phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters whereby more than 30,000 people,
including women and young people, from at least 100
countries from different latitudes, have joined these
terrorist groups, not to mention the threat posed by lone
wolves.
The use of violence and terrorism to subjugate
societies, civilizations, religions and beliefs is taking
on new forms, such as the recruitment of children,
kidnapping, the destruction of the cultural heritage of
humankind, slavery and sexual violence as a weapon of
war, as well as the use of chemical weapons. However,
deep down, those despicable practices, which have
severely impacted civilians — in particular ethnic
and religious minorities and the most vulnerable
groups whose human rights have been systematically
and deliberately violated leading to an unprecedented
humanitarian crisis — are still the result of practices
that respond to intolerance, violent extremism and
sectarianism. The experience of those actions paint a
clear picture of war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide, and the perpetrators of those actions
must be brought to justice.
Experience teaches us that terrorist groups feed on
despair, injustice, frustration, lack of opportunities,
the denial of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
particularly in devastated societies, to promote
practices that resemble those of fascism, as well as
their criminal, ideological and political agendas.
Poverty; social and economic inequalities; political,
ethnic and religious intolerance; and violations of the
sovereignty of peoples and nations, among others, are
also part of the so-called push factors of terrorism. In
addition, protracted crises further exacerbate conflicts
and serve as a breeding ground for violent extremism
and terrorism to fuel organized transnational crime
and to facilitate the flow, financing and training of
foreign terrorist fighters, thereby enhancing terrorist
organizations’ capacity for action. Hence the long-term
solution to the threats posed today necessarily involves,
among others, a political settlement of the conflicts in
countries, such as Syria, Libya, Iraq and Palestine.

S/PV.7670

We would like to draw the attention of the Security
Council to the elements that are mentioned in the
concept note and that we believe are crucial to be able
to have an effective counter-terrorism strategy. First
of all, we must determine how the terrorist groups
have achieved such a military and logistical capacity.
They are terrorist groups that have heavy weapons;
they are terrorist groups that have missiles; they are
terrorist groups that have chemical weapons. Who has
given those weapons to those terrorist groups and who
maintains them? The terrorist groups occupy wide
swaths of territory in Iraq, Libya and Syria. They are
capable of defeating and containing national armies
from those countries and they are capable of resisting
the actions of coalitions and other international efforts
aimed at defeating them. Not only do they occupy and
govern in those territories, but they also impose their
fascist and extremist ideology. That is only possible
with foreign support.
Furthermore, terrorist and extremist groups also
receive a great deal of financing, which is the result
of the illicit trafficking in oil. It is not easy to sell
oil illegally. There are mechanisms that are perfectly
monitored by all international organizations, and we do
not understand how they do not condemn or do not take
clear action to put a stop to that financing of terrorist
groups, which is the result of oil sales. To sell oil one
must transport it and store it. It must be transported
on ships. Therefore, the Security Council should act
honestly on the basis of the resolutions that it has adopted
in order to stop the illegal flow of those resources that
fuel terrorism. In addition, we ask ourselves how it is
possible that the international financing system, which
is controlled and regulated by the large centres of
power, is not capable of detecting and blocking those
financial flows. We believe that this is an activity that
should be tackled with genuine commitment.
Another serious problem is the trafficking of
small arms and light weapons. We have said that the
Security Council must promote a resolution to prohibit
the trafficking of small arms and light weapons, which
is a euphemism because small arms and light weapons
range from heavy submachine guns to missiles.
However, in the area with that technical designation,
we have allowed weapons to be distributed to violent
non-State groups. Those violent non-State groups then
become terrorist groups, which is what is happening
and has happened in Syria, where non-State armed
groups are trained, armed and equipped with advanced

16-1046923/32

S/PV.7670

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

destructive technology and then go on to join Al-Nusra
and other terrorist groups.
In order to defeat the Government of President
Muammar Al-Qadhafi, thousands of tons of weapons
and munitions were distributed in Libya. Today they
are in the hands of various militias and factions and
have been distributed and spread in Africa, especially
in the Sahel region, which is one of the main threats for
the security of those brotherly countries in Africa.
The issue of terrorism cannot be dealt with by
using a double standard. We cannot instigate the
creation of terrorist groups to defeat, combat and
destabilize Governments. This is not the first time
this has happened and experience has shown that these
extremist groups then become a problem and a threat
for the Governments that stimulated their creation. That
was the case in Afghanistan and it is the case in Libya.
We hope that we do not have to wait for documents to be
declassified to understand that this was one of the main
causes that has fuelled the current terrorist groups.
Furthermore, the concept note draws attention
to the use of social networks as an instrument to
destabilize Governments. The use of that mechanism
is nothing new. The fact that the tremendous and
penetrating capacity of social networks to destabilize
legitimate Governments is now being used has been
condemned on various occasions. That happened in
Iran and with other Governments. It is just that now
terrorist groups also use that platform to spread their
fascist and extremist ideology and recruit young people
around the world. The fact that more than 30,000
foreign terrorist fighters have entered Syria has a great
deal to do with the incitement that is carried out from
countries of origin against specific Governments. That
was the case of the brutal campaign in some European
countries against Syria, which has led young people,
for various reasons, to join the terrorist groups that are
fighting the Government of President Bashar Al-Assad.
We believe that the Security Council must act to combat
this problem, because all of the social networks use
technology platforms that are under the absolute control
of the large information technology corporations.
Finally, Venezuela condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. There are no good or bad
terrorists. We deplore the fact that the Security Council
did not express regret when the terrorist group Da’esh
occupied Palmyra last year and killed more than 500
people. They killed the archaeologist who was in charge
24/32

14/04/2016

of protecting this world cultural heritage and then
began the destruction of the society of Palmyra. At the
time, the Security Council was not able to deplore those
acts. Nor was the Council, following the liberation of
Palmyra, able to express its satisfaction at the liberation
of the city of Palmyra and at the fact that its rebuilding
had begun.
The Security Council has the responsibility of
condemning all terrorist acts, whether or not for any
reason they favour their national interests. We believe
that all countries are victims of such terrorist acts.
On a daily basis, Syria, Libya, Nigeria, Iraq, Turkey,
Pakistan and European countries all are affected by this
phenomenon, which we must condemn.
Terrorism is a violent expression of the fascist
extremist ideology with clear political objectives.
Hence the response of the Security Council must
be a political and military one. The Council has the
responsibility of preventing conflicts that due to a lack
of political response, as in the case of Palestine and
Western Sahara, could turn into violent conflicts and
even lead to the expansion of terrorism as a result of the
frustration and despair of those peoples.
Lastly, our country supports an inclusive United
Nations counter-terrorism strategy that would be the
result of a broad-based debate in the General Assembly
and in which the Security Council, as the organ
responsible for international peace and security, would
take part constructively, in strict adherence to the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and in
particular international humanitarian law.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
China thanks Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his briefing. Currently, international terrorist activities
are rampant. Terrorist organizations such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida are
now better organized, and terrorists move across
borders more frequently. They have a great variety
of financing channels and are increasingly using new
technologies such as the Internet and social media to
spread their extremist ideas and engage in terrorist
activities, thus posing a grave threat to international
peace and security.
Terrorism is the common enemy of humankind.
The international community should increase its
16-10469

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

cooperation and take effective countermeasures while
formulating new and targeted initiatives in the light of
emerging trends and characteristics in the evolution
of terrorism. The international community should use
political, economic and cultural means in an integrated
manner to address both the symptoms and the root
causes of terrorism.
In this connection, China wishes to make the
following six points.
First, it is necessary to increase political input
in counterterrorism and forge a greater international
consensus. The effects of terrorism transcend national
boundaries. No country can deal with it on its own,
and no country is immune to it. The international
community should adhere to uniforms standard in
counterterrorism and combat it with zero tolerance
and no differentiation. All terrorist activities, under
whatever pretext, against which our country and by
whatever means, must be firmly suppressed.
Terrorism should not be linked to any particular
ethnic group or religion. In the fight against
terrorism, the leading role of the United Nations
and its Security Council in particular must be given
full play. The purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations must be complied with and
effective coordination enhanced so as to form a united
international front against terrorism, suppress terrorists
relentlessly and put them under great pressure.
Secondly, we must block the flow of terrorists
across borders and be vigilant in an effective fight
against those who return. The frequent movement of
foreign terrorist fighters across borders constitutes
a grave threat to the security of countries of origin,
transit and destination. The international community
must pay great attention to this problem, and the
countries concerned should cooperate closely so as to
strengthen border control and step up law-enforcement
cooperation. They should create databases for counterterrorism as soon as possible, share intelligence and
destroy networks that facilitate the flow of terrorists.
All of the parties concerned should enhance
communication, provide intelligence support for one
another and step up law-enforcement cooperation so
as to effectively respond to the threat of returning
terrorists and ensure that terrorists are severely
punished wherever they may try to seek safe haven.

S/PV.7670

Thirdly, update the means of response and
effectively suppress the use of the Internet and social
media for terrorism. The Internet and social media
have now become an important platform for terrorist
organizations. The international community should,
in the light of the characteristics of cyberspace, adopt
effective measures to resolutely combat the criminal
activities of terrorist groups, including posting
audio and video materials on the Web to disseminate
extremist ideology, raising funds, promoting materials,
recruiting for terrorist attacks and planning terrorist
activities. All parties must comprehensively implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions, strengthen
the regulation of the Internet and suppress the use of
the Internet for terrorist activities. The relevant organs
of the United Nations should identify the right breaking
points and points of action and come up with new ideas
and initiatives to promote international cooperation
and strengthen coordination in cyberregulation.
Fourthly, there is a need to strengthen comprehensive
cooperation and eliminate sources of funds and
weapons for terrorists. Terrorist groups such as ISIL
depend heavily on the exploitation of natural resources
as a way to finance their operations. The international
community should effectively implement resolutions
2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015), among others; strengthen
cooperation in the regulation of the financial and other
sectors; and effectively prevent terrorist groups from
raising funds through trafficking in oil and cultural
relics.
Countries should be highly vigilant against the real
threat of nuclear, biological and chemical terrorism,
strengthen their coordination and cooperation, focus on
scaling up the security of the relevant materials, boosting
international information-sharing and improving the
relevant laws and regulations so as to close the Internet
channels by which terrorist organizations attempt to
acquire nuclear, biological and chemical materials.
Fifthly, intensify prevention and upstream
checkpoints in the fight against terrorism. All countries
must give serious attention to the dissemination of
violent extremism and incitement of national and
religious hatred by terrorist organizations, in an effort
to comprehensively implement Security Council
resolution 1624 (2005). Countries should adopt robust
legislation to effectively combat incitement to terrorism,
and suppress, according to the law, the dissemination of
violent extremist ideas.

16-1046925/32

S/PV.7670

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Sixthly, countries should work together to build
a new type of international relations with win-win
cooperation at its core; establish a common, holistic
cooperative and sustainable security concept; resolutely
promote global security governance; promote universal
development and prosperity; and engage in cultural
exchange so as to achieve harmony while respecting
differences among different cultures. Countries should
treat each other as equals, drawing inspiration from
each other in order to create a social and cultural
atmosphere in which different nations, cultures and
religions coexist harmoniously. Attention should be
given to promoting the political settlement of regional
conflicts, maintaining an international environment
conducive to peace, stability and sustained development
and eliminating the breeding grounds for terrorism at
an early date.
China is an important member of the international
counter-terrorism camp. The East Turkestan terrorist
forces, represented by the East Turkestan Islamic
Movement, is a real threat facing China today. In recent
years, the East Turkestan terrorism movement has been
constantly inciting and organizing terrorist activities
that have seriously threatened not only China’s national
security, but also regional security and stability.
The Chinese President, Mr. Xi Jinping, has stressed
that China will fight terrorists on both the domestic
and the international fronts simultaneously and will
further enhance its international counter-terrorism
cooperation. In that regard, China has established
counter-terrorism cooperation mechanisms with over
10 countries and engaged in substantive cooperation
with them. China is also deeply involved in multilateral
cooperation mechanisms, such as the United Nations,
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum, thus making an important
contribution to the international fight against terrorism.
China will continue to take an active part in and push
forward bilateral and multilateral counter-terrorism
cooperation, scale up counter-terrorism intelligence
sharing and provide, to the best of its ability, matériel
and capacity-building assistance in the fight against
terrorism to other developing countries.
China is willing to continue to uphold the spirit of
mutual respect and cooperation on an equal footing,
work with all other countries, strengthen exchanges
and cooperation, and strive to advance cooperation
on international counter-terrorism in order to enable
us to build a tightly woven network against terrorist
26/32

14/04/2016

organizations and forces, which will leave no blind spot
for terrorism, thus ensuring regional and global peace
and security.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts and to deliver a
condensed version when speaking in the Chamber. I
would also like to appeal to speakers to deliver their
statements at a reasonable speed so that interpretation
may be provided accurately.
I now give the floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Gómez Camacho (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I would like to greatly thank your
delegation for having convened this debate. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing.
I would like to begin by reiterating that my
country firmly condemns terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. Likewise, we are trying to adopt
effective measures against terrorism, at the national,
regional and international levels, while fully respecting
human rights and fundamental freedoms. All States
have an obligation to act in strict compliance with
international law, in particular the Charter of the United
Nations, international human rights law, international
humanitarian law and refugee law.
It is crucial that terrorism not be associated with
any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group.
Political, religious and community leaders must
guarantee that messages issued about terrorism and how
to tackle it promote tolerance, respect and the culture
of peace, avoiding the dissemination of xenophobic and
discriminatory messages.
Since 2002, Mexico has led the initiative on the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism (General Assembly
resolution 68/178), both in New York and Geneva.
General Assembly resolution 70/148 reiterates the
commitment of the international community to
respect its obligations in that sphere. It also reiterates
the importance of civil society and humanitarian
organizations, as well as the right to privacy and
the participation of women, in formulating counterterrorist measures.
16-10469

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

In the light of the review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which is to take
place in June, I would like to make the following four
specific points:
First, greater coherence and coordination are
needed among the various United Nations offices
that make up the Strategy. That means reviewing the
Strategy’s architecture and the definition of mandates.
Secondly, we must improve communication
and coordination between the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.
Thirdly, it is important to guarantee that the
efforts of the Strategy are properly based on the four
action pillars, incorporating a broader agenda in terms
development, security and respect for human rights.
Fourthly, we must always favour a preventive
approach. That means addressing the causes
that lead to terrorism through two main actions:
enhancing the capacity-building of States and
strengthening development.
While it is understandable that we are trying
to prevent violent extremism so as to avoid the
proliferation of terrorism, it is crucial to think about the
implications. Mexico is concerned by the temptation to
merge the two concepts, which could lead to an overly
broad application of counter-terrorist measures and
potentially punish types of behaviour that under no
circumstances can be described as terrorist acts.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): First, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for presiding over the Security Council for this month.
I am sure that your able leadership and experience
will produce positive results. Allow me to express our
appreciation for the convening of this high-level open
debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing, which was most valuable.
Terrorism is one of the most significant challenges
facing various communities, individuals and States,
whatever their religion or ethnicity may be. It is a
phenomenon that garners significant financing and
is an obstacle to development. Terrorism knows no
nationality nor country of origin. The Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia emphasizes once again, therefore, its

S/PV.7670

rejection and condemnation of all terrorist acts, in all
forms and manifestations, whatsoever their objectives
may be. They are heinous crimes rejected by Islam,
crimes without any basis or foundation. We reiterate
the fact that extremely violent hate crimes that terrorize
Muslims across the world are being committed. Some
believe that these Muslims are responsible for the
actions of terrorists. Such a belief is unjust, creates
discrimination against Muslims, and increases both the
danger of terrorism as well as its spread.
We reiterate the importance of our cooperation
and participation in international and bilateral efforts
to combat terrorism and its financing, as well as to
extirpate the roots of this phenomenon, in particular the
application of all Security Council resolutions relevant
to the fight against terrorism.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is working to combat
terrorism and has always rejected the phenomenon at
the national and international levels. We have grappled
with it nationally and condemned it internationally.
We have also worked to curtail its sources of funding.
Those efforts include the criminalization of acts of
terrorism, incitement to terrorism and travel to conflict
zones, and measures to address terrorism financing. My
country’s efforts illustrate the importance of protecting
local communities against terrorists, and putting a stop
to terrorist cells. Security measures have enabled us to
be proactive in fighting attempts to spread terrorism
and to combat those who finance it, who represent an
equally important threat.
The Saudi public has roundly rejected terrorism.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has played a leading role
at the international level in calling on the international
community to combat terrorism. We have called for
the adoption of a global action plan in the framework
of international legislation so as to eradicate terrorism
and to uphold the sovereignty, security and stability
of countries. We have hosted several international
conferences on this topic, and participated in the creation
of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre.
Furthermore, we recently announced our contribution of
$10 million to establish a specialized centre for nuclear
counterterrorism at the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) headquarters. Moreover, we announced
a contribution of €500,000 to the modernization of
the IAEA laboratories in Seibersdorf. In addition, the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was one of the first countries
to support the international resolutions on nuclear
peace, having ratified the Convention on the Physical

16-1046927/32

S/PV.7670

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Protection of Nuclear Material. We are also members
of the International Convention for the Suppression of
Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.
The Muslim world is the first to suffer from the
impact of official, organized terrorism arising from the
occupation and seizure of land and property, as well as
terrorism that uses religion as a pretext. There has been
a failure to denounce the official organized terrorism
perpetrated by Israel and the impunity it enjoys with
regard to the crimes committed by its colonial army
and terrorist settlers. Those crimes include systematic
killings, occupation, Judaization and ethnic cleansing,
all of which may constitute war crimes or crimes against
humanity. The failure to condemn such terrorism
ultimately leads to its exacerbation and spread.
Moreover, the policy of double standards adopted by
some countries and the upholding of the interests of the
strongest — setting aside equality — are all factors that
serve to exacerbate violence, terrorism and extremism.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has adopted a very
firm position with its Arab brothers against the policy
of interference adopted by Iran in the Arab region. That
policy seeks to amplify conflicts and crises in the region,
export the revolution and create conditions conducive to
the spread of terrorism, violence and terrorism that uses
religion as a pretext. That policy seeks to destabilize
the region and to support terrorists and intercommunal
conflicts. It also seeks to support militias, armies and
terrorist groups, such as Hezbollah in Lebanon, and
other religious militias. Iran has also created terrorist
groups in Bahrain that are trained and financed by
the Guardians of the Revolution. Furthermore, Iran
continues its attempts to smuggle explosive materials
and weapons into Yemen. That is a flagrant violation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Following the exacerbation of the terrorist threat in
various Muslim countries, we announced the creation of
an Islamic alliance composed of 34 countries to combat
terrorism. The alliance will be an effective international
partner at all levels — cultural, ideological, financial
and technological — to strengthen security. The alliance
will be a solid force against terrorist organizations.
Moreover, my country is ready to participate in any
international effort to eradicate Da’esh and Al-Qaida in
Syria and any other country.
On numerous occasions, my delegation has warned
about the despicable crimes perpetrated by spoilers in
Syria and foreign groups that use religion as a pretext
28/32

14/04/2016

there and create conditions conducive to the spread
of the actions of Da’esh and the Al-Nusra Front, and
have exacerbated terrorism in the region. I wish to
call attention to the fact that in spite of the unstinting
efforts made to stop acts of aggression in Syria, which
have been committed in violation of resolutions 2254
(2015) and 2268 (2016), Syrian forces have violated the
cessation of hostilities 900 times, leading to the deaths
of more than 150 civilians. Furthermore, Syrian forces
have targeted hospitals, schools and civilians, and used
such indiscriminate weapons as barrel bombs. They
continue to besiege civilians and impede the transport
of humanitarian assistance. The pursuit of such actions
could undermine the agreement on a cessation of
hostilities.
We reiterate that the fight against terrorism
in Syria and the region is inextricably linked to a
political solution on a provisional Government entity,
in line with the first Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523,
annex). Such an entity would have operational global
prerogatives and lay the foundations for the future
of Syria — a Syria that rejects terrorism, violence,
intolerance and extremism, and that has no place for
those who have killed Syrian people.
The protection of civilians against occupation
and systematic killings, the rejection of the spread
of sectarian and ethnic conflicts, and the upholding
of international instruments are not merely moral
obligations; rather, they are vital prerequisites, the
absence of which would lead to the spread of terrorism.
Such actions should enjoy priority among international
counter-terrorism efforts. My country’s delegation will
therefore maintain its international cooperation in order
to ensure the security and stability of the region and the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): I wish first to thank China
for organizing this very important open debate.
Hungary, of course, aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered later on behalf of the European Union, but
I should like to say a few words in my national capacity.
Hungary truly believes that terrorism is a global
problem that has to be tackled globally. We always say
that terrorists cannot win, and we can counter terrorism
only through the broadest possible international
cooperation and with the help fo a comprehensive
16-10469

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

set of instrucments, ranging from security measures
to preventive tools. Hungary believes that all acts of
terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless
of their motivation and wherever, whenever and by
whomever they are committed. Terrorism should not be
associated with any religion, nationality, civilization or
ethnic group.
Hungary believes that the United Nations is the
best placed to play a leading role in the coordination
of international counter-terrorism cooperation. It is
the best placed to assess and monitor international
priorities, set international strategies and policies,
and play an important role in capacity-building. In
this regard, we fully support the all-of-United Nations
approach laid out in the Secretary- General’s recent
Plan of Action on Preventing Violent Extremism. We
also believe that the upcoming review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy will
offer a unique opportunity to reach consensus on the
robust framework of international cooperation and
coordination that is needed to counter terrorism today.
Hungary supports all international and regional
efforts aimed at cutting off the sources of terrorism.
The Hungarian criminal code criminalizes terrorism
financing and money-laundering for such purposes.
We believe that the efforts and specific activities of
the relevant financial intelligence units of Member
States must be harmonized on the basis of shared
information and joint investigations, as appropriate,
to more effectively hamper the capacity of terrorist
organizations to function and survive.
The most recent tragedies in Brussels have also
painfully reminded us of the importance of curbing
the flow of foreign terrorist fighters. More effective
border control is needed if we are to be able to manage
the security threat caused by foreign terrorist fighter
returnees. Interoperable databases and real-time
information-sharing should help more us to effectively
monitor the travel of foreign terrorist fighters and
ensure swift action by all stakeholders when needed.
A comprehensive counter-terrorism strategy
cannot be based solely on security measures. Enhanced
preventive measures are also critical elements for
success. Good governance, the rule of law, full respect
for human rights, quality education, youth participation,
intercultural dialogue all play an important role in
preventing radicalization. We must also engage all
members of society, including religious leaders,

S/PV.7670

women leaders, leaders in the arts, music and sports in
this regard.
One of the greatest challenges of our time is to
create an Internet that is a free and safe environment
for our children and youth and prevents terrorists from
exploiting the Internet for their own purposes. We must
learn from examples of responsible online activism
that effectively engages young people to contribute
to inclusive societies and a sustainable future for all.
We support all efforts aimed at confronting terrorists’
distorted propaganda, including the activities of
those Muslim communities, Islamic leaders, imams
and other Islamic opinion-leaders who commit their
actions to making a clear difference between Islam as
a religion and Da’esh propaganda, which goes against
it. We are also pleased that various service and content
providers are open to cooperating with the international
community when terrorist online content is reported
to them.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the floor
to Mr. António.
Mr. António: Allow me first of all to congratulate
you, Sir, upon your assumption of the Security
Council presidency for this month, and for convening
this important and very timely debate. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his very
insightful briefing.
Today’s debate is taking place against the backdrop
of ever-increasing challenges in the area of peace
and security due to the rise of terrorism and violent
extremism. The recent terrorist attacks in many capitals
of the world, which shocked the conscience of the
international community, came as a further illustration
of the magnitude of the challenges at hand. I reiterate
the African Union’s strong and unequivocal rejection
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, as
well as its strong condemnation of all terrorist acts,
which cannot be justified under any circumstances. I
once again express the continent’s solidarity with the
affected countries and victims, whose plight should
be fully acknowledged and addressed. It is also our
strong belief that terrorism cannot and should not be
associated with any religion, nationality or civilization.
Likewise, terrorism should not be equated with the
legitimate struggle of peoples under foreign occupation
to achieve their inalienable right to self-determination.
In Africa, terrorism and violent extremism
still represent the most serious threat to peace and

16-1046929/32

S/PV.7670

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

security. This threat has, in the past decade, assumed
greater proportions by expanding geographically and
displaying unprecedented levels of violence in various
parts of the continent. In the face of these challenges,
the African Union (AU) and its regional mechanisms
have remained committed and actively engaged in
the fight against terrorism and violent extremism.
The relevant AU policy organs have articulated a
comprehensive framework for the implementation of
AU and international counter-terrorism instruments
in Africa. The 1999 Convention on the Prevention and
Combating of Terrorism and its 2004 Supplementary
Protocol, as well as the 2002 plan of action and the
establishment of the African Centre for the Study and
Research on Terrorism, continue to provide a sound
legal and institutional basis for enhanced cooperation
among member States.
The African Union has also undertaken numerous
capacity-building initiatives to enhance the capacity of
its member States to combat terrorism. The commitment
of the African Union was further demonstrated during
the recent Summit of the AU Peace and Security
Council, held on 29 January, which, among other
things, reviewed the AU efforts against terrorism.
The Summit reaffirmed the continued relevance of the
instruments adopted by the Organization of African
Unity and the AU in past years and called for renewed
efforts to combat extremism and radicalizing religious
interpretations that foster intolerance and violence.
The Summit also agreed to pursue and intensify
efforts to support the establishment of regional
cooperation mechanisms aimed at addressing specific
transnational threats in different parts of the continent.
In that regard, it is worth recalling that a number of
security cooperation mechanisms have already been
established to encourage better coordination and
information exchange among member States, notably
within the frameworks of the Nouakchott Process, the
Sahel Fusion and Liaison Unit, the Djibouti Process
for Eastern Africa, and the Eastern Africa Fusion and
Liaison Unit. In that regard, the progress made on
the ground by the troop-contributing countries to the
African Union Mission in Somalia in the fight against
the terrorist group Al-Shabaab should be acknowledged
and fully supported in every way by the international
community. Any reduction in its resources will have a
very bad impact on the gains realized so far. The recent
operationalization of the African Mechanism for Police
Cooperation will also greatly enhance the continent’s
30/32

14/04/2016

capacity to address the threat posed by terrorism and
transnational organized crime.
With regard to the issue of financing terrorism,
the African Union has frequently expressed its deep
concerns about the reported financial flows coming
from outside the continent in support of terrorist and
extremist groups, and has stressed the importance of
investigating the matter in order to determine the extent
of the problem and make recommendations on how to
address it comprehensively. It should also be noted that
the African Union prohibits the payment of ransoms in
exchange for hostages and requests that such acts be
considered crimes.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
commitment of the AU to fully shouldering its share
of the responsibility in the fight against terrorism and
violent extremism. We should also be mindful of the
fact that we all have that responsibility and that we
must act collectively to confront this scourge, which
not only undermines international peace and security
but also the very values and principles that have long
characterized our diverse and democratic societies.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Morales López (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the Chinese presidency of the
Council for its initiative in holding today’s open debate
and for the concept note accompanying it (S/2016/306,
annex).
Effective and comprehensive action in the face of
threats such as terrorism, violent extremism and foreign
terrorist fighters is becoming increasingly urgent.
Every day we see people from various countries and
regions around the world fighting in conflicts that are
totally alien to them or for violent causes in situations
far from their native lands. The ways in which terrorism,
violent extremism and hate speech have recently spread
affects our ability, and that of future generations, to
live together.
We have an ongoing duty to build social and
cultural environments that do not glorify violence.
Terrorism cannot and should not be associated with
any religion, ethnic group, community or nationality,
and we must therefore join forces to combat terrorism
comprehensively and objectively. All our actions should
be based firmly on respect for international standards
and the rule of law. That is the only way we can make
16-10469

14/04/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

progress and thereby prevent this threat from continuing
and growing stronger in future. As the Secretary-General
said earlier, it is only when we respect the standards of
human rights and international humanitarian law that
we can ensure that the strategies we use to fight this
scourge do not become counterproductive and worsen
the effect on the communities we want to protect.
Colombia is part of the Global Counterterrorism
Forum and promotes the adoption, implementation and
application of the various international conventions and
protocols relating to terrorism, as well as the relevant
Security Council resolutions, as an effective way of
preventing, sanctioning and eliminating terrrorism
through close cooperation. The strong links between
terrorism and the various forms and manifestations of
transnational organized crime have enabled terrorist
organizations to expand both their size and scope. The
international community must deal effectively with the
economy of terrorism, with particular emphasis on its
finances and the laundering of the proceeds from its
illicit activities.
The shared challenge to us all that terrorism
represents is evolving daily, and we can fight it only
through the concerted efforts of Member States and our
Organization. As the concept note indicates, the gravity
and importance of a phenomenon such as this make it
vital that the Security Council shoulder its principal
responsibility for addressing international peace and
security and promote cooperation with the General
Assembly and the Secretariat, with a view to joining
forces for efforts that can lead to terrorism’s definitive
neutralization and to the climate of international
peace and security that the world needs if it is to make
progress on development.
The fight against terrorism cannot succeed in
the continued absence of a general convention on
international terrorism. Years of discussion have
already been expended on efforts to formulate such
a convention, and the seriousness of the problem of
international terrorism demands that act urgently to
make the necessary decisions, however difficult they
may be. A convention would enable us to complement
existing instruments, bridge gaps that remain and
strengthen the internationally binding legal mechanisms
for tackling this crime. Columbia emphasizes
how important it is to promote open and inclusive
consultations in this multilateral forum in order to
achieve a speedy agreement on a general convention,
and we believe that a consensus text would be a sign

S/PV.7670

of the commitment of all Member States to the shared
benefit that the elimination of terrorism represents.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s open
debate on threats to international peace and security
caused by terrorist acts. Today, terrorism is a global
phenomenon that no country or society can remain
immune or indifferent to. According to authoritative
accounts, 2,850 people have lost their lives, and nearly
4,000 more have been injured, in terrorist-related
violence in 38 countries during the first three months
of this year alone. In effect, terrorism is extracting a
deadly price. We therefore welcome your initiative in
holding this debate as one step in a global approach to
a collective challenge.
While the international community has made
progress in evolving a rule-based order for managing
many aspects of globalization, it still has some way
to go in addressing evolving security threats such as
terrorism. Today terrorists are globally networked.
They have expanded their footprint and mutated
into hydra-headed monsters. Alas, the international
community’s counter-terrorism efforts are still in an
embryonic form.
The United Nations is uniquely placed to provide
the platform necessary for real cooperation and
coordination in our common fight against terrorism.
Such cooperation should include establishing standards
and making rules as well as formulating practical and
specific ways to counter terrorism. That is why we feel
that the actions of the Security Council alone, however
effective they may be in responding to identified
threats, cannot provide a sufficient response to the
global scourge of terror.
To put the counter-terror efforts that many
Governments now undertake in a broader normative
construct, the adoption of a comprehensive convention
on international terrorism is an imperative. It would
put in place a framework that enables local action to
fit with global norms. It would generate coherence in
national responses against what is a challenge to all
of us collectively. Even as we work to advance the
prospects of a normative framework in the form of a
comprehensive convention, there are several other steps
that can be taken to delegitimize terrorism.

16-1046931/32

S/PV.7670

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

First, we agree with the proposition in the
concept note (S/2016/306, annex) that all terrorist
acts are criminal, no matter whenever, wherever or
by whomsoever they are committed. The world today
does not accept any cause as justification for terrorism.
Every outcome document referring to terrorism
therefore needs to reinforce this approach. Statements
of solidarity when attacks happen and expressions of
policy independent of happenings have a value that is
often underestimated.
Secondly, frameworks such as the Financial
Action Task Force, which sets standards with respect
to combating money laundering and terrorist financing
or the Egmont Group, which is an informal network of
financial intelligence units, are important elements in
degrading and defeating terrorist organizations.
Thirdly, we need to effectively control upstream and
downstream activities associated with terrorism and
also address the ecosystem that spawns terrorism. We
therefore support the formulation of a legal framework
to criminalize foreign terrorist fighters.
Fourthly, in terms of tangible support, the Security
Council’s sanctions committees need to foster greater
responsiveness to Member States’ requests for
preventive listings to counter terror. They also need
to follow up complaints against violations by listed
individuals and entities more vigorously.
Fifthly, the procedures of unanimity and
anonymity of the Committee pursuant to resolutions

32/32

14/04/2016

1267 (1999),1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida,and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), need
to be revisited. Currently, they result in a lack of
accountability under the cloak and garb of unanimity
and anonymity. Each of the 15 members now has a veto
and none except these 15 members is told which it is
that has wielded the veto in a specific instance. The
general membership of the United Nations is never,
ever formally informed of how and why requests for
listing terrorists are not acceded to. Counter-terror
mechanisms such as the sanctions committees, which
act on behalf of the international community, need to
build trust, not engender impunity by the use of this
form of a hidden veto.
I hope that deliberations of this debate will feed
in positively to the ongoing consolidation of the
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
and the upcoming discussions on the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Although we have
made progress on some fronts, forging a broad-based
consensus on an issue like countering terrorism is a test
we have yet to pass at the United Nations. Yet, it is also
a test that none of us can afford to fail.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are still
a number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. I intend, with the concurrence of the members
of the Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

16-10469
