16

General Assembly-Eighth Session

728 (VIII). Work of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the problems of refugees who
are i:he concern of the United Nations High Com1
missioner for Refugees in the light of his report
to the General Assembly at its eighth session and of
the Secretary-General's memorandum,2
Having noted 'With appreciation the work being done
on behalf of these refugees,
Having noted 'With concern the precarious situation
of certain groups of refugees within the High Commissioner's mandate, in particular those in need of
emergency aid, the considerable number- still living in
camps, and those requiring special care for whom no
satisfactory arrangements have yet been made,
1. Invites the High Commissioner to concern himself in particular with these groups of refugees in
carrying out his functions as defined in the Statute of
his Office and to pay special attention to them in his
report to the General Assembly at its ninth session;
2. Appeals to the governments of States Members
and non-niembers of the United Nations to intensify
their efforts to promote, in co-operation with the High
Commissioner, solutions for the problems of refugees,
through repatriation, resettlement and integration in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 538 B
(VI) of 2 February 1952;
3. Takes note of the relations which the High Commissioner has established with interested organizations,
expresses the hope that appropriate consultations will
take place in the drawing up of all programmes of
international action designed to improve the situation
of refugees within his mandate and invites the High
Commissioner to give an account of such consultations
in his reports.
453rd plenary meeting,
23 October 1953.
729 (Vlll). Technical assistance in promoting
and safeguarding the rights of women
The· General Assembly,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 504
J II (XVI) of 23 July 1953 concerning technical
assistance in promoting and safeguarding the rights
of women,
Approves the decision of the Council authorizing
the Secretary-General to render, at the request of
Member States, services which do not fall within the
scope of existing technical assistance programmes, in
order to assist these States in promoting and safeguarding the rights of women.
453rd plenary meeting,
23 October 1953.
730 (VIII). Technical assistance in the fields of
prevention of discrimination and protection
of minorities
The General Assembly,
Having considered the recommendation contained
in paragraph 2 of Economic and Social Council reso1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighth
Session, Supplement No. 11.
2 See document A/2457.

lution 502 G (XVI) of 3 August 1953 on technical
assistance in the fields of prevention of discrimination
and protection of minorities,
1. Authorizes the Secretary-General to render, at
the request of any State Member of the United Nations, technical advice and other services which do
not fall within the scope of existing technical assistance programmes, in order to assist the government
of that State within its territory in the eradication of
discrimination or in the protection of minorities or
both;
2. Decides that the services so authorized may
include, but need not be restricted to, technical advice
regarding the drafting of legislation and the establishment of administrative and judicial machinery and
appropriate services in such matters of fundamental
importance as education, subject to arrangements within
existing agreements with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and other
competent specialized agencie'l.
453rd plenary meeting,
23 October 1953.

731 (VIII). Development of political rights of
women in Territories where these rights are
not fully enjoyed
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 56 ( I) of 11 December 1946
relating to the political rights of women, which was
reaffirmed in resolution 640 (VII) of 20 December
1952,
Having considered Economic and Social Council
resolution 504 F (XVI) of 23 July 1953,
Urges States to take all necessary measures, particularly educational and legislative measures, leading
to the development of the political rights of women
in all Territories in which women do not enjoy full
political rights, including Trust and N on-Self-Governing Territories.
454th plenary meeting,
23 October 1953.
732 (Vlll). Programme of concerted practical
action in the social field of the United Nations
and the specialized agencies
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the principles contained in its resolution
535 (VI) of 2 February 1952,
1. Takes note ivith appreciation of the efforts made
to establish the programme of concerted practical
action in the social field of the United Nations and
the specialized agencies adopted in Economic and
Social Council resolution 496 (XVI) of 31 July 1953;
2. Invites the Secretary-General and the specialized
agencies to keep particularly in mind, in the implementation of the projects of the programme of concerted practical action, the general principles, methods
and techniques defined in Economic and Social Council resolution 496 (XVI), special consideration being
given to the needs of the under-developed countries;
3. Recommends that the Economic and Social
Council should supplement the programme of concerted
practical action in the social field of the United Nations and the specialized agencies as set forth in reso-
