S/PV.8383

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8383rd meeting

Friday, 26 October 2018, 9 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Woldegerima
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-34307 (E)
*1834307*

S/PV.8383

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 9.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. De Mistura is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Beirut.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura (spoke in Spanish): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to address
the Council from Beirut.
(spoke in English)
I take this opportunity to update you, Sir, and the
members of the Security Council on developments
with regard to Syria that have taken place since my last
briefing (see S/PV.8373), which took place last week
in New York. Today, I will focus in particular on an
update on my consultations in Damascus two days ago.
Following the meeting between the SecretaryGeneral and the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the Syrian
Arab Republic, Mr. Al-Moualem, on the margins of
the General Assembly, I met Minister Al-Moualem in
Damascus on 24 October. We focused on the political
process and the efforts to convene a constitutional
committee. I appreciated the quite frank nature of
the exchanges that we had in Damascus. Minister
Al-Moualem expressed appreciation for his meeting
with the Secretary-General during the General
Assembly. He indicated that it paved the way for the
meeting in Damascus. I will now refer as accurately as
possible to what I heard from Minister Al-Moualem.
He strongly underlined the principles of sovereignty
and non-interference in the internal affairs of United
2/17

26/10/2018

Nations Member States. He underlined that the Syrian
Constitution is a highly sensitive matter of national
sovereignty. On the Sochi final statement, Minister
Al-Moualem referred to another outcome, rather than
the one circulated by the Russian Federation to the
Council. He said that it was possible for the Government
of Syria to take some elements of the outcome circulated
by Russia and “reconcile” them with the Government’s
preferred other outcome. The key differences in this
regard concerned mainly the role of the United Nations.
With regard to the understanding reached between
Russia and the United Nations before the Sochi event,
which I mentioned specifically when I briefed the
Council on 17 October, Minister Al-Moualem did not
view it as consistent with the principles of sovereignty
and non-interference. Basically, Minister Al-Moualem
did not accept a role for the United Nations in general
in identifying or selecting the middle third list; rather,
Minister Al-Moualem indicated that the Government
of Syria and Russia had agreed recently that the three
Astana guarantors and the Syrian Government would,
in consultations among them, prepare a proposal with
regard to the third middle list and present it to the United
Nations facilitation. I should add, just for the sake of
completeness, that Mr. Al-Moualem, did not on that
occasion or in that meeting, indicate the Government’s
views on the mandate, chairmanship, decision-making
or any other aspects of the rules of procedure necessary
for a constitutional committee to function.
For my part, I welcomed the chance for the United
Nations to talk directly with the Government about the
constitutional committee. I also regretted that this had
not been possible since the Sochi meeting and that the
Government had declined the United Nations offers to
engage it directly on the constitutional committee and
its follow-up. I recalled that it was in this context of
non-engagement by the Government with the United
Nations that the United Nations began to work with
the Astana guarantors, at their own suggestion, on a
package and that Russia and Iran had informed the
United Nations that they had been constantly consulting
the Government as the consultations proceeded.
I indicated that it was also appropriate and logical
for the United Nations, as the mediator mandated by the
Security Council, to seek understandings with Russia
regarding a meeting that Russia had proposed in Sochi,
hosted and facilitated, in order to ensure a common
understanding of how the initiative would contribute
to the United Nations-mandated process. I reminded
18-34307

26/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Minister Al-Moualem of the convening role of the
United Nations, mandated by resolution 2254 (2015). I
also recalled the terms of the Sochi final statement, as
circulated by the Russian Federation to the Council. I
would also remind the members of the Security Council
today of what was agreed. The first task was
“to form a constitutional committee comprising
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
delegation along with wide-represented opposition
delegation for drafting of a constitutional reform
as a contribution to the political settlement under
the United Nations auspices in accordance with
Security Council Resolution 2254 (2015)”.
Secondly, the
“constitutional committee would at the very least
comprise Government, opposition representatives in
the intra-Syrian talks, Syrian experts, civil society,
independents, tribal leaders and women; ... care
would be taken to ensure adequate representation
of Syria’s ethnic and religious components; and...
final agreement is to be reached in the United
Nations-led Geneva process on the mandate and
terms of reference, powers, rules of procedure,
and selection criteria for the composition of a
constitutional committee.”
I explained in detail during the last briefing the
criteria that guide us in approaching the questions on the
list, which I went through with Minister Al-Moualem.
Most importantly, I stressed that the United Nations
was in Damascus precisely to consult the Government
on the list. As the facilitator, I offered for the United
Nations to work there and then with the Government if
the Government objected to particular names, or even
on the development of a new, credible balanced and
inclusive list as long as it had those characteristics. I
observed that, to me, this seemed to fully respect the
sovereignty of the Syrian Arab Republic. Indeed, it was
an invitation to exercise that sovereignty.
At a certain point, Minister Al-Moualem proposed
that I withdraw the proposed middle third list already
on the table. I indicated that the United Nations could
withdraw its proposal only once and only if there
was an agreement on a new, credible, balanced and
inclusive list consistent with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Sochi final statement. I urged that we seize
the opportunity to ascertain if that was possible or not.
Minister Al-Moualem indicated that he would get back
to me if new instructions came from his own leadership.

S/PV. 8383

However, he also said that he preferred, at that stage,
to await the outcome of my forthcoming consultations
with the Astana guarantors.
I should add that Minister Al-Moualem stated that
the Astana guarantors had rejected the initial United
Nations proposal on a third list. I, for my part, indicated
that this was not really the case and that while they
had suggested the need for some changes, they were
engaging on the proposal and that it had already been
revised more than once. I also indicated that all three
guarantors supported the role of the United Nations, as
per resolution 2254 (2015) and the Sochi declaration.
The Government has expressed its position clearly
and I can say that it has indicated that it wishes that
position to be made public, which I am currently doing.
However, I cannot at this stage report any evolution
on its position beyond what I have just said and what
I have heard myself, which I am reporting to faithfully
to the Council. The efforts of those who convened and
sponsored Sochi to ensure that the Government of
Syria would be fully on board with the outcomes of the
Sochi final declaration have not, as of today, produced
the outcome we were hoping for. Otherwise, we would
have heard something different.
Taking into account, first, the mandate of the Special
Envoy, embodied in resolution 2254 (2015); secondly,
Minister Al-Moualem’s different understanding of
the role of the United Nations and of the Sochi final
declaration; and thirdly, the extent of the Government’s
desire to reopen the work today, we have a serious
challenge ahead. Let me be frank. It is my intention
to spare no effort to address this challenge during the
coming weeks. Since Minister Al-Moualem indicated
that the Government’s preferred methodology at this
stage was to work with the Astana guarantors on a
third list, a great deal of responsibility and expectation
rests now on them and on how to implement the Sochi
declaration in a manner that would carry forward the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) and give
practical effect to the basic points that the United
Nations supported in Sochi.
As I have already indicated, the United Nations
proposal was made after careful consultations,
including with the guarantors, and has already been
revised in the light of those consultations. The sheer
difficulty of keeping everyone on board should be
a reminder to all to be careful in thinking that some
radically different approach has any prospect of success.

18-343073/17

S/PV.8383

The situation in the Middle East

26/10/2018

The United Nations is not opposed to constructive and
moderate suggestions so long as we maintain the same
spirit of credibility — I repeat, credibility — balance,
and the international legitimacy of the middle third
list on the table. There is a sense of urgency to find
common ground or to at least clarify where we stand,
because we should not miss the opportunity offered by
the Idlib window. That is why November is becoming
so important.

as Special Envoy when I brief the Council in person
on 19 November. Meanwhile, we shall keep our door
open, and we shall keep under review all options for a
constructive and credible outcome.

Let me also stress once more that the United Nations
believes it is important to ensure a minimum of 30 per
cent women representatives in the committee and that
this requires at least 24 of the 50 representatives in
the middle third to be women. Tomorrow, I will be
travelling to Istanbul to brief the Presidents of France,
Germany, Russia and Turkey when they meet to discuss
Syria. I am honoured by this invitation and will use
that occasion to remind those four important leaders
that, given the fact that a catastrophe in Idlib has so
far been avoided; that the international consensus to
see a credible and balanced constitutional committee
with United Nations facilitation as soon as possible;
and that the instructions given to me by the SecretaryGeneral — whom I am constantly consulting on
the matter more than ever before — require me to
exhaust every avenue in the time that remains to my
mandate, there is, in my opinion, still a clear window of
opportunity that needs to be urgently seized.

Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy De Mistura for his briefing.

The influence that can be exercised by all world
leaders, including in particular the four world leaders
meeting tomorrow in Istanbul, can be crucial in
ensuring that this happens. Seeing as members of the
Small Group on Syria will meet on Monday in London,
I will also use that occasion to host a meeting with them
later on, within the context of the Geneva process. I
really look forward to hosting the Astana guarantors
very soon. They themselves met in recent days and,
according to their statement, discussed many aspects
of a constitutional committee. That meeting will be
vitally important to consultations.

Further obstruction of the committee’s formation
is unacceptable. Further delay risks squandering
the window of opportunity provided by the Turkish
and Russian demilitarized zone, which succeeded in
preventing further bloodshed in Idlib and beyond. The
parties have been consulted. No one should doubt that
the United Nations Special Envoy has the mandate to
move forward to establish the constitutional committee.
Any list in that respect, by whomever proposed, must
have the approval of the Special Envoy, not just in
its membership but in how it is compiled. That is his
charge, and not just from Sochi, but from paragraph 2
of resolution 2254 (2015).

I will spare no effort in the time that remains to
my mandate to verify whether it is indeed possible
to convene a United Nations-facilitated, Syrianowned, Syrian-led constitutional committee that is
credible, balanced and inclusive and that contributes,
in the context of the Geneva process, to implementing
resolution 2254 (2015). If it is feasible, the United
Nations will convene such a committee as soon as
possible. I will, in any case, share a full assessment
4/17

The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Council, I thank Mr. De Mistura for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council wishing to make statements.

The United States, along with all other members
of the small group — Egypt, France, Germany, Jordan,
Saudi Arabia and the United Kingdom — and other
like-minded Security Council partners are united in our
position that the United Nations should move swiftly
to convene the constitutional committee. We continue
to strongly support Special Envoy De Mistura’s efforts
towards the formation of that committee in November.
As the Special Envoy noted, the constitutional
committee must be credible, balanced and
representative of the Syrian people, and we note,
despite what the Special Envoy heard in Damascus,
that the United Nations has exclusive control over the
committee’s membership, schedule and scope of work,
as affirmed by the Russian Federation in its January
2018 Sochi declaration.

We should be in full agreement as to the fact that
there is no alternative to a United Nations political
process as described in that resolution and agreed
by unanimous decision of the Council. That political
process must move forward now.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like at the outset to thank the Special Envoy of the
18-34307

26/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

United Nations Secretary-General for his particularly
important and enlightening briefing concerning
progress in the political process and, more broadly,
for his tireless efforts, which deserve and enjoy our
full support.
We requested this meeting in response to the
proposal made by Staffan De Mistura last week. We
did so because Syria is currently at a crossroads: it
could either tip into military escalation in Idlib, which
would open up one of the darkest chapters in the Syrian
tragedy, or it could take the difficult path of genuine
political momentum for a settlement to the conflict.
We are deeply convinced that today, perhaps for the
first time in seven years, there is a narrow window
of opportunity to achieve that. Both scenarios, the
encouraging one and the bleak one, are possible today;
the choice depends a great deal on us and on the ability
of the Council to come together around the option
of peace.
The establishment of the constitutional committee
can and must be the turning point that we are looking
for, a first step in a process of genuine political
momentum. Such establishment as soon as possible
is therefore our priority today. To be clear, given the
choice between war and peace in Syria, the key lies
largely in the land of Tolstoy; the establishment of the
constitutional committee requires that Russia leverage
its full weight in Damascus in this respect, just as we are
doing for our part with our partners in the small group.
After all, the idea of the constitutional committee came
out of an initiative of Russian diplomacy, and today all
the members of the Council, without exception, have
advocated for its establishment.
So what are we waiting for to move forward?
I should like today to make three points: to clearly
identify the responsibilities of the Syrian regime, whose
obstruction is continuing to block the launch of the
political process; to share with the Council the efforts
made by France and the small group to achieve this; and,
lastly, to briefly lay out possible subsequent solutions.
Our friend Staffan went to Damascus to hear the
expectations and positions of one of the parties to the
conflict. From the picture that he has just painted, it
seems, as was, unfortunately, predictable, that the
regime does not consider itself bound by a commitment,
even though a few months ago it transmitted its list to
the Special Envoy, and that it is rejecting the list of the
third third of the constitutional committee proposed by

S/PV. 8383

the Special Envoy, in so doing not hesitating to trample
the rules laid down in Sochi.
The conclusions of his visit provide clarification
concerning the responsibilities at play and require us to
redouble our efforts to finally get the political process of
the ground. The United Nations has made considerable
efforts to achieve a composition of the constitutional
committee that represents all components of Syrian
society. Here once again, on behalf of France, I would
like to pay tribute to Staffan de Mistura for his work.
Staffan has conducted in-depth consultations,
adjusting his proposals several times so as to achieve
a balanced, universally acceptable composition of the
constitutional committee. The offer currently on the
table meets those requirements. He was mandated to
carry out this work and to achieve the establishment of
the committee, and he has our full support for inviting
the participants without delay to a first meeting in
November. We strongly request that he move forward
in this respect.
France has spared no effort to encourage progress
in the political process. The ministers from the small
group issued a joint communiqué on the margins of the
General Assembly calling for the early creation of the
constitutional committee. The members of the small
group, whose representatives all spoke last week in the
Security Council (see S/PV.8373), demonstrated their
unity and support for that agenda along with the vast
majority of members of the Council.
President Macron spoke on the telephone with
President Trump at the beginning of the week on the
subject of Syria, and the urgent need to make progress on
the political track was underlined. Our determination to
ensure that the constitutional committee is established
is therefore very clear. The Istanbul summit, which
will take place on Saturday and will bring together
France, Germany, Russia and Turkey, must also allow
for progress to be made on this specific point and, of
course, on the subsequent political process. The small
group will meet once again before the end of the month,
and there is therefore unprecedented mobilization for
the committee to meet. So let us come together to push
ahead with all of our strength in this direction so that
we do not allow this very fragile window of opportunity
to close.
What do we need to do now? As confirmed by the
Special Envoy’s visit to Damascus, the top priority is
for all actors to at last bring the necessary pressure to

18-343075/17

S/PV.8383

The situation in the Middle East

26/10/2018

bear on Damascus so that the committee can meet in
November. That is the only possible path. Together we
must show that we are firm and mobilized to ensure
the implementation of the objectives that we have
clearly endorsed.

that we actually face a grave challenge in the way that
Members of the United Nations have been cooperating
with the Organization, and as my American and French
colleagues have said, we face a grave challenge in terms
of the situation on the ground.

The Council’s convergence of views on a
proposal initially made by Russia represents a unique
opportunity; to fail to seize it would be irresponsible.
We cannot allow the regime to ruin our collective
efforts; if that happened, the conflict would continue
for years, with no financial resources to rebuild the
country and refugees left unable to return.

Additionally, there is now enormous doubt
over what the Sochi agreement was and what it now
represents. Either Russia has given the United Nations
and the Council assurances that it has proven too
weak to deliver on, or it was all a cynical smokescreen
designed to divert attention and energy while Russia,
Syria and Iran prosecuted the military campaign. That
military campaign has been brought to a halt only by
the international outrage at the threat to 2 to 3 million
civilians in Idlib, before the Turks bravely stepped in
and brokered an agreement that was designed to protect
those civilians.

In summary, our friend Staffan de Mistura’s road
map is clear and in line with resolution 2254 (2015),
which is more than ever our common compass, and
he has our full support in implementing it. I will
conclude with a solemn appeal to everyone’s sense of
responsibility: we must remain fully aware that the risk
of a new escalation in the Syrian tragedy cannot be
ruled out. The only definitive way to avoid that is with
a credible and inclusive political solution. That means
that the coming weeks are crucial, and that is why we
will not hesitate to convene the Security Council as
often as needed during the coming period to mobilize
the international community in support of mediation
on the part of the United Nations and to finally
achieve the delayed establishment of the constitutional
committee. I remind the Council that the establishment
of that committee will be only the first step in the long
process of bringing back peace to Syria, which includes
elections and the establishment of a safe and neutral
environment on the ground. We are counting on our
friend Mr. De Mistura, just as he can count on our full
support until the end of his mission.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): We thank Mr. Staffan
de Mistura and his team for briefing us today. I find
it incredible that we should have to rehearse, for the
benefit of the Syrian authorities, why the United
Nations needs to be involved in Syria. It is not a matter
of national sovereignty that there are over 1 million
refugees. It is not a matter of national sovereignty that
there are 400,000 dead in Syria. What we have there
is a threat to international peace and security, and it is
right that the United Nations is involved. The United
Nations has been involved on the humanitarian aspect,
the refugee aspect and the health aspect. It is absolutely
front-and-centre correct that it should be involved in the
political process. I will therefore go further than Mr. De
Mistura, who talked about a serious challenge. I think
6/17

I therefore think that we need five things, in support
of what my French and American colleagues have said.
We need clarity on the status of the Sochi agreement and
the new proposals of the Syrian authorities. What do
they mean? What do Russia and Iran think about them?
We need clarity on what steps need to be taken by all
the players before 19 November, when Mr. De Mistura
has offered to come back and brief the Council, and
before the end of November when he steps down. We
need clarity that Russia, as one of the five permanent
members of the Council, an Astana guarantor and
the convener of the Sochi agreement, will work
constructively and tirelessly with the United Nations,
along with Syria and Iran. All United Nations Members
have a responsibility to support Mr. De Mistura as the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria. We
need to hear today that that promise of constructive,
tireless and dedicated engagement is there to bring this
conflict to an end.
We need the agreement on Idlib to hold. We need
for that opportunity that others have mentioned to
be seized. We need the constitutional committee to
be convened, and I share the views of my American
and French colleagues on that. We need humanitarian
access to be improved, and we need resolution 2254
(2015) to be upheld. The Council needs to come together
to support the political process. Without the political
process, this dreadful conflict will never truly end,
whatever happens militarily on the ground. We look
forward to further reports following the international
meetings in the coming days, but I believe that we must
hear today from all Council members that they will
18-34307

26/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

support the United Nations as it tries its very best to
move the political process forward.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria for his briefing
this morning. We commend Mr. Staffan de Mistura’s
intensified efforts to reach a political solution and bring
an end to the conflict in Syria. We very much appreciate
his update today following his visit to Damascus,
although I have to say that the content of what he has
reported on, the response from Damascus, is not what
we had hoped for. We are deeply disappointed by the
continued lack of cooperation on the part of the Syrian
Government regarding the constitutional committee,
which contradicts the Sochi final statement that was
circulated by Russia to the Council. We support Mr. De
Mistura’s approach and his insistence on credibility,
balance and international legitimacy. We therefore call
again on the Syrian Government to fully cooperate
with the United Nations, and on those with close
relations with Damascus, especially Russia, to support
such efforts.
We fully support Mr. De Mistura and his mandate
to establish the constitutional committee, which
constitutes the first step towards a political solution
in line with resolution 2254 (2015). The Sochi final
statement made clear that it was via the Geneva process
and the facilitation of the Special Envoy that the final
selection of the committee would be made. Therefore,
the Special Envoy’s intensified efforts in many ways
constitute a make-or-break moment for the United
Nations efforts to convene a credible constitutional
committee and for the legitimacy that comes with
that. Mr. De Mistura therefore needs and deserves
the wholehearted backing of the Council, because it
is only through a United Nations-led process that we
can achieve a political solution that is acceptable to
all Syrians and the international community. At this
critical time, we want to reiterate our strong call on
the Syrian Government, which I believe everyone in
the Council agrees on, to fully engage and support the
United Nations-led political process and make sure that
there will be real progress in time for the next meeting
in November, as previous speakers have said.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I wish to thank Special Envoy De Mistura for
his briefing and express our appreciation for his efforts
to facilitate a political settlement of the Syrian issue.

S/PV. 8383

Thanks to the efforts of the Syrian people themselves
and with the support of the international community,
the situation in Syria remains generally stable and the
process for a political settlement has maintained its
momentum. The Syrian Government invited Special
Envoy De Mistura to visit Damascus for an in-depth
exchange of views on facilitating the political process
in Syria, including the formation of the constitutional
committee. The Russian Federation, Turkey and
Iran met in Moscow and jointly sent out a positive
message in support of the facilitation of the political
process in Syria. We appreciate the efforts of all of the
parties in that regard. China has always supported a
political solution to the Syrian issue. The international
community should push for the revitalization of the
Syrian-owned and Syrian-led political process, in
which Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity must be respected.
The Syrian conflict has been ongoing for more
than seven years. Resolving differences requires all
parties to work together and meet one another halfway.
The formation of a constitutional committee must be
conducted in a consistent and orderly manner, while
striking a balance between the legitimate concerns of
the Syrian Government and those of the other parties
to make sure that the committee is representative of
and acceptable to all in order to ensure that the Syrian
political process is sustainable and constructive. The
future of Syria will ultimately be determined by the
Syrian people themselves. The international community
should continue its support for the good offices of the
United Nations and Special Envoy De Mistura, properly
leverage the role of the Astana process and help to
ensure that the Syrian parties remain fully engaged
in dialogue and consultations, thereby facilitating
the efforts of the Syrian parties to gradually achieve
reconciliation, resolve differences and find a realistic
and lasting political solution. We hope that all the
parties concerned will jointly ensure the effective
functioning of the Idlib demilitarized zone, consolidate
the gains made in the fight against terrorism, assist
in the clearance of explosive remnants of war, rebuild
infrastructure and ensure the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons as soon as possible.
China stands ready to work with the international
community in a joint effort to facilitate a political
settlement in Syria, improve the humanitarian situation
and play a constructive role in restoring peace and
stability in Syria and the region.

18-343077/17

S/PV.8383

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank Staffan
de Mistura for his briefing. Frankly speaking, we
are disappointed. We were hoping for more positive
information, and we are concerned about the challenges
that Mr. De Mistura described, especially the attitude
of the Syrian regime with regard to the role of the
United Nations.
In our view, it is time for the constitutional committee
to be launched. We believe that it is important to make
irreversible progress towards a political resolution of
the conflict in Syria by convening the constitutional
committee under United Nations auspices as soon as
possible, in November, before the end of Special Envoy
De Mistura’s tenure. We need to see the actual launch
of the constitutional committee, and invitations should
be sent out in the coming weeks.
One can speak of a credible political process
only if the constitutional committee itself is credible,
balanced and inclusive and represents all Syrians.
Therefore, the role of the United Nations is key, and the
Security Council adopted resolution 2254 (2015) to that
end. The role and the autonomy of the United Nations
are essential, and that autonomous role includes the
membership of the committee and the scheduling and
scope of its work. The United Nations did not start from
scratch but is operating fully in line with resolution
2254 (2015) and the Sochi final statement of January,
circulated to the Council by the Russian Federation.
The Syrian regime therefore has to work with the
United Nations, and we count on the countries that
have influence, especially the Russian Federation, to
use such influence with Damascus.
We need to see the meaningful commitment of the
Syrian regime to work with the United Nations. The
political time and space for further delaying the process
and endlessly moving the goalposts have simply run
out. We expect the Syrian regime to make sure that the
Syrian delegation can travel to participate, that it can
participate in full and that it will participate in good
faith — contrary to what we saw during the earlier
Geneva rounds. We expect the same of any members
of the United Nations middle list who currently reside
in Syria. Let me also say that we strongly support the
Special Envoy’s commitment to ensuring that women
constitute 30 per cent of the constitutional committee’s
members, as he indicated earlier. We strongly urge that
such a commitment be extended to ensuring that any
future drafting subcommittee or other committee also
include 30 per cent women’s representation, particularly
8/17

26/10/2018

this week given yesterday’s open debate dedicated
to resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security (see S/PV.8382).
Of course, the constitutional committee is not a
goal in and of itself. It is part of the broader United
Nations-led political process based on the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and on resolution
2254 (2015). Implementation of that resolution is the
only path forward. There is no circumventing that
important resolution. Let us use the “Idlib window”, as
Staffan de Mistura mentioned earlier.
In conclusion, let me just refer to our well-known
position on accountability, humanitarian assistance and
certainly the need for a political transition to take place
as a precondition for reconstruction aid.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the holding of this meeting and to
Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his important briefing.
Peru notes with concern the prospects for a political
solution in Syria following the recent meetings held by
the Special Envoy with key stakeholders, about which
he has informed us this morning. Only a few days ago,
in the Security Council (see S/PV.8373), we believed
that the auspicious agreement reached between Turkey
and the Russian Federation to establish a demilitarized
zone in Idlib created an environment more conducive to
achieving a political agreement, making it possible to
envisage a lasting peace in Syria. Today we would like
to reaffirm the urgent need to establish an inclusive and
representative constitutional committee pursuant to
what was agreed at the Congress of the Syrian National
Dialogue in Sochi nine months ago. We believe that
that important initiative, like the Astana process, is
required to complement the Geneva process. In that
regard, with full respect for the sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic, we
deem it important and urgent to form the constitutional
committee mentioned above and to define its
operational and decision-making mechanisms, with
a view to advancing the political process outlined in
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex). We are particularly concerned
about the possibility that further delays in establishing
the committee could affect the credibility of the process
and lead to greater divisions.
We emphasize the importance that all parties
engage constructively in the negotiations, while
showing flexibility, concern for the country’s future
18-34307

26/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

and national unity so as to build the necessary trust to
promote reconciliation and build sustainable peace in
Syria. Accordingly, we wish to express our full support
for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General in his
efforts to move forward in that direction, in particular
the way in which he approached the discussions in
Damascus and the work that he told us he would be
doing over the next several days.
In conclusion, we also would like to underline
how important it is that the Astana guarantors and
other countries with influence on the parties help to
ensure that the constitutional committee be convened
promptly, ideally in November.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Envoy De Mistura for his briefing on the results of his
visit to Damascus. We appreciate his visit and thank
him for all his efforts to achieve peace in Syria. We
highly value his engagement in intensive further
consultations in the period ahead so as to ascertain
the possibilities for convening a credible and balanced
United Nations-facilitated, Syrian-owned and Syrianled constitutional committee.
Kazakhstan is closely following the situation
presented by the crisis in Syria and supports all
initiatives aimed at resolving the violent conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic as soon as possible. We consider
the protection of Syrian civilians and infrastructure
to be a high priority. At this moment, our attention
should be focused on preserving the peace in Idlib. In
that regard, I would like to thank Russia and Turkey
for the agreement, which has allowed us to prevent
bloodshed and a large-scale humanitarian catastrophe.
We are encouraged by the information concerning the
establishment of humanitarian corridors that can be
used by as many as 3,000 civilians. All of that is the
result of the creation of a demilitarized zone, which has
become a guarantee for the cessation of hostilities.
We welcome the agreement reached on 24 October
in Moscow by the Astana guarantors to speed up the
formation of the constitutional committee. At the same
time, Astana calls on all interested parties to take into
account the interests of all Syrians in the formation
of the constitutional committee in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015). We also commend the readiness
of the Astana group to pursue dialogue with the socalled small group on Syria. We know that the dialogue
should be based on that resolution.

S/PV. 8383

Kazakhstan underlines the need to move towards
the creation of the constitutional committee as a starting
point for the revitalization of the political settlement
process in Syria. We hope that the committee will be
formed as soon as possible. At the same time, in the
future the constitutional committee should work in
compliance with the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and the United Nations resolutions on
the Syrian issue to protect the sovereignty, independence
and unification of Syria.
Astana underlines the importance of achieving
a political solution in Syria, especially by forming a
constitutional committee as a major step in the political
settlement of the crisis. Astana fully supports the Special
Envoy’s efforts to achieve a comprehensive settlement
of the regional crisis. It is the Syrians themselves who
should begin to shape the future political system of the
Syrian State, with the necessary legislative reforms,
territorial and administrative structure and presidential
and parliamentary elections. Only a political, diplomatic
approach in the spirit of the Charter and the Council
documents on preventive diplomacy and sustaining
peace can bring proper results.
There is therefore a strong need to continue to
support the goals of the Astana talks and further
Geneva negotiations in order to see positive outcomes.
We believe that the Syrian people are capable of
determining their own future. However, achieving their
aspirations for democracy, reconstruction and stability
is impossible without genuine international support.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
Security Council has a particular responsibility to end
the tragic period in Syria. We urge the Council to unite
around that common political goal by supporting the
Geneva and Astana processes, as well as the Special
Envoy and a comprehensive political settlement.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for
his important briefing. The State of Kuwait expresses
its appreciation and gratitude for all his efforts over the
past four years in carrying out his difficult task. We are
certain that he will make further efforts until his last
day in office.
We have just listened to the outcomes of the Special
Envoy’s visit to Damascus, which we had hoped would
lead to positive results and would advance the Syrian
political process nine months after the declaration
made in Sochi regarding the constitutional committee.

18-343079/17

S/PV.8383

The situation in the Middle East

26/10/2018

Unfortunately, the outcomes of the visit did not meet
our aspirations and expectations.

Affairs and Expatriates of the Syrian Arab Republic in
Damascus a few days ago.

According to resolution 2254 (2015), the formation
of the constitutional committee is an important step in
the political process and a basis for further steps in the
future, including the drafting of the constitution and
the holding of free and credible elections in Syria under
the supervision of the United Nations and with the
participation of all Syrians.

We note that the Special Envoy had, to use his
own words, ”a very frank and very intense exchange of
views” on the constitutional committee and the political
process in general. We thank him for sharing with us
what transpired during the meeting. We understand that
the discussion on that issue has not been easy and that
finding common ground will continue to be a challenge.

The Sochi declaration is clear in terms of identifying
the role of the Special Envoy and the Geneva process
in the final formation of the constitutional committee
so as to contribute to the political settlement under the
auspices of the United Nations and in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015).

Nevertheless, we believe that Special Envoy De
Mistura should continue his efforts to convene the
constitutional committee as soon as he possibly can.
We all agree that the agreement reached between Russia
and Turkey on Idlib provides a window of opportunity
that should be seized in order to revive a credible,
inclusive and Syrian-owned political process, starting
with the establishment of a United Nations-facilitated
constitutional committee.

There is still nearly one month to go until Mr. De
Mistura leaves office. We encourage him to continue
his efforts to form the constitutional committee and
to ensure that its work can begin as soon as possible.
We once again express our support to him. We believe
that he has the necessary mandate to establish the
constitutional committee, and we agree with him on
the need to create a balanced and credible committee.
In conclusion, we stress the need to respect and
to implement Security Council resolutions. They
should not be a dead letter, especially resolution 2254
(2015), which was unanimously adopted by the Council
nearly three years ago. In the coming days we have an
opportunity that we must all seize, particularly after
the stability seen in Idlib following the Russian-Turkish
agreement. That provides an important opportunity to
revitalize the political process led by the United Nations
following some eight years of war, destruction, killing
and displacement in Syria. We hope that diplomatic, not
military, solutions will prevail.
Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, for his briefing today. We highly appreciate and
support his continued and tireless efforts to facilitate a
peaceful solution to the Syrian crisis.
While he informed us in his most recent briefing
(S/PV.8373) of his plan to move on after November, we
have full confidence that he will do everything possible
until the last day to help to move the political process
forward. In that context, we welcome his meeting with
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
10/17

We note that there was a meeting of the Astana
guarantors in Moscow this week, which we hope will
be helpful in sustaining the engagement to move the
political process forward, particularly the formation
of the constitutional committee. At the same time, we
also look forward to the four-way summit on Syria to
be held in Istanbul this weekend. We hope that all those
diplomatic initiatives at the various levels will contribute
to reinvigorating the United Nations-facilitated political
process. As the process of the constitutional committee
should be Syrian-led and Syrian-owned, we encourage
all Syrian parties to constructively engage with the
Special Envoy.
Finally, this is the time to further coordinate and
accelerate diplomatic efforts to support the Special
Envoy in his endeavours to establish the constitutional
committee. The Council should also continue to put its
full weight behind the Special Envoy, whose efforts will
be extremely critical over the coming days and months.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this briefing on
the establishment of the constitutional committee in
the Syrian Arab Republic and thanks Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, for his informative briefing.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the meeting on 24 October
between the Special Envoy and the Syrian Foreign
Minister, leading to a communiqué from the Office
of the Special Envoy, which reported a very frank
18-34307

26/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

and very intense exchange of views concerning the
constitutional committee and the political process in
general. In that regard, my country calls on the Syrian
parties to choose the path of dialogue by resolutely
joining the Geneva and Sochi processes with a view to
effectively overcoming the remaining obstacles to the
establishment of the constitutional committee.
Côte d’Ivoire also welcomes the holding of
the upcoming four-party summit among Germany,
France, Russia and Turkey in Istanbul on 27 October,
which will serve as a framework for reflection on a
political solution to the crisis, under the auspices of the
United Nations, and on the situation in Idlib in northwestern Syria.
Côte d’Ivoire sincerely hopes that the dialogue
among all the stakeholders will continue with a view
to ensuring a peaceful end to the crisis in Syria — the
key to lasting peace and stability — irrespective of the
conclusions of the talks between Mr. Staffan de Mistura
and the Syrian authorities, on the one hand, and the
four-party summit planned in Istanbul, on the other.
We therefore call on the parties to the conflict
to respect the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015),
which sets out the road map of the political process
in Syria. We once again urge Council members to
restore the unity that has always enabled them, in
difficult circumstances, to overcome the challenges to
international peace and security.
As Mr. Staffan de Mistura prepares to step down,
Côte d’Ivoire would like to reiterate its deep gratitude
to him for his sustained commitment and for his work
to restore lasting peace in Syria.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland) At the outset, let me join
other delegations in expressing my deep appreciation
for the Special Envoy’s tireless efforts to find a political
solution to the crisis in Syria. I would also like to assure
him of Poland’s strong support for his ongoing work
and for the United Nations-led political peace process
in Syria.
As there can be no military solution to the conflict
that can bring sustainable peace to Syria, we should
aim at reaching an intra-Syrian framework political
agreement. Furthermore, we strongly believe that the
Idlib ceasefire agreement could be an opportunity
for a resumption of the political process under United
Nations auspices in Geneva as soon as possible. In
that regard, we fully support Mr. De Mistura’s efforts

S/PV. 8383

to establish a constitutional committee as soon as
possible. As we spent a great deal of time last week
discussing women and peace and security here in the
Chamber (see S/PV.8382), it is worth recalling Mr. De
Mistura’s appeal for ensuring women’s participation in
the constitutional committee, since there is a very clear
link between women’s participation in the peace process
and the durability and quality of peace agreements.
Setting up the constitutional committee should now
be a priority, to be swiftly followed by further steps to
enable a negotiated political transition process, which
requires the full and constructive engagement of all the
parties to the conflict. There is a special role in this for
the Syrian authorities, which should participate in the
negotiations in good faith and without preconditions.
This is for the Syrians themselves to negotiate. Only
a real, tangible political process ensuring that the
Syrian people are genuinely represented, can lead to
the establishment of a timetable and procedures for
drafting a constitution and conducting free and fair
United Nations-supervised elections.
In conclusion, I want to underline that any
political solution must be brokered in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex).
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I would first like to thank the delegations of
France, the United Kingdom and the United States for
requesting the convening of this meeting and Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura for his informative briefing
and hard work in facilitating the political process in
Syria. The promptness with which this meeting has
been convened, so soon after the Council’s meeting on
17 October (S/PV.8373) and the 24 October meeting in
Damascus, underscores the need for greater efforts to
address and resolve our new challenges and to set up a
constitutional committee without further delay, with a
view to opening the way to a peaceful political solution
to this long-running conflict.
While the Republic of Equatorial Guinea welcomes
the Special Envoy’s exemplary conduct and the way
he has carried out his functions in extremely complex
circumstances, we can only deplore the fact that today,
after eight years of conflict, during which numerous
meetings have been held in the Geneva and Astana
formats, we find ourselves at a crossroads, as the
representative of France eloquently pointed out at the
17 October meeting and mentioned again this morning.

18-3430711/17

S/PV.8383

The situation in the Middle East

The spectre of military escalation and the difficult path
towards a resumption of peace negotiations between the
Syrian parties continue to be a focus of the international
community’s attention.
We welcomed the meeting in Damascus on
24 October between the Special Envoy and Syria’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs as part of the efforts to set
in motion the constitutional committee to be charged
with drafting a new constitution for Syria. We want to
remind the parties that significant progress still has to
be made, nine months after an agreement was reached
in Sochi on forming the committee. In that regard,
the demilitarization of Idlib favoured by the Astana
guarantors offers an opportunity to give the political
process greater impetus by creating an environment
conducive to intra-Syrian peace negotiations.
It is important to use this relatively peaceful
environment to deal with the difficulties that have been
preventing the committee from starting work without
delay. As has been emphasized, the main stumbling
block remains the composition of the middle third list,
of members of civil society, proposed by the United
Nations. We appeal to the parties to spare no effort to
establish a committee with extremely high credibility,
which is crucial, and one that is as representative as
possible. In addition, for the committee to be credible
and legitimate, its composition, rules of operation
and decision-making must be based on transparent
mechanisms. National parties must also renounce their
partisan interests and assume a position of equality
of all so as to ensure the success of the constitutional
committee’s work. As Special Envoy de Mistura
has stressed on previous occasions and again today,
a credible and balanced committee could be the
cornerstone of an inclusive political process for Syrians
towards implementing resolution 2254 (2015).
It is on this basis that the Government of Equatorial
Guinea hopes that tomorrow’s Syria summit between
the Russian Federation, Turkey, France and Germany
will significantly help to promote a political solution to
the crisis by giving priority to the debate on the start of
the committee’s work. Additional steps to strengthen
security and stability, as well as conditions for the
return of refugees and the restoration of social and
economic infrastructure, also need to be addressed.
Article 24 of Chapter V of the Charter of the United
Nations confers on the Security Council the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
12/17

26/10/2018

peace and security. I therefore call on the Council to
bring peace and security back to Syria. After eight
years of conflict, the situation in Syria must no longer
be a subject that crystallizes the division among
the members of the Security Council. A sustainable
solution cannot be achieved in Syria without the
unhindered involvement of the members of the Council,
whether they are allies of the belligerents or have the
capacity to influence the national parties. The peoples
of the world are watching us, and history will judge
us. As members of the Security Council, permanent or
non-permanent, let us demonstrate the humanist values
that characterize our Organization and bring an end to
this conflict by putting the well-being and legitimate
prosperity of Syrians ahead of geostrategic interests.
We call on the Government and the people of Syria
to take into account their country’s current political
situation, support the efforts of the international
community and undertake an inclusive debate among
the various parties to the conflict within the framework
of a constitutional committee and in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015), which was unanimously
adopted by this Security Council at the proposal of the
Russian Federation.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura
to the Security Council today. We heard a briefing from
Mr. De Mistura in this Chamber (see S/PV.8373) just 10
days ago. It is hard to recall any other instances of public
briefings of the Council by United Nations mediators
on every contact with the parties to a given conflict or
the international stakeholders involved. Experience has
shown that this kind of work requires great patience,
caution and a very measured dose of publicity so as
not to harm the matter at hand. We are therefore not
convinced that those who insisted on convening today’s
open meeting are genuine fans of a peaceful settlement
in Syria. It is not hard to postulate that what we are
seeing is rather the latest show of tragic breast-beating
and moralizing directed at Russia.
There is noticeable action being taken at the moment
with regard to Syria. On one hand, the United Nations
is working within the framework of resolution 2254
(2015). The Idlib agreements are being implemented and
our Turkish partners are working diligently on that. The
guarantors of the Astana process are making serious
efforts to halt the violence on the ground and create
conditions that can advance the intra-Syrian dialogue.
It is difficult, but concrete progress is clearly being
18-34307

26/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

made. People in many parts of Syria are beginning to
return to normal life and feel that they are safer.
On the other hand, we have a group of self-styled
examiners sitting on high who have done no visible
service in the cause of a settlement but who for some
reason have arrogated to themselves the right to a
biased investigation of what Russia is doing. We want
to emphasize that there are no grounds for establishing
artificial deadlines for creating a constitutional
committee based on the outcomes of the Syrian National
Dialogue Congress in Sochi. It cannot be imposed
under conditions that run counter to the wishes of the
Syrians themselves. Mr. De Mistura’s visit to Damascus
at the invitation of the Syrian Government was useful
as part of the pathway to achieving the goals outlined
in Sochi. We are confident that for the remainder of his
term he will spare no effort to advance the issue within
his mandate as mediator in full respect for Syria’s
sovereignty, and we will help him do that.
The very fact of the Special Envoy’s visit to
Damascus is crucial, but it is not the only development
on the Syrian settlement. The Astana troika recently
held consultations in Moscow, and representatives of
Turkey, Russia, Germany and France are meeting in
Istanbul tomorrow for a quadrilateral summit in which
the Special Envoy will also participate. Incidentally,
according to our information and assessment, his visit to
Damascus was very useful and constructive. We should
not underestimate its importance and the momentum
that his visit can give the settlement process.
However, we caution those who would like to reap
dubious dividends from an artificially whipped-up
crisis that it would do criminal damage to the political
process. That applies first and foremost to the Western
participants in the so-called small group. We believe
that the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy
understand the full depths of their responsibility in
this delicate matter. We assume that Mr. De Mistura’s
briefing today is not his political farewell. He can still
get a great deal done before his mandate ends, and we
are sure that he will work tirelessly to get results. I will
say it again — we will help him in every possible way.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.
My delegation thanks the Special Envoy for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his briefing. We want to
highlight his visit to Damascus, as well as his efforts to

S/PV. 8383

achieve a political solution to the conflict. We believe
that dialogue is the best way to achieve positive results.
In that regard, we again underscore the efforts of the
Astana guarantors and the agreements concluded on the
situation in Idlib, which have had tangible effects in
reducing violence and restoring relative calm for the
Syrian people. We reiterate that the conflict can have no
military solution, and we therefore reject any attempts
to foment fragmentation or sectarianism in the Syrian
Arab Republic, as well as the presence of foreign forces
with no authorization from the Syrian Government.
I want to once again emphasize Mr. De Mistura’s
tireless efforts on this very delicate and important issue,
not just for the Council but for the entire international
community. I would therefore like to thank him for his
work and reiterate our full support for his efforts to
find a political solution. We eagerly await the outcome
of the upcoming high-level meetings. After hearing
his briefing today, our delegation sees the glass as
half full rather than half empty. We remain optimistic
that patience and dedication will have positive results.
We agree that if we want to strengthen the political
process, we must also give the Special Envoy the
opportunity to work and focus on reaching that
outcome. We believe that the solution requires ensuring
the continuity and implementation of the Sochi final
outcome, whose main goal is establishing a credible,
balanced and representative constitutional committee
through continued consultation and cooperation with
the Syrian Government. We urge that the conflict be
resolved through dialogue and an inclusive and united
political process, led by and for the Syrian people, that
can lead to a peaceful and sustainable solution within
the framework of the Geneva process and resolution
2254 (2015), under the auspices of the United Nations,
in line with international law and with full respect for
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of the Syrian Arab Republic.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I want to note that I have the
impression, as other colleagues certainly also do, that
those who called for this meeting today are attempting
to nullify the cooperation between the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic and the United Nations. As

18-3430713/17

S/PV.8383

The situation in the Middle East

the Council knows, that cooperation has had a number
of positive results over the many years of the so-called
Syrian crisis. I have heard some colleagues, specifically
those who called for today’s meeting, saying that the
Syrian Government does not want to cooperate with the
United Nations. The Council is aware that those words
have nothing to do with the reality.
First of all, we are a founding Member of the
United Nations and have been elected as a member of
the Security Council three times. We are therefore quite
familiar with the importance both of this international
Organization and the Council.
Secondly, we have been committed to the Geneva
talks since the beginning. We held dozens of meetings
with the late Kofi Annan and with Lakhdar Brahimi
and Staffan de Mistura. We have devoted thousands of
hours to working with them to help Syria end the crisis,
and we are therefore committed to the United Nations.
The Council knows that we have sat down with it 56
times to discuss reports issued by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), which
is a humanitarian body of the United Nations. I repeat, I
have discussed OCHA reports with the Council 56 times,
which represents additional proof of our cooperation
with the United Nations. We cooperate with all the
United Nations entities located in Damascus, as well
as 28 international non-governmental organizations. Of
course, we participated in the Astana process, which,
as the Council is aware, has yielded many positive
results. We are cooperating with the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, as the Council is
also aware, and we have participated with the Council
in dozens of meetings on that topic. There is therefore
no reason to doubt my Government’s cooperation with
the United Nations, and I hope that this topic will be
pulled out of circulation in such important meetings.
This meeting, which is being held to hear a briefing
by the Special Envoy, is taking place two days after
the anniversary of the founding of our Organization.
We are proud that my country has been a founding
Member and signatory to the Charter, as I mentioned
earlier. The Charter has enshrined the principles of
respecting the sovereignty and independence of States
Members of the United Nations; rejecting the crimes of
aggression against them; rejecting interference in their
internal affairs; and rejecting actions that undermine
their territorial integrity.
14/17

26/10/2018

It is shameful that 74 years after the creation of our
Organization and the adoption of those lofty principles,
these values are being swept aside and ignored by States,
including some permanent members of the Council.
Certain Western countries violated the Charter very
quickly, even before the ink it was written in had dried.
Those States in particular conspired against my
country and waged an unprecedented seven-year
terrorist war against it. They have created military
bases to sponsor and protect the terrorists whom
they brought from the four corners of the globe; they
called them the moderate armed opposition. The
plans and projects of the enemies of Syria are harmful
and poisonous as snake venom, but in the face of the
resilience and determination of our people, they will
become as fragile as a spider’s web.
I deplore the fact that the statement made today by
the Special Envoy did not refer in any way to terrorism or
to the shelling carried out by the so-called international
coalition, which is led by the United States of America.
Syrian towns and villages have suffered 69 military
raids carried out by coalition planes that have created
thousands of martyrs and wounded thousands more, in
addition to destroying my country’s infrastructure. The
Special Envoy did not mention that, although I always
started my meetings with him in Geneva by recalling
the need for him to make a statement condemning these
military operations against Syrian civilians, in Deir ezZor and elsewhere.
Once again, on 19 October, the illegitimate socalled international coalition led by the United States
of America committed a heinous crime that caused
dozens of civilian deaths. Coalition planes deliberately
targeted the villages of Sousa and Bubadran in the
south-eastern part of Deir ez-Zor province, martyring
62 civilians, mostly women and children, and leaving
many people injured, some of them critically.
I have sent the Council 96 official messages
informing it of the appalling crimes committed by
the illegitimate coalition against Syrian civilians. I
demonstrated that the coalition had targeted everything
except armed terrorist groups. As a poet once said, if
my interlocutors had been alive, my voice would have
reached them.
Certain members of the Council have been passive
with regard to those crimes. The Special Envoy has
joined them in also ignoring those crimes and not
mentioning them in the reports of the Secretariat, which
18-34307

26/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

are claimed to be credible although they are far from
being so. We therefore call for accountability and for
those States that consider themselves to be defenders of
the right to life to move away today, not tomorrow, from
this pernicious coalition.
What is astonishing is that those States that falsely
wept over Idlib and made threats, claiming that they
wanted to protect civilians in that city, turned a blind
eye when armed terrorist groups in Idlib randomly
targeted civilians in Aleppo city with dozens of
missiles on 24 October, resulting in scores of martyrs
and wounded people.
We have heard no statement on the attack on
Aleppo from the Special Envoy, the Secretary-General
or anyone else on the Council. Idlib is, of course, a dear
part of my country, and we are determined to recover
it. We now allow political and diplomatic efforts to be
made, but our right under the Charter and international
law allows us to fully recover Idlib when we deem
it necessary.
The Syrian Government will not allow Idlib to
become another Tora Bora. We will not allow that.
There can be no other Tora Bora terrorist groups in
Idlib. That has already been fully decided upon.
Based on our respect for the role of the United
Nations in facilitating intra-Syrian dialogue, the
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
for Syria and the Diaspora met the Special Envoy in
Damascus on 24 October. During that meeting, a
discussion was held on the efforts made to move ahead
with the political process to resolve the crisis in Syria,
as well as ideas regarding the political process and the
constitutional committee. Those issues were discussed
by our Minister and Secretary-General António
Guterres in New York on the margins of the work of the
General Assembly at its seventy-third session.
My country believes in the role of the United
Nations and its Charter, as did the founding fathers. Its
role is based on the strength of law and not the arrogance
of force, a role that respects States’ sovereignty and
non-interference in their internal affairs.
A State that is a permanent member of the Council
has established a camp for terrorists in Al-Tanf in
which it deploys its military troops. As the Council
is aware, Al-Tanf is a part of the Syrian territories,
so that would be a violation of the Charter. However,
the Syrian Government has committed positively and

S/PV. 8383

openly to the Geneva negotiations and transparently
dealt with the Special Envoy since he took up his
mandate as intra-Syrian facilitator four years ago. My
country continues to wish for the success of his mission
because it is in the interest of the Syrian people, as
attested to by the Syrian Government when it dealt
with his two predecessors, the late Kofi Annan and
Lakhdar Brahimi.
My country has engaged with the Astana process in
a fully positive way and dealt positively with the results
of the national Syrian dialogue in Sochi. We continue to
maintain the results achieved regarding the creation of
a committee to discuss the current Constitution.
The Special Envoy can facilitate the work of
the committee. My country’s Government was the
first to submit a list of participants to the Special
Envoy on behalf of the Syrian State, and we believe
that the guarantor States can play an important role,
in full cooperation and coordination with the Syrian
Government, in the creation of the committee and its
mandate and working mechanism, with the facilitation
of the United Nations. The Council should note that we
are not excluding the United Nations. However, its role
is to facilitate an intra-Syrian dialogue, and it does not
have guardianship over the dialogue. The task of the
Special Envoy is to facilitate intra-Syrian dialogue.
No one wants to end the crisis that has been ravaging
my country for more than seven years more than the
Syrian Government. We have been bearing the brunt of
a terrorist war whose goal was to fragment the Syrian
State, kill our people and destroy our infrastructure.
The plan was to turn Syria into a failed State, but we
have made that plan fail. We have also been open to
counter-terrorism initiatives and to resolving the crisis
and settling the cases of the people who have become
involved in the war. The aim is to achieve national
reconciliation with a view to ending the bloodbath and
preserving the unity of Syria and its people.
We believe that establishing a committee to discuss
a constitution that reflects Syrian society and realizes
its ambitions is a way to end the crisis. In our view,
therefore, the meeting between our Foreign Minister
and the Secretary-General on the margins of the general
debate of the General Assembly, as well as the recent
consultations with the Special Envoy in Damascus,
represents the start of efforts reflecting our positive
cooperation with the Special Envoy. We also believe
that coordination with the two Astana guarantors, Iran

18-3430715/17

S/PV.8383

The situation in the Middle East

and Russia, in reaching thoughtful solutions that will
ensure the establishment of a constitutional committee
and help to realize the aspirations of the Syrian people,
will play an important role in achieving our objective.
It was the Syrian National Dialogue Congress in Sochi
that proposed establishing a constitutional committee,
not the Special Envoy, the Geneva talks or the Astana
process. Syrians themselves took the decision in Sochi
to establish a committee in order to discuss their
Constitution. We also believe that setting artificial
deadlines and proposing ideas that are not conducive to
the outcome we desire will not have positive results in
helping us achieve our aspirations.
Lastly, I want to emphasize that the Syrian
Government will make every effort to meet the
aspirations of the Syrian people and of our true
friends, as well as all who aspire to build a world free
of terrorism, strengthen the values of the Charter of
the United Nations and achieve stability and security
in the region and across the world. We are ready to
continue cooperating with the United Nations to reach
the outcome we desire.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of the United Kingdom has asked to make a
further statement.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I will be very brief.
We have heard a great deal of support for the Special
Envoy in the Chamber. Let us look to that to hold
between now and 19 November. I have a question about
Idlib. The Syrian Ambassador referred to the Syrian
authorities retaking — I repeat, retaking — Idlib. That
would cut across the agreement that the Russians and
the Turks have made with regard to Idlib. I would like
to know if the Russian and Turkish agreement on Idlib
still holds and how long it is likely to hold.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic has asked to make a
further statement.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank my colleague the Ambassador of
Britain for her question on that issue and for requesting
further clarification.
First, the Council knows of course that I have
frequently said on behalf of my Government that Idlib
is a beloved part of Syria. We are not talking about
Florida, Glasgow or Marseilles. We are talking about
Idlib, an area that is part of the Syrian Arab Republic.
16/17

26/10/2018

Secondly, when terrorism threatens a member State
of the Council, it is natural for its Government to step in
immediately to combat it. There are thousands of such
examples. Yesterday, every TV channel in America
was reporting on the terrorist act in which nine parcels
containing bombs were mailed to prominent people and
public institutions in New York and talking about the
gravity of that terrorist act. Fortunately, it did not result
in any loss of life. We all think that the United States
Administration is doing the right action in investigating
the matter because it is an act of terrorism. And what
about the 30,000 foreign terrorist fighters in Idlib?
Of course they are all moderates — and they belong
to the Al-Nusra Front, Da’esh, Alwiya Al-Furqan and
Turkmen and other groups. They are all moderate
by nature, those 30,000 foreign terrorist fighters
who shelled Aleppo two days ago, killing scores and
injuring dozens. They shelled Aleppo from Idlib, which
constitutes a breach of the Russian-Turkish agreement.
That has nothing to do with our intention of retaking
Idlib, which is a beloved part of our country that is
currently under terrorist control.
Thirdly, we will retake Idlib and restore our
sovereignty over Idlib when the Government deems it
appropriate to do so. What does that mean? It means
that we will do it when we are sure that diplomatic and
political efforts have failed to restore that beloved part
of our territory to national sovereignty. That issue is
governed by diplomatic and political protocols. We
know how to address it and naturally we have friends
and allies to help us analyse the situation. It is therefore
no surprise if I say on behalf of my Government that we
will restore our sovereignty over Idlib when we see fit
to do so, because it is part of our lands.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked to make a
further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I will be just as brief as my British colleague.
She asked a very specific question about whether or not
the recent Russian-Turkish Idlib agreement is in effect.
Yes, it is still being implemented, as we said in our
statement. At the same time, I would like to confirm
what the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic
said, which is that we are talking about an area that
is part of sovereign Syria. It goes without saying that
we believe that, ultimately, the legitimate Syrian
authorities will retake control over all of the territory
18-34307

26/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

that makes up the Syrian Arab Republic. There are no
contradictions between those two points.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to Mr. De Mistura to respond to comments
and questions.
Mr. De Mistura: Let me first clarify one point.
When I had the very intense and long meeting with
Minister Al-Moualem, he did not raise the issue of
terrorism. That is why I did not specifically refer to
that in today’s meeting about my visit to Damascus.
The only issue was the constitutional committee.
Let me remind the Council that November is a
very special month, not because of my departure,
but because there are a lot of opportunities for some
progress with regard to the constitutional committee.
First, the Istanbul summit is scheduled for tomorrow,
27 October. Secondly, there will certainly be a meeting
of the Astana group, and we are looking forward to
seeing whether the Astana group will be able to draft
some type of proposal that the United Nations can
hopefully approve and decide whether it is credible and
inclusive. Thirdly, there will probably be more than
one meeting of the small group, with one taking place

S/PV. 8383

on Monday 29 October. We also heard of a possible
summit between President Putin and President Trump
in November, and we are scheduled to brief the Security
Council at least once more on 19 November.
So during this period, I have been asked to monitor
especially the Astana group, because they have a task
that was given to them for the month of November. I
will continue to ascertain the feasibility of the followup to the Sochi declaration and that of the constitutional
committee in order to report accordingly to the Security
Council and to the Secretary-General.
I will leave no stone unturned until the last day of
my assignment in order to be able to take advantage
of any opportunity to issue invitations to a first
meeting of the constitutional committee and to assess
the outcome of all those discussions and meetings,
including by briefing the Secretary-General and the
Security Council about the clarity of the constitutional
committee and why things are moving or why they are
not moving. The Council deserves to have all of that in
November, and I have the duty to clarify that.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m

18-3430717/17
