S/2017/907

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 October 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2363
(2017), by which the Council extended the mandate of the African Union -United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) until 30 June 2018 and requested
me to report, every 60 days, on its implementation. The report provides an update
on and analysis of the conflict, the political situation and the operational
environment in Darfur and the main challenges to the effective implementation of
the mandate, including violations of the status-of-forces agreement, for the period
from 15 August until 15 October 2017. It also presents the steps taken by UNAMID
towards achieving its benchmarks and provides an update on progress in the
implementation of the recommendations contained in the special report of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations on the strategic review of UNAMID (S/2017/437).

II. Conflict analysis
2.
While there were no open confrontations between the forces of the
Government of the Sudan and Darfur armed groups during the period under review,
the arms collection campaign launched by the Government brought to the fore
tensions involving the tribal militias formerly allied with the Government, and
resulted in shifting alliances among various groups. Meanwhile, intercommunal
clashes and hostilities continued, many of them attributable to unresolved disputes
over land management and ownership, notwithstanding the reconciliation efforts led
by local authorities with the support of UNAMID and the United Nations country
team. The implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, aimed at
addressing such outstanding issues, remained slow, constrained by the lack of
presence, capacity and resources on the ground of the remaining commissions and
fund of the Doha Document. No large-scale return of internally displaced persons
took place, and the overall humanitarian situation remained unchanged, with no
significant displacements reported.
Emerging tensions in the context of the disarmament campaign
3.
No confrontation between the Government and the Darfur rebel groups was
reported. On 8 October, the Government extended the unilateral ceasefire until the
end of December. Meanwhile, the non-signatories of the Doha Document for Peace

17-18599 (E)

011117

*1718599*

S/2017/907

in Darfur and their former foes, namely, the tribal militias that had supported
counter-insurgency operations, joined together in opposition to the arms collection
campaign launched by the Government in August. Musa Hilal, a northern Rizeigat
with strong influence over the border guards, categorically denounced the campaign
and the plan to incorporate the border guards into the Rapid Support Forces (RSF).
On 9 August, the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minawi (SLA/MM) indicated that
the armed movements in Darfur would not hand over their weapons, unless
comprehensive security sector reform was undertaken. On 19 August, the Sudan
Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid (SLA/AW) welcomed the position of Musa Hilal and
offered to work with him in rejecting the process. On 24 August, Gibril Ibrahim , the
leader of the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM), called for the process to be put
on hold until a comprehensive peace agreement was reached. Other forces
previously allied with the Government, including two Arab militias of the Korgibba
and Savana tribes, declared their support for Musa Hilal on 19 August, and
76 military officers of the 20th Division of the Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF) in
East Darfur State, along with some RSF elements, reportedly joined Hilal on
20 August. In addition, Nour al Din Zurg, the leader of the Sudan Liberation
Army/Zurg faction, who had signed a peace agreement with the Government in
2015, joined Hilal on 22 August.
4.
The disarmament campaign has to date generated different reactions across the
Darfur states. While no incidents were reported in South Darfur State, the
impounding of unregistered vehicles in West Darfur State led to the killing of one
soldier from SAF in Murnei and injury to an Arab Awlad Janoub in Al Salam by the
Sudanese Police Force on 12 September. UNAMID also received reports of the
tense security situation in Murnei, West Darfur, due to the refusal of Arab
communities to cooperate in the arms collection campaign. In East Darfur, three
Ma’aliya youth were arrested and imprisoned in Abu Karinka, while a group of
former border guards from the Rizeigat tribe allegedly smuggled heavy weapons to
North Darfur State. In North Darfur, the home of Musa Hilal, the President of the
Sudan, Omar Hassan al-Bashir, reportedly instructed the Governor on 23 August to
decisively handle any attempts to destabilize security. On 21 and 23 September,
RSF reportedly clashed with Hilal’s forces in the Bir Magi area, near the border
with Libya, and in Dongola in the Northern State of the Sudan, respectively. On
12 October, the Governor of North Darfur announced the arrival of 10,000 RSF
members to support the disarmament campaign, while the mobilization of RSF has
also been reported near Kabkabiyah, where the Jebel Amir gold mine is located.
5.
Clashes involving RSF were reported on several other occasions. On
22 August, in West Darfur, unidentified men exchanged fire with RSF in Adikong
area, 26 km west of El Geneina, killing one RSF officer. RSF and Arab militias
mobilized, blaming Chadian forces for the incident, and RSF elemen ts attacked a
group of Zaghawa coming from Chad and seized their vehicles. SAF and the Sudan Chad joint forces were deployed to defuse the tensions in the area. In North Darfur,
on 28 August, a group of RSF personnel killed a member of the Central Reserve
Police in Maliha town, north-east of El Fasher, as a result of an altercation. In
retaliation, members of the Central Reserve Police blocked access to the town,
restricting all movement, and demanded that RSF surrender the perpetrators.
Government authorities intervened to defuse tension.
6.
The security situation in Sortony, North Darfur, remained precarious, with the
continued presence of the Sudan Liberation Army/Popular Defence (SLA/PD) led
by “General” Sadiq. On 3 September, a group of Arab nomads mobilized to attack
the Sortony gathering site for internally displaced persons, alleging livestock theft
by SLA/PD elements at the site. Sadiq denied the accusation, while announcing his
refusal to join SAF on account of failures by the Government to fulfil i ts promises
2/14

17-18599

S/2017/907

and hinting at the possibility of rejoining SLA/AW. On 6 September, Sadiq, with
90 SLA/PD elements, moved from Sortony to Lugo, in Rockero, 65 km north -east
of Nertiti, in Central Darfur State. Meanwhile, on 15 September, UNAMID received
reports that SLA/PD had imposed a tax on traders inside the Sortony gathering site,
which Sadiq claimed to use for the protection of internally displaced persons during
the farming season and the purchase of ammunitions and uniforms for his group.
Intercommunal conflicts
7.
Intercommunal conflicts continued, albeit with fewer incidents, mainly over
disputes relating to farmland, grazing areas, water and livestock. Eight cases
resulted in 19 fatalities, compared with the 10 clashes with 74 fatalitie s reported
during the previous period. The reduction could be attributed to effective
interventions by local authorities.
8.
In Central Darfur, on 21 August, two separate incidents resulted in the deaths
of a member of the Salamat tribe in Bindisi and a Fallata near Um Dukhun. Both
instances were resolved through compensation agreements reached by community
leaders. In North Darfur, on 11 September, Ereigat herders killed a farmer in Wadi
Mondow, near Korma. Meanwhile, tensions between the Maharia northern Rizeigat
and SLA/AW elements over cattle theft escalated into the abduction and killing of a
SLA/AW commander in July and the abduction of a Maharia member of the border
guards on 15 August, which prompted armed Maharia to threaten an attack on
Nertiti market and Straha area on 21 August. In addition, two civilians were killed
by nomads in the Boulay area over livestock theft, on 14 September. In South
Darfur, a Fallata was killed in Tulus in an incident of cattle theft.
9.
In East Darfur, following the clashes between the Ma’aliya and the Rizeigat in
June and July, the Governor issued a decree on 16 August, instructing the
commissioners of all localities in the state to relieve the local chiefs ( umda) of their
responsibilities for their failure to contain the conflict. Subsequently, 194 umda
from five communities were relieved of their duties, including 105 from the
Rizeigat, 45 from the Birgid, 30 from the Ma’aliya and 7 each from the Bago and
Khazan Jadid native administrations. While tensions consequent ly subdued, there
were concerns that such measures could further weaken the traditional institutions.
Violence against civilians and human rights violations
10. The overall human rights situation in Darfur remained tense and volatile,
compounded by the proliferation of arms and weak law enforcement and justice
institutions. As was the case in the previous reporting period, internally displaced
persons and other vulnerable persons continued to face harassment, killings, looting
of property, random shootings within and around their camps and general insecurity.
11. UNAMID was informed of 72 cases of human rights violations and abuses
involving 253 victims, including 16 minors (15 girls and 1 boy) and 30 women,
compared with 82 cases involving 124 victims, including 15 minors, during the
previous reporting period. Violations of the right to life accounted for 7 cases
involving 8 victims, violations of the right to physical integrity (assault) accounted
for 30 cases involving 146 victims, and abductions accounted for 6 cases involving
27 victims. There were 27 cases of sexual and gender -based violence in the form of
rape and attempted rape involving 31 victims, including 15 minors (all girls), and
2 cases of arbitrary arrest and illegal detention involving 41 victims. Violence
against women and girls continued unabated. Challenges of restricted access to
areas where incidents occurred and the non-reporting of cases by some victims of
sexual violence due to stigma and limited access to justice for women, in part icular
in remote areas, remained.
17-18599

3/14

S/2017/907

12. UNAMID confirmed 53 cases of human rights violations and abuses involving
149 victims, but the remaining 19 cases involving 104 victims could not be verified
owing to various factors, including access restrictions. Of the 72 reported cases,
5 cases involving 39 victims were reportedly perpetrated by government security
forces and auxiliary groups, 15 cases involving 16 victims were reportedly
perpetrated by male civilians, including one minor, and the remaining 52 case s
involving 198 victims were allegedly perpetrated by unidentified armed men, some
described by the victims as Arabs. Investigations were initiated in only 17 of the
72 documented cases, resulting in 10 arrests. Police inaction and lack of trust in the
police have resulted in many cases not being reported and civilians resorting to
resolving issues through local or community leaders.
13. Internally displaced persons were a target in 45 crimes, which led to
6 fatalities, compared with 211 crimes with 48 fatalities in the previous reporting
period. Other civilians were affected by 73 crimes resulting in 10 fatalities,
including cases of murder (10), armed robbery (7), attempted robbery
(4),assault/harassment (22), burglary/break-in (2), abduction (5), shooting (19),
attack/ambush (1), threat of violence (2) and livestock theft (1).
14. In South Darfur, the visit of Mr. Al-Bashir to Darfur from 19 to 23 September
triggered a massive demonstration in the Kalma camp for internally displaced
persons. On 22 September, government forces attempted to disperse the internally
displaced persons and stop them from holding a public rally across the Kalma camp,
which resulted in heavy shooting between the two sides, killing 5 internally
displaced persons and injuring 28 others, as well as two security personnel. A
UNAMID medical team deployed to the camp and assisted the local authorities in
treating the injured, while engaging the state government and leaders from among
the internally displaced persons to resolve the matter peacefully.
15. In West Darfur, farmers and internally displaced persons continued to be
attacked and harassed by armed herders, especially in the areas of El Geneina and
Masteri. In East Darfur, improved security in the Labado area has prompted some of
the returnees to reclaim their farmland from herders, in response to which the latter
resorted to the destruction of crops and farms, including four in Yasin locality on
15 August.
16. During an armed robbery in Central Darfur on 5 September, a group of A rab
men fired at a group of internally displaced persons, injuring one, in Wadi Faro,
20 km west of Zalingei. On 16 and 17 September, Arab nomads entered Golo town
and fired indiscriminately, reportedly in retaliation for an incident of cattle theft by
unknown perpetrators in an area between Rockero and Golo. The market in Golo
closed temporarily as a result of the shooting, although no casualties were reported.
On 29 September, a group of armed Salamat attacked the Bindisi camp for
internally displaced persons, 25 km west of Mukjar, killing one and stealing a large
number of cattle. On 3 October, seven armed men fired several shots and stole eight
solar panels in the Thur East camp for internally displaced persons , 18 km southeast of Nertiti. On the following day, six armed men entered the camp and engaged
in indiscriminate shooting, injuring one internally displaced person. On 6 October,
an Arab member of the peaceful coexistence committee announced that the
internally displaced persons were not allowed to leave the camp to conduct
livelihood activities, in particular in areas west of Thur. On the next day, armed men
carried out random shootings inside the camp.

4/14

17-18599

S/2017/907

III. Political situation
17. The political situation remained relatively stable, but progre ss relating to the
Darfur peace process continued to be modest. On 20 August, an informal
consultation with SLA-MM and JEM was held in Berlin to explore ways to revive
the peace process. Both groups maintained their rejection of the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur as the basis for political negotiations, claiming its shortcomings in
relation to security arrangements, the protection of civilians, compensation, land
ownership and justice. They also reiterated their objections to the arms collection
campaign by the Government, arguing that weapons of tribal militias should not be
collected by other militias, such as RSF. On the same day, Qatar reiterated its
commitment to the implementation of the Doha Document by signing an agreement
to provide $70 million for the construction of two new model villages in each
Darfur state. On 11 September, in a meeting with the Chairperson of the former
Darfur Regional Authority, Mr. Al-Bashir assured him that directives would be
issued for speedy structuring and revitalization of the commissions tasked with
completing the unimplemented provisions of the Doha Document.
18. On 22 August, it was reported in the media that Mr. Al -Bashir had held a
meeting with the Prime Minister of Chad in Khartoum and discussed, inter alia,
strengthening border control through the continuation of the Sudan -Chad joint
border forces in West Darfur. On 6 September, the Governor of West Darfur,
accompanied by the state security committee and some ministers, visited Adre town
in Chad to discuss border issues with their Chadian counterparts. Both parties
reportedly agreed to reopen the border following the aforementioned incident
involving RSF in Adikong.
19. On 27 August, a breakaway faction of JEM, led by Abubakar Hamid and
Souleyman Jamous, accepted the disarmament proposal made by the Government,
by which a gathering point in the border area between Chad and Darfur would be
identified and the process would begin after the rainy season. The parties requested
the President of Chad, Idriss Déby Itno, UNAMID and the international community
to ensure a safe and smooth disarmament exercise.
20. On 24 September, the United States of America removed the Sudan from a
renewed travel ban imposed in March on six Muslim-majority countries. On
6 October, the United States issued a press statement indicating that it was revoking
economic sanctions against the Sudan and the Government of the Sudan, to take
effect on 12 October.

IV. Humanitarian situation
21. The overall humanitarian situation remained relatively stable, with no
significant displacement recorded in Darfur, although South Sudanese refugees
continued to arrive in South and East Darfur, with approximately 3,500 and
195 registered, respectively, from 1 August to 15 September. The spread of acute
watery diarrhoea and flash floods continued to compound the dire humanitarian
situation in Darfur. In August, floods affected up to 1,700 internally displaced
persons in the Zamzam camp in North Darfur and 1,600 internally displaced persons
in the Otash camp in South Darfur. Non-food items were distributed to those
affected in both camps. Torrential rains also affected 380 families in Niteiga locality
and 341 families in the Sereif camp for internally displaced persons in South Darfur.
Following verification and the conduct of a needs assessment, non-food items and
water, sanitation and hygiene supplies were provided to those affected.

17-18599

5/14

S/2017/907

22. From the date on which the first case of acute watery diarrhoea was reported,
on 14 June, to 11 October, 674 cases were reported in North Darfur, resulting in
29 deaths, 775 in East Darfur, resulting in 43 deaths, 2,563 in South Darfur,
resulting in 123 deaths, 680 in West Darfur, resulting in 20 deaths, and 747 in
Central Darfur, resulting in 25 deaths. The World Health Organization (WHO)
supported the State Ministry of Health, as well as health partners, by providing
supplies for treatment and conducting water quality and vector control. WHO
executed 876 house-to-house awareness-raising campaigns promoting good hygiene
practices and conditions in East Darfur, reaching 2,876 people, and the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) continued its response activities, focusing on
case management, case control and communication on disease prevention, social
mobilization and monitoring and evaluation.
23. While a humanitarian response is in progress for all current emergencies,
major gaps were reported, mainly in the Jebel Marra area, including in the provision
of education services, emergency shelter and non-food items. A number of families
in three Jebel Marra localities verified by humanitarian agencies have yet to receive
non-food items. In Central Darfur, about 5,000 people affected by flooding have yet
to receive emergency shelter and non-food items. The delivery of humanitarian
assistance was challenged by road conditions as a result of heavy rains.
24. An inter-agency mission was conducted in Zalingei at the end of August, with
the objective of initiating consultations with the Central Darfur authorities and
humanitarian and development partners regarding the profiling of displacement and
return areas.

V. Operating environment
25. The overall operating environment continued to improve, with fewer criminal
incidents and fewer restrictions on movement of UNAMID and humani tarian
personnel reported.
Attacks and threats of attacks
26. A total of 23 criminal incidents were recorded, compared with 40 in the
previous reporting period, reflecting the overall improvement in the security
situation on the ground. On 16 August, unidentified perpetrators broke into a World
Food Programme (WFP) warehouse in Sortony, North Darfur, and stole a variety of
food items. On the same day, in Ed Daein, East Darfur, unidentified perpetrators
broke into the residence of a WFP national staff member and stole personal
belongings, and, in West Darfur, a local man who stole an electric cable from the
team site of UNAMID in Foro Burunga was arrested by mission personnel and
handed over to the national police.
27. On 17 August, in El Fasher, North Darfur, three unidentified armed men
assaulted and injured two WFP national staff members on board a private vehicle
and robbed them of their valuables. One of the victims was taken to El Fasher
hospital and discharged the same day and the other was evacuat ed to Khartoum. On
9 September, unidentified perpetrators broke into the accommodations of a
UNAMID police adviser in the Operation’s “supercamp” in Nyala and stole
personal belongings. On the same day, unidentified armed men opened fire on a
UNAMID national staff member in El Fasher. UNAMID national staff members
were robbed in El Fasher on 14 and 19 September. On 28 September, in an
attempted carjacking in Bursa area in El Fasher town four men shot and wounded a
national staff member. On 30 September, unknown perpetrators broke into the

6/14

17-18599

S/2017/907

residence of a UNAMID national staff in El Geneina and stole mobile phones. On
7 October, an international aid worker was abducted in El Fasher, North Darfur.
28. Three cases of carjacking were recorded during the reportin g period. On
10 August, a United Nations Population Fund vehicle was carjacked in Nyala, South
Darfur. In Kabkabiyah, North Darfur, armed men hijacked an ambulance and stole
the health equipment of a local non-governmental organization on 14 August, and in
Umm Shalabiyah, Central Darfur, an unidentified perpetrator carjacked a local
non-governmental organization vehicle on 26 August.
Detention of staff
29. Three UNAMID staff members were arrested and detained during the
reporting period. On 23 August, the national police arrested one UNAMID national
staff member in El Fasher over alleged involvement in a carjacking incident. In East
Darfur, a UNAMID national staff member was arrested on 28 May on allegations of
bribing a public officer and espionage against the state made by the National
Intelligence and Security Service; the staff member was convicted of bribery in the
general court in Ed Daein on 24 August, acquitted of conspiracy against the state
and sentenced to two years’ imprisonment and a fine of 30,000 Sudanese pounds.
Observers alleged that the trial lacked transparency and fell short of international
judicial standards. A UNAMID national staff member arrested in Ed Daein on
28 August for allegedly issuing a fake cheque was released on 31 August. A
UNAMID national staff member arrested in Nyala by the National Intelligence and
Security Service on 23 November 2016 for alleged espionage was released from
detention in Khartoum on 31 August. On 8 October, a UNAMID national staff
member was arrested for failing to provide financial support to his children in Nyala
but was released the following day. On 5 October, another UNAMID national staff
member was arrested in Nyala, allegedly for issuing two false bank cheques, but
released on 12 October after paying a fine.
Access restrictions
30. There were two incidents of access restriction during the reporting period. On
19 August, a government military intelligence officer restricted a UNAMID national
staff member from entering the UNAMID terminal at the airport in El Fasher,
allegedly for security reasons. On 6 September, following discussions with the
Sudanese authorities, the national staff member was allowed to resume his duties at
the airport. On 10 October, a UNAMID patrol tasked with carrying out a project
inspection mission to various locations in Murnei town, West Darfur, was denied
access by the National Intelligence and Security Service and military intelligence
officers, who claimed not to have received notification of the mission.
31. UNAMID did not experience any air movement restrictions in the period
under review. There were occasional bureaucratic impediments, however, including
delays in the approval of flight schedules, prohibition of flights between team sites
in different sectors, limits placed on air operation hours and the denial of use of the
airport in El Obeid, North Kordofan, as an alternate airport for emergencies. On
11 October, in Golo, Central Darfur, SAF forced the entry of two soldiers with
gunshot injuries into a United Nations Humanitarian Air Service aircraft bound for
Zalingei.
32. Humanitarian activities continued without significant interference from
government authorities, and several missions were successfully conducted,
including to Jebel Marra. The International Organization for Migration (IOM)
conducted a registration mission in Central Darfur from 7 to 20 August. On
10 September, an inter-agency assessment mission was carried out in Deribat, South
17-18599

7/14

S/2017/907

Darfur. WFP food distribution in Golo, Central Darfur, was successfu lly conducted,
and local authorities approved regular United Nations humanitarian flights to
Rockero. Significant progress was made in the issuance of notifications, travel
permits, technical agreements and visas. Overall compliance with the revised
humanitarian directives issued in December 2016, however, remained inconsistent.
In Central Darfur, access to areas in eastern Nertiti required prior approval by the
Governor and the State Security Committee, and a request for an inter -agency
mission to eastern Nertiti submitted on 29 July is still pending. Humanitarians
remained unable to access areas of Darfur under the control of SLA/AW, including
Kutrum, Golol, and Boldong, with authorities citing the inability to ensure security
for humanitarians as the reason therefor.
33. Humanitarian workers also experienced difficulties in getting authorization
from the National Intelligence and Security Service and the military intelligence
officers, notwithstanding their having received approvals from the Humanitarian
Aid Commission. For example, the IOM registration mission in Aynsero in North
Darfur was suspended by the National Intelligence and Security Service, even
though it had been initially approved by the Humanitarian Aid Commission. In
addition, a UNICEF mission planned for 20 to 23 August to eastern Jebel Marra was
put on hold by the Government for security reasons.
Visas and customs clearance
34. The Government granted 411 visas for UNAMID, including 74 for military
personnel, 196 for police personnel, 61 for official visitors, 58 for contractors,
14 for international staff members and 8 for dependants. A total of 246 visa requests
have remained pending beyond the normal period of 15 days, some of them since
January 2016. They include 42 for police personnel, 90 for contractors, 43 for
official visitors, 35 for civilian staff members, 24 for military personnel, 11 for
United Nations Volunteers and 1 for a consultant. The vacancy rate for the Human
Rights Section remains unchanged, at 44 per cent, while 4 per cent of the overall
17 per cent vacancy rate for the Operation’s international civilian staff is
attributable to pending visas.
35. The Sudanese authorities progressively released shipments and containers
from Port Sudan. Currently, 63 shipments are pending release, some of them since
April 2015. They include one armoured personnel carrier, 10 vehicles,
communications and information technology equipment, generators, submersible
pumps and spare parts for vehicles. The delays have resulted in demurrage char ges
and other costs associated with the inspection and repair of equipment incurred by
troop- and police-contributing countries. UNAMID is still awaiting further
information from the Government on the new system for the certificate of taxation
exemption for goods imported in 2016 and 2017.

VI. Progress towards achievement of the strategic objectives
of the Mission
Protection of civilians
36. Integrated field protection teams conducted 21 missions in North Darfur, 8 in
West Darfur and 2 in Central Darfur. In North Darfur, the teams conducted daily
visits to the Korma camp for internally displaced persons, together with surrounding
areas, including Kundi, Tawilah, Shoba Wadi, Hillet, Hibrahim, Gozil Na ’im,
Bandago, Basinga, Simayat, Dekere and Kurula. The teams interacted with local
communities and received reports of harassment and intimidation against internally
displaced persons who were collecting firewood and grass and farming. In West
8/14

17-18599

S/2017/907

Darfur, the teams were informed of similar challenges in Habil a, Kanery, Tajuna,
Afandi, Almashruwa, Himmeda, Kamkam, Kurti and Azerni, including physical
assaults in farming areas, denial of access to land, destruction of crops and violence
against women and girls. In Central Darfur, the team visited Shawa, a farmin g area
located 15 km east of Zalingei, in response to reports of security threats from
nomads faced by farmers.
37. On the basis of input from those communities, UNAMID categorized
18 farming areas around Zalingei, Nertiti, Mukjar and Azum in Central Darf ur as
hotspots, although access to the areas has been difficult owing to the road conditions
during the rainy season. UNAMID also intensified patrols in farming areas around
Sortony, Tawilah, Umm Barru, Shangil Tobaya and Saraf Omra in North Darfur.
38. The military component of UNAMID conducted a total of 10,311 patrols,
including 213 long-range patrols and 1,366 night patrols, which amounted to 2,420
visits to villages and 1,445 visits to camps for internally displaced persons. The
police component of UNAMID conducted 3,924 confidence-building patrols to
camps for internally displaced persons and 2,958 patrols to address the security
needs of internally displaced persons, in particular women and children engaged in
livelihood activities outside the camps. In addition, 304 joint patrols with 1,176
community policing volunteers were carried out as part of crime prevention
initiatives.
39. The uniformed personnel of UNAMID provided 195 round -trip escorts for
humanitarian partners in support of the delivery o f humanitarian assistance,
inter-agency and verification assessments, the distribution and monitoring of food
and non-food items and operational activities. In addition, UNAMID continued to
provide daily escorts to humanitarian partners undertaking the wat er, sanitation and
hygiene initiative of trucking water from the Kube to the Sortony gathering sites in
North Darfur, which host over 21,500 internally displaced persons, and regular
armed escorts for the transport of humanitarian supplies between Sortony and
Kabkabiyah in North Darfur. Under special arrangements with WFP, UNAMID
armed escorts facilitated seven WFP logistics convoys of 32 trucks delivering
629 tons of food and non-food items in North and South Darfur. UNAMID
continued to provide security for WFP warehouses in various locations, including
El Fasher and Sortony in North Darfur.
40. UNAMID conducted six training sessions on human rights and the prevention
of sexual and gender-based violence, community policing and family and child
protection for 97 internally displaced persons (93 men and 4 women), as well as
13 training sessions on community policing, human rights and the prevention of
sexual and gender-based violence, and health care for 424 internally displaced
persons and community policing volunteers (247 men and 177 women). Between
13 and 24 August, 100 newly recruited prison officers were provided a two -week
training in El Fasher, North Darfur, and Nyala, South Darfur, to enhance their
capacity and promote a human rights-based approach to prison management.
41. UNAMID continued to follow up with local judicial authorities on the status
of investigations, arrests and trials. In addition to a trial in El Geneina, West Darfur,
of suspects charged with the rape of two female teachers, UNAMID monitored the
court case involving two members of the Rizeigat militia accused of killing eight
internally displaced persons from the Sortony camp in May 2016. In response to a
rare instance of the Office of the Special Prosecutor for Crimes in Darfur pursu ing
accountability measures against Arab militias, armed Rizeigat in Sortony blocked
the road between Sortony and Kabkabiyah, demanding the release of the two
suspects. UNAMID provides support to the Office on compliance with fair trial

17-18599

9/14

S/2017/907

standards and makes the logistical arrangements for witnesses from Sortony to
appear before the court in El Fasher.
42. Support from UNAMID enabled the operationalization during the reporting
period of a new multipurpose court in El Geneina, which includes a rural and a
district court, along with offices for judges and separate detention facilities for men
and women. This allows improved oversight of the rural court and promotes access
to justice for the population by reducing travel costs and facilitating the appeal of
cases by the district court. In addition, as a result of UNAMID advocacy, the
Government is in the process of building a correctional facility that emphasizes
prisoner rehabilitation in Nyala, South Darfur, in compliance with international
standards.
43. On 16 August, SLA/MM renewed its order issued on 17 December 2013
prohibiting the recruitment and use of child soldiers, sexual violence against
children, the abduction of children, the killing and maiming of children and attacks
on schools and hospitals. Between 15 August and 11 September, UNAMID
undertook 19 field missions to hospitals, prisons and camps for internally displaced
persons to monitor and report allegations of grave violations of children ’s rights.
UNAMID also conducted six training sessions for 481 participants from local
communities, women’s groups and prison and police officers. In line with Security
Council resolutions 1261 (1999), 1460 (2003) and 1612 (2005), UNAMID
conducted 14 training sessions benefiting 628 peacekeepers and associated
personnel (87 women and 541 men) to increase the awareness and knowledge of
mission personnel on child rights and child protection.
44. UNAMID, in collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme
and the Sudan Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission,
supported the launch of the third phase of the reintegration process for
350 ex-combatants demobilized between 2014 and 2016. On 21 August, the
reintegration programme began for 200 demobilized ex-combatants in Zalingei,
Central Darfur, and for 150 ex-combatants in Nyala, South Darfur. In addition,
UNAMID completed 15 community stabilization projects, including 3 in South
Darfur, 5 in North Darfur and 7 in West Darfur, and conducted vocational skills
training for 1,200 at-risk youth in Shattay and Bulbul-Dalal Anagara in South
Darfur, Umm Barru in North Darfur and Tandalti in West Darfur.
45. UNAMID teams conducted general explosive hazard assessments and disposal
operations in 10 villages across Darfur, with particular focus on Jebel Marra. As a
result, 11 hazardous areas were cleared and 241 items of unexploded ordnance
destroyed. Mine action teams surveyed four UNAMID team sites earmarked for
closure prior to their handover to the Government. UNAMID also conducted
training on explosive hazards across Darfur, which benefited 12,389 people,
including 2,003 men, 3,314 women, 3,790 boys and 3,282 girls.
Support to the Darfur peace process and the implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur
46. The African Union-United Nations Joint Special Representative for
Darfur/Head of UNAMID continued to engage with the movements that were
non-signatories to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur and the Government,
with the aim of the resumption of talks towards the signing of a cessation of
hostilities agreement and subsequent negotiations. In response to the letter sent by
the Joint Special Representative on 11 August regarding the impasse of the process,
the Government reiterated its insistence on the Doha Document as the basis for
negotiations, while the non-signatories maintained their view of the need for a
cessation of hostilities agreement before proceeding to negotiate further. On
10/14

17-18599

S/2017/907

30 August, the Prime Minister and First Vice-President of the Sudan reiterated the
position of the Government in a meeting with the Joint Special Representative.
47. On 15 August, UNAMID met with the Commissioner of the Darfur Land
Commission, who provided a briefing on the progress of the Darfur land -use
mapping database, with the assistance of a German consulting firm. Those data will
constitute the basis for the Land Act. UNAMID also met with the Commissioner
and the Executive Director of the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission on
20 August, who requested the support of the Operation in implementing
peacebuilding activities in the following priority areas: (a) Mellit locality in North
Darfur, targeting the Berti, Zayadiya and Awlad Omran communities; (b) Kutum and
Waha localities in North Darfur, targeting all communities in the area; (c) Um
Dukhun in Central Darfur, targeting the Ta‘a’ishah, Salamat, Beni Halba and
Misseriya communities; (d) Mouli area in West Darfur, targeting the Arab and
Masalit communities; and (e) Graida in South Darfur, targeting the Masalit,
Rizeigat, Salamat, Fallata and Habbaniya communities.
Mitigation of intercommunal violence
48. In collaboration with the Sudanese authorities, the United Nations country
team and other stakeholders, UNAMID continued efforts to resolve the conflict
between the Fallata and the Salamat in South Darfur, holding two meetings with
community leaders and the National Intelligence and Security Service, on 17 and
21 August. In Central Darfur, two meetings were held, on 27 and 30 August, to
resolve the tension between the Mahariya and SLA/AW elements, involving local
officials and peaceful coexistence committee members. Similarly, in West Dar fur on
20 August, UNAMID held a meeting in Arara to follow up on the implementation of
the peace agreement between the Najaa and the Awlad Rashid.
49. UNAMID, jointly with the United Nations Development Programme,
conducted workshops on peaceful coexistence, confidence-building and conflict
prevention and management in North Darfur from 28 to 30 August and in South
Darfur on 28 and 29 August, bringing together 220 participants, including
77 women, internally displaced persons, young people and nomads. To mitigate
seasonal farming-related communal conflicts in the context of the upcoming harvest
season, UNAMID held three meetings in North Darfur, on 16, 22 and 23 August,
two meetings in West Darfur, on 16 and 21 August, one meeting in South Darfur, on
15 August, one meeting in East Darfur, on 6 September, and one meeting in
Khartoum, on 15 August. The meetings brought together diverse stakeholders,
including representatives of the native administrations, commissioners, local
authorities and community leaders, representatives of the peaceful coexistence and
agricultural protection committees, internally displaced persons, farmers and
nomadic herders.

VII. Progress in the implementation of the recommendations
of the strategic report
50. Pursuant to resolution 2363 (2017), UNAMID continued to implement phase
one of its reconfiguration, including the closure of 11 team sites and the reduction
of the authorized strength to 11,395 military personnel and 2,888 police personnel.
As at 15 October, six team sites had been closed, namely, Muhajiriyah in East
Darfur, Edd al-Fursan and Tulus in South Darfur, and Maliha, Mellit and
Um Kaddadah in North Darfur, while the closure of four additional tea m sites is
expected to commence in the second half of October. The team site in Shaeria, East
Darfur, has been handed over from the military unit to the formed police unit of
UNAMID.
17-18599

11/14

S/2017/907

51. Two of the three battalions to be withdrawn in phase one have been
repatriated, except for their contingent-owned equipment and the rear parties, and
the departure of the third battalion was scheduled to commence on 16 October. In
addition, two formed police units had been repatriated as at the end of September.
Individual police officers have also been redeployed from the closing team sites to
the remaining ones.
Jebel Marra task force
52. The establishment of the Jebel Marra task force is on track. Nine existing team
sites in Central, North and South Darfur States have redirected their activities to
address the humanitarian needs of the population in the area, while there have been
promising discussions with the Government of the Sudan in Khartoum and the local
government on the establishment of the temporary operating base in Golo.
Following the successful meeting of the Tripartite Mechanism in New York, on
22 September, and the meeting of the Joint Special Representative with the
Governor of Central Darfur, on 7 October, technical arrangements are taking place
for the ground preparations of UNAMID operations in Golo. Meanwhile, UNAMID
is in the process of developing a tailored protection strategy for Jebel Marra and
finalizing the headquarters arrangements for the Jebel Marra task force.
Civilian staffing review
53. The civilian staffing review of UNAMID, which was carried out in August to
adjust the level of civilian personnel commensurate with the drawdown of
uniformed personnel, has completed its task. While the recommendations of the
staffing review are being finalized, UNAMID has recommended the reduction of
562 posts, to be implemented over the next 12 months in two phases, which will be
reflected in the revised 2017/18 budget.
Joint financing strategy for sustaining peace in Darfur of the African Union United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the United Nations country team
54. UNAMID and the United Nations country team finalized the integrated
strategic framework for 2017–2019 at their joint meeting held in Khartoum on
26 September. Focusing on the rule of law and human rights, durable solutions to
displacement and peacebuilding for human security, the strategy sets out the
common framework through which to tackle those issues in a consistent and
complementary manner, based on comparative advantage and division of labour.
The development of a joint financing strategy for implementing the framework is in
progress, and it is aimed at identifying measures to ensure the Government ’s
engagement in and ownership of those issues, the further geographical pri oritization
and sequencing of tasks, and outreach to a wide range of partners to mobilize the
resources necessary for sustainable peace in Darfur.

VIII. Financial aspects
55. The General Assembly, by its resolution 71/310 of 30 June 2017, authorized
the Secretary-General to enter into commitments for the Operation in an amount not
exceeding $486.0 million for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2017.
56. As at 10 October 2017, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account
for UNAMID amounted to $141.0 million. Total outstanding assessed contributions
for all peacekeeping operations at that date amounted to $2,400.3 million.

12/14

17-18599

S/2017/907

57. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs has been made for the period
up to 31 August 2017, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent -owned
equipment has been made for the period up to 30 June 2017, in accordance with the
quarterly payment schedule.

IX. Observations
58. Progress towards achieving comprehensive peace in Darfur through a
negotiated political settlement to the conflict remains elusive. While the parties
proclaim the desire to continue the negotiations, they set preconditions that
constrain the progression of the talks. I urge both the Government of the Sudan and
the armed movements to continue honouring their unilateral ceasefires and to
resume talks aimed at reaching an agreement on the cessation of hostilities. In this
regard, I commend the continuous efforts made by the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, led by the former President of South Africa Thabo Mbeki
and supported by the Joint Special Representative, to bring the parties to the
negotiating table. I urge the parties to cooperate in the mediat ion in seeking lasting
solutions to the crisis.
59. While the disarmament of the civilian population and the militia is one of the
provisions of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur and a prerequisite to
establishing sustainable peace, without a wider consensus on the way forward to end
the conflict in Darfur, the arms collection campaign launched by the Government
has the potential to exacerbate the existing divisions within society, notwithstanding
the merit of reducing the circulation of weapons that fuel violence. The
developments to date indicate that the process has generated uneven outcomes
across the Darfur states and mixed reactions, which, if not managed carefully, could
lead to unanticipated consequences politically. In addition, the militia issu e needs to
be addressed in the context of wider security sector reform and adequate
investments into alternative livelihoods.
60. In accordance with the decisions of the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union, UNAMID has made progress on the
reconfiguration process. I thank the Government for its cooperation and support in
the repatriation of uniformed units and the closure of the team sites and appeal for
the completion of the preparations towards establishing a temporary operating base
in Golo. I am encouraged by the overall progress made in the issuance of visas and
the release of containers and ask the Government to remove all outstanding
impediments, including pending visas, customs clearance and the certificate of tax
exemption, in accordance with the status-of-forces agreement.
61. Ensuring that the drawdown of UNAMID is accompanied by the further
stabilization of the situation in Darfur is the collective responsibility of the
Government, the United Nations system and local stakeholders in Darfur. Together
with the African Union, the Secretariat has initiated preparations for the midterm
review of the reconfiguration by the end of 2017, as mandat ed by the Security
Council.
62. In conclusion, I would like to thank the Joint Special Representative, Jeremiah
Nyamane Kingsley Mamabolo, and all the personnel of UNAMID, the United
Nations and the humanitarian community who continue their relentless efforts to
improve the lives of the people of Darfur. I commend my Special En voy for the
Sudan and South Sudan, Nicholas Haysom, and the former President of South
Africa Thabo Mbeki and the former President of Nigeria Abdulsalami Abubakar of
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel for their remarkable efforts to
resolve the conflict in Darfur.

17-18599

13/14

S/2017/907

14/14

17-18599
