S/PV.9023

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9023rd meeting

Wednesday, 27 April 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Roscoe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Oliveira Freitas
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ravindran
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region (S/2022/276)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-33167 (E)
*2233167*

S/PV.9023

The situation in the Great Lakes region

highlights that trend and provides several illustrative
examples. However, that positive trend was disrupted
by the security and humanitarian crisis in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, compounded by the
resumption of military activities by the Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23) in the last quarter of the past year, with
attacks on several positions of the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo (FARDC).

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region
(S/2022/276)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Rwanda to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Huang Xia,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region; His Excellency Mr. João Samuel Caholo,
Executive Secretary of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region; and Mr. Dinesh Mahtani,
independent expert on the Great Lakes region.
Mr. Caholo and Mr. Mahtani are joining this
meeting via video-teleconference.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/276, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
I now give the floor to Mr. Huang Xia.
Mr. Huang Xia (spoke in French): I welcome
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
most recent report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region (S/2022/276).
Since I last briefed the Council on 20 October
2021 (see S/PV.8884), the situation in the Great
Lakes region has shown an encouraging trend in
terms of dialogue, cooperation and integration and, in
general, the continued will to tackle the root causes
of the instability. The report before the Council today
2/24

27/04/2022

The situation is all the more regrettable since
it occurs nearly 10 years after the signing of the
2013 Nairobi Declaration by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and M-23 insurgents,
in which that armed group, defeated militarily,
committed itself to no longer taking up arms. As I said
before the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union during an important meeting on the Great Lakes
region several days ago, I would like to reiterate here
my solemn appeal to that rebel group to lay down its
arms. The people in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo have suffered too much, and the region can
ill afford yet another crisis.
Similarly, it is regrettable that the Allied Democratic
Forces (ADF) and other local armed groups continue
to commit atrocities against civilians. To achieve its
sinister ends, the ADF in particular still seems to benefit
from a network of recruiters in the region and even
beyond, as confirmed by recent arrests during the joint
Democratic Republic of the Congo-Uganda operations.
All of that reminds us that peace in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains extremely
fragile and how much we still need to step up our
joint efforts to achieve a region completely free of the
horrors of war. I would like to once again express my
sincere condolences to the families of the victims of
the recent violence in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo and to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO) for the tragic deaths of
peacekeepers in the line of duty.
Despite that fragility, I would like to express my
conviction that it is still possible to consolidate the
significant gains made to date in the region and to move
progressively towards a lasting peace. To that end,
efforts must be made on at least three levels.
The first level remains the urgent need for
increased cooperation on security matters. That is
illustrated, inter alia, by the joint operations conducted
by the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda;
22-33167

27/04/2022

The situation in the Great Lakes region

the memorandum of understanding between Burundi
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to meet
the security challenges at their common border;
the regular consultations between the heads of the
intelligence services of the countries in the region; the
establishment of the Contact and Coordination Group
on non-military measures; and the efforts under way at
the level of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region to devise a strategy to combat terrorism
in the region. That ongoing trend, which is aimed at
significantly reducing the nefarious influence of armed
groups, should be welcomed and supported.
The second level is based on a direct, standing
dialogue at the highest level between the leaders in
the region so as to ease tensions and strengthen trust.
In that regard, I would like to welcome the progress
made in normalizing the relations between Rwanda and
Uganda, which were marked, notably, by the reopening
of the common border, and the relations between
Burundi and Rwanda.
I would like also to congratulate the Heads of
State of the region on consolidating that encouraging
trend at the tenth summit of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region, held in Kinshasa on 24 February. I
also would like to congratulate President Tshisekedi
Tshilombo on the successful outcome of that important
high-level meeting, which saw an exceptional level of
mobilization. On that occasion, the Heads of State,
inter alia, committed themselves to pooling their
efforts to an even greater extent so as to tackle more
effectively the increasingly numerous and multifarious
challenges facing the region. They also reiterated their
commitment to the framework agreement as their
platform for cooperation.
I would like to also welcome the convergence of
views among Heads of State on regional priorities
so as to tackle the factors underlying instability and
conflict and the fresh impetus that they have provided
in that respect.
I would like to pay tribute to the leadership of
President Kenyatta, who, on two occasions during the
month of April, hosted in Nairobi his counterparts in
the region during two important summits to consider
the ongoing security challenges in the east of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and come up with
specific solutions.

S/PV.9023

I welcome the fact that the Nairobi conclave held on
21 April promised an approach that is both pragmatic
and firm, giving priority to dialogue between the
representatives of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and armed groups, with
facilitation provided by Kenya. I would like to also
encourage all parties to continue with that open and
frank dialogue so as to find a lasting solution to the
searing question of insecurity.
The third level of action is continued support
by the international community for the region. That
mobilization for the region is indispensable since the
accomplishments already made merit being safeguarded.
I call on the members of the Security Council and of
the International Contact Group for the Great Lakes
Region, with whom I have regular contacts, to support
regional dialogue efforts. The consultation process
under way to follow up on the conclave’s decisions
makes it imperative that there be rapid support for the
new strategy for the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme
at the national level, and for the plan of action of the
Contact and Coordination Group at the regional level.
I would like also to welcome the close cooperation
with my colleague Bintou Keita, Head of MONUSCO,
as well as that between our teams at the technical level.
Allow me to list some priority initiatives that I will
be dealing with in the upcoming months, in keeping
with the action plan of the United Nations Strategy for
Peace Consolidation, Conflict Prevention and Conflict
Resolution in the Great Lakes Region and the decisions
that emanated from the Regional Oversight Mechanism.
First, I will continue, in close cooperation with
other institutions that are guarantors of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework, good-offices
and diplomatic efforts aimed at improving goodneighbourliness relations among the countries of the
region. Then, together with other guarantor institutions
and with the support of MONUSCO, I plan to provide
all the support necessary to make sure that there is
an effective deployment of the operational unit of
the Contact and Coordination Group on non-military
measures. I invite the Council to support my appeal to
mobilize the resources necessary to attain the goals set.
In cooperation with MONUSCO, my Office will
also continue providing technical and logistical support
to the Nairobi peace process and, if it can help, we will
also stand ready to provide our contribution to the

22-331673/24

S/PV.9023

The situation in the Great Lakes region

efforts to repatriate the disarmed combatants of M23
and the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda,
as was already done in 2018. We would recall that
that initiative had had non-negligible results in terms
of repatriation.
Similarly, so as to follow up on the earlier
recommendations that came out of the Khartoum
workshop on natural resources, which took place from
31 August to 2 September 2021, I intend to continue
in the upcoming weeks my work together with the
Executive Secretariat of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region to promote enhanced
national and regional ownership of the Regional
Initiative on Natural Resources. To fill in that missing
link in the chain, political advocacy with the countries
in the region, as well as diplomatic involvement with the
destination countries for smuggled strategic minerals,
will be a priority for us in the months to come.
The fifteenth Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development-International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region (ICGLR) Forum on Responsible Mineral
Supply Chains is planned for next week and represents
an opportunity for us to solicit support upstream in the
production chain, in particular major companies, for
the region’s efforts to combat the exploitation of and
the illicit trade in high-value mineral resources.

27/04/2022

On that topic, the upcoming meeting of the justice
ministers of the region, to be held in June in Kinshasa,
will allow us to take stock of the implementation of the
Nairobi Declaration on Justice and Good Governance
of May 2019 and, certainly, to provide guidance for
expediting it.
I would be remiss if I did not thank the Security
Council for its ongoing concern for the Great Lakes
region. In these uncertain times, where new and old
challenges emerge, I would like to call on the Security
Council and beyond to reiterate my appeal to the
international community to remain mobilized for the
Great Lakes region to ensure that all efforts made at all
levels can deliver on their promises.
The President: I thank Mr. Xia for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Caholo.
Mr. Caholo: Let me begin by expressing my
sincere appreciation to the United Kingdom, and
indeed the entire Security Council, for including this
very important topic in the programme of work for
the month of April 2022. I also extend my gratitude
to the United Kingdom through its representative,
Ambassador Barbara Woodward, and her team for the
able leadership exhibited thus far and for inviting me to
address the Council.

As we continue with efforts to promote the
economic empowerment of women as a strategy for
peacebuilding, my Office, in partnership with the ICGLR
Private Sector Forum, UN-Women and the Economic
Commission for Africa, co-facilitated in December
2021 the launching of a women entrepreneurs network
in the Great Lakes region, and I intend to engage in
an ongoing dialogue with regional institutions on their
gender policies and to continue supporting that network
to ensure that it can make the most of opportunities for
regional integration, in particular the broadening of the
East African Community with the bringing in of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

It is always an honour to speak to the Security
Council. As per the invitation, I am required to present
my perspective on the situation in the Great Lakes
region. I will therefore provide an update on major
developments in the region with regard to the political
and security situation. I will conclude by providing
some recommendations for the consideration of the
Security Council.

For as long as the impunity that fuels the cycle of
violence and promotes recruitment into armed groups
prevails, it will be difficult to rebuild trust between the
people and the Government. In that context, my Office
will continue to support the efforts of the countries of
the region in combating impunity and promoting human
rights, in particular the work being done by the Great
Lakes Judicial Cooperation Network on high-profile
cases of transborder crime.

On the security front, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is facing a resurgence of attacks by
armed groups, rebel forces and Islamist terrorists,
who are sowing terror by massacring and abducting
civilians and burning villages, among other things,
particularly in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Those armed groups include militias from
the Coopérative pour le développement du Congo,
the Force de résistance patriotique d’Ituri, the Allied

4/24

The Great Lakes region faces various security
challenges, emanating mainly from the activities of
negative forces and armed groups operating in parts
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central
African Republic and the Republic of South Sudan.

22-33167

27/04/2022

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Democratic Forces (ADF), the Mayi-Mayi groups and
the Movement du 23 mars (M-23).
In a bid to curb growing insecurity, His Excellency
Mr. Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo, President
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo declared a
state of siege on 3 May 2021 over parts of the national
territory, including North Kivu and Ituri, in accordance
with article 85 of the Constitution of the Republic. The
Parliament of the Republic reviews and renews the
state of siege every 15 days. The country has thereby
made progress in the security sector, and the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo have
regained control of several villages, with the support of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
However, it is worth noting that intercommunal
violence and increased armed group activities have
continued in those areas, which is of great concern to
us. The Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo deployed more troops to Ituri in March 2022.
There is an increase in killings with machetes, arrows,
small weapons and guns. In addition, attacks on a camp
for internally displaced persons in Ituri have increased.
That must be condemned, and all actors must be
called upon to end the violence and the violations of
international humanitarian law.
The resurgence of the M-23 rebel group in North
Kivu on Tuesday, 29 March, is an issue of great concern
for the region. The rebels attacked military positions
in Chanzu and Runyoni, in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, causing loss of lives and
displacement of locals in those villages. On 1 April,
the group announced a unilateral ceasefire on the front
lines of the Jomba grouping in Rutshuru territory. We
call upon the Security Council to support regional
efforts and those of the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo to protect innocent lives in
this part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) will remain vigilant through its Mineral
Tracking and Certification Scheme so as to ensure
that those armed groups are not financed by the illegal
exploitation of natural resources.
In the Central African Republic, the security
situation remains a concern following activities of
armed groups in some parts of the northern, northeastern, eastern, western and central parts of the
country. The Mbororo are noted to be assisting the

S/PV.9023

Unité pour la paix en Centrafrique and the Return,
Reclamation and Rehabilitation group and are also
trafficking arms within the Central African Republic.
Frequent clashes are noted between rival ethnic armed
groups who were for or against the implementation of
the Khartoum Peace Agreement and the Luanda road
map. Through the able leadership of His Excellency
Mr. João Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço, President of
the Republic of Angola, in his capacity as Chairperson
of the ICGLR, the organization hosted three minisummits on the political and security situation in the
Central African Republic on 29 January, 20 April and
16 September 2021. Those high-level meetings resulted
in the declaration of a unilateral ceasefire on 15 October
2021 by His Excellency Mr. Faustin Archange
Touadera, President of the Central African Republic, in
accordance with the joint road map adopted at the end
of 16 September mini-summit.
Despite the declaration of the ceasefire, there
continue to be violations of the joint road map, and
cases of violence in the country are still being reported.
We continue to urge the warring parties to respect the
implementation of the joint road map and support the
technical team comprising the Republic of Angola the
Central African Republic and the Republic of Rwanda
on the follow-up of the implementation process of the
joint road map on the Central African Republic. We
again call upon the Security Council to remain vigilant
and to be seized of the matter.
The situation in South Sudan remains volatile. In
March, there were reports of escalating tensions and
clashes between the South Sudan People’s Defence
Forces and the Sudan People’s Liberation MovementArmy in Opposition in the Upper Nile state counties,
in full violation of the 2018 Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. Furthermore, elements of the National Salvation
Front, commonly known as NAS, continue to perpetrate
atrocities against civilians and carry out attacks on the
positions of the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces,
in violation of the 2018 ceasefire agreement. The NAS
was involved in killings, abductions, extortions and
burning of vehicles along the entire length of the JubaYei-Kaya and Juba-Nimule roads. Notwithstanding
that, the Government of South Sudan continued to
implement the Revitalized Agreement.
We reiterate our call for the Security Council
and the entire international community to support
the efforts of the Government of the Republic of the

22-331675/24

S/PV.9023

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Sudan and the Government of the Republic of Uganda
to assist the South Sudanese parties in expediting the
implementation the Revitalized Peace Agreement,
which was signed in September 2018, and which
sought to end the civil war that took place between
2013 and 2018. In addition, we joined the international
community in calling for dialogue between the South
Sudanese parties in order to bring an end to the strife.
The Republic of the Sudan is in a transitional period
after the revolutionary change in December 2018. The
revolution put the Sudan on the path of democratic
transformation, peace and stability, but the country is
still facing challenges in areas of peace and economic
development. However, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) was happy to
witness some achievements, such as the signing of the
Juba Peace Agreement on the 3 October 2020 and the
hosting and facilitating of the peace negotiations that
culminated in the signing of the Revitalized Peace
Agreement for South Sudan.
At the moment, the Government of the Sudan is in
the process of implementing economic reforms aimed
at normalizing relations with the international financial
institutions and attracting foreign direct investment.
We call upon the Security Council to encourage all
Sudanese parties to engage in a political dialogue
leading to a consensus with a view to organizing free
and transparent elections by the end of the transitional
period in conformity with the rule of law and
fundamental freedoms.
In addition, we are happy to have witnessed the
hosting of the negotiations that ended with the signing
of the Khartoum Agreement between the parties to the
conflict in the Central African Republic in February
2019. Further and more importantly, allow me to
reiterate the request of His Excellency Mr. João Manuel
Goncalves Lourenço, President of the Republic of
Angola and Chairperson of the ICGLR, for the Security
Council to urgently reconsider the arms embargo,
which continues to impinge on the defence and security
forces’ ability to safeguard the territorial integrity of
the Central African Republic and restore and maintain
law and order in the country. Political stability and
economic development can only be brought about with
improvements in the defence, security and humanitarian
situation in the country.
In general, the Great Lakes region continues to
face threats from the terrorism and mercenary-fighter
6/24

27/04/2022

phenomenon emanating from global and regional
terrorist groups that continue to recruit, radicalize,
plan and execute attacks. Terrorism remains a security
concern attributed to the activities of the ADF in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Al-Shabaab terror group in Kenya and the Islamic
State of Iraq and Syria in the Sudan. We call upon the
Council to work closely with the leaders of the Great
Lakes region to seal and secure the external borders of
the region.
The Republic of Angola and the Republic of Kenya
are scheduled to hold general elections in August
2022. While competitive elections are a hallmark of
democracy, elections in the region have always been
a flashpoint for conflict and violence. The causes
and triggers of violence in the region are many
and overlapping. We urge the Security Council to
intensify calls for violence-free elections and peaceful
coexistence of the peoples of the region.
As I conclude, I am grateful to the Security Council
for continuing to place the situation in the Great Lakes
region on its agenda, which allows the Council to remain
seized with and apply itself to matters concerning the
region. As the representative of the ICGLR, I would like
to reiterate and underscore the capacity of the leaders
of the region to reach compromises that can lead to
further peace, stability and sustainable development
in the region. The recent mini-summit on the security
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
convened on 21 April 2022 and attended by the Heads
of State and Government of the Republic of Kenya,
the Republic of Burundi, the Republic of Rwanda, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Republic
of Uganda is a very commendable initiative. We call
upon the Security Council to support the resolutions
emanating thereof
The President: I thank Mr. Caholo for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mahtani.
Mr. Mahtani: Mr. President, I thank you for giving
me this opportunity to speak to the Security Council
today. I am also honoured to be able to do so in front
of attending representatives from the Great Lakes
and East African regions, whose authorities I have
engaged with in some depth over the last 20 years. The
following comments are based on insights gathered
during this period, as well as from fresh interviews I
have conducted in the Great Lakes, East and Southern
Africa over the last 18 months.
22-33167

27/04/2022

The situation in the Great Lakes region

We come together today in the wake of concerning
developments in the Great Lakes. In recent weeks, the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23), which fled the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
surrendered into the hands of Ugandan and Rwandan
authorities in 2013, has re-emerged in the Democratic
Republic’s North Kivu province, raising the spectre
once again of a regional security crisis. The Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF), also resurgent since 2013,
and responsible for targeted and indiscriminate
massacres against civilians also in North Kivu, has in
the meantime found a new ally, the Islamic State, whose
celebration of the ADF suicide attacks in Kampala last
year in turn prompted Uganda’s military to deploy into
North Kivu with Kinshasa’s approval.
In the past, insecurity in the Great Lakes was largely
confined to the region itself. Conflict there, however,
is today increasingly interconnected with dynamics
in other parts of the continent. It is now known for
example, that a number of Mozambican insurgents
came to train in ADF camps just as the insurgency in
Cabo Delgado began to emerge in 2017. They travelled
by land from Mozambique to the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo through Tanzania
and Burundi, crossing into the Democratic Republic’s
South Kivu province before making their way to North
Kivu. There, in the ADF camps, they learned battlefield
tactics, passing this knowledge and training on to their
fellow insurgents when they returned to Mozambique.
Around that time, radical youth from Kenya and
Tanzania, including those who were once the East
African foot soldiers of Somalia’s Al-Shabaab militant
group, also began to flee security crackdowns at home
in East Africa, migrating west towards the ADF camps
in eastern Congo, with many others moving south from
East Africa to join the insurgency in Mozambique,
which is also claimed by Islamic State as its affiliate.
These East Africans who have turned up in Congo
and Mozambique are just some of the young men
whom the Islamic State may be looking to support with
continued financing, with money transfers originating
from abroad, including, as has been discovered,
from South Africa. Radicalized even further by their
battlefield experience from their time in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Mozambique, they are likely
to be a threat to security in their home countries should
they ever return. It is no wonder therefore that East
African Governments are worried. Not only do they
have Al-Shabaab, an Al-Qaida affiliate, to deal with,

S/PV.9023

but Islamic State is also likely building up its presence
on their soil.
In this context, the insecurity in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, fuelled by the
presence of dozens of local and foreign armed groups
scattered from the province of Ituri all the way down to
Tanganyika province, takes on new meaning. Besides
pursuing their own agendas in grabbing territory,
plundering local natural resources, attacking security
forces and terrorizing civilians, these armed groups
are now also the agents and collaborators of criminals
and jihadists looking to bolster their influence in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic. The foreign
recruits who come in to join the ADF, for example, are
often trafficked by different criminal and armed groups
who move them through their own territory before they
get to ADF camps.
Partly for those reasons, the Governments of the
Great Lakes and East Africa have now agreed to line up
shoulder to shoulder and possibly launch joint military
operations against armed groups in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The idea of a joint force, agreed
by regional leaders in Kenya’s capital Nairobi, can
at least be interpreted as a robust expression by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its neighbours
to finally bring security to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo’s troubled east, and in so doing also suppress
the playing field for jihadists. Confidence in military
solutions is high after Rwanda’s intervention in
Mozambique significantly dented the insurgency there.
Uganda’s intervention against the ADF has meanwhile
scattered the armed group from its bases. But in both
theatres, in Mozambique and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, military victory is far from achieved.
More military operations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in the form of the proposed
joint force, are now on the table. Those pose significant
risks. For starters, many armed groups that the regional
Governments propose attacking in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo have at times been proxies for
those very same regional Governments against each
other. Trust between two of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo’s neighbours in the Great Lakes has been
shaky in recent years, and despite signs of a recent
warming of ties between them, it is unclear whether
those nascent signs of solidarity can be sustained if
the parties are thrust back into a situation in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo where they are not
fully confident of each other’s motivations. Officials in

22-331677/24

S/PV.9023

The situation in the Great Lakes region

those two countries have regularly voiced their belief to
me in private that their counterparts across the border
are in fact involved in supporting either the M-23 or
the ADF.
Besides that regional trust deficit, there are
also serious challenges to the implementation of
any such proposed force. How would a joint force of
East African States, including Uganda, sit alongside
Uganda’s existing mission in North Kivu? How would
it also sit aside the Force Intervention Brigade of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is partly
also comprised of Kenyan troops? They have command
issues there that need to be considered. Even if all
those forces could apply the necessary and coordinated
pressure on Congolese armed groups and push them
towards surrender, in a context of ongoing negotiations
and dialogue elsewhere, does the Democratic Republic
of the Congo’s national institution for disarmament
have sufficient resources to implement a smooth
demobilization and reintegration of the different armed
factions back into society? What should happen to
foreign armed group members who surrender or are
taken captive?

27/04/2022

Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes for
his briefing, as well as all other briefers.
I would like to focus on three points.
First, I would like to recall the importance of
dialogue among the States of the region to address the
security threats that the briefers referred to. The fact
that the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) has taken up
arms again is a serious risk, which could destabilize
the region. The region is already plagued by attacks
against civilians and security forces by a number of
armed groups.
France takes note of the decisions of the States of
the region during the Nairobi meetings and renews its
support for efforts to increase regional dialogue.
France will continue to support the Congolese
authorities in their efforts to strengthen stability in
the east of the Democratic Republic of Congo. It is
important that any regional military initiative take into
account the actions and mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Mission has suffered
heavy losses, but the safety of its peacekeepers must be
ensured and prioritized.

While the use of force should eventually constitute
an important component in any exercise to neutralize
armed groups in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, it is crucial that all interested parties first work
together to help implement the Democratic Republic of
the Congo’s strategy on the demobilization of armed
groups and rebuild and consolidate trust among the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s neighbours
themselves. Without those ingredients, foreign military
intervention might simply create a cascade of secondorder problems on the ground, which Kinshasa’s
authorities might struggle to cope with. Dismantling
armed and terrorist groups might in the meantime be
better achieved by the region enhancing intelligence
sharing and policing partnerships in order to better
control borders and interdict recruitment networks
and the circulation of combatants, illicit finances and
material supplies.

The repatriation of former combatants, in particular
M-23 combatants, must resume, as was mentioned. In
the Democratic Republic of Congo, the disarmamentdemobilization-reintegration programme must be
implemented as soon as possible, especially at the
provincial level.

The President: I thank Mr. Mahtani for his briefing.

The tenth Summit of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism reaffirmed the relevance of the Addis
Ababa Framework agreement. The commitments
made must be translated into action. I am thinking in
particular about reducing tension through political and
diplomatic channels.

I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would like to begin by thanking the Special
8/24

As Mr. Mahtani noted, the terrorist threat is
growing in the region. France encourages the Office of
Counter-Terrorism to strengthen the capacities of the
States of the region. The strengthening of cooperation
and information-sharing mechanisms within the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) and the Southern African Development
Community must be a priority.
That brings me to my second point: the importance
of continuing to address the root causes of all those
conflicts.

22-33167

27/04/2022

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Regional cooperation must promote proper
management of natural resources. The Executive
Secretary of the ICGLR reminded us that the ministers
of mines have continued their work to strengthen
the traceability and certification of resources. The
recommendations of the Khartoum regional workshop
must be implemented.
We must focus our attention on the people. Equal
rights for women and parity in political life are priority
objectives. France welcomes the establishment of the
Great Lakes Women Entrepreneurs Network, which
was also mentioned.
The protection of human rights will also contribute
to the stability in the region. In Burundi, progress has
been made and those initial steps, and the need for them
to continue have led the European Union to lift the
financial restrictions on Burundi. We will continue to
support the country through ongoing political dialogue
via the European Union.
Thirdly, all the objectives of the United Nations
regional strategy must be pursued. I would mention
health issues in particular. The Ebola virus has just
resurfaced in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
while the coronavirus disease continues to be rampant.
France supports the development of a regional strategy
to respond to the socioeconomic impact of epidemics.
I also wish to mention justice. The conference on
judicial cooperation scheduled to take place in Kinshasa
next month must extend the commitments of the
Nairobi Declaration on Justice and Good Governance.
The European Union will continue to support the
fight against impunity and promote reconciliation. In
Bugesera, Rwanda, the European Union is providing
€2.5 million to promote understanding between former
offenders and survivors.
Finally, a high-level meeting on financing
sustainable peace is being held today. France calls on
the Peacebuilding Fund to provide further support to
the Great Lakes States and the implementation of the
regional strategy.
Challenges persist, but the countries of the region
are not alone. France will continue to wholeheartedly
support them and the efforts of the Special Envoy.
Mr. De Oliveira Freitas (Brazil): First, let me
convey the gratitude of the Brazilian delegation to
all the briefers for the insights they shared with the
Security Council today.

S/PV.9023

We have followed the most recent developments
in the region attentively, and we wish to make a few
remarks on the security situation and on a number of
aspects of the peace process, as follows.
Security remains a matter of great concern to us.
The threat posed by armed groups to the countries of
the Great Lakes region is still tangible, as the tragic
events of 5 April in Ituri, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, have demonstrated. In that particular
regard, I wish to reiterate our condemnation of such an
ominous act, as well as of any attacks and provocations
against the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
addition to the risks posed for the lives of peacekeepers,
the armed groups’ activities, which unfortunately seem
to be on the rise, have a destabilizing effect on local
communities from various perspectives, ranging from
human rights to economic development. Since those
activities often result in sexual violence, the lack of
access to humanitarian aid, the recruitment of children
in armed conflict and illicit exploitation of natural
resources — just to name a few of the troubling realities
on the ground — they can jeopardize the ongoing
efforts to reach sustained peace.
In order to protect the achievements of the peace
process made so far, it is imperative to expedite the
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes. At the same time, it is
necessary to ensure that former combatants, women and
young people have access to economic opportunities that
provide them with the tools to improve their livelihood
conditions in the post-pandemic period. In that vein, I
would like to voice our support for the Special Envoy
and highlight the contribution of the United Nations
Strategy for Peace Consolidation, Conflict Prevention
and Conflict Resolution in the Great Lakes Region
in bringing coherence and comprehensiveness to
peacebuilding initiatives
We also wish to emphasize the importance of local
ownership to attaining lasting peace and prosperity
in the region. In that regard, we commend the leading
and constructive role played by the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Regional
Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Moreover, we commend the leadership
provided by Kenya at the Heads of State conclave on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We hope that their
role as facilitators in the dialogue between the armed

22-331679/24

S/PV.9023

The situation in the Great Lakes region

27/04/2022

groups and the Government in Kinshasa will soon bear
fruit. Another positive development that we want to
welcome is the admission of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to the East African Community at the
end of March, since it opens up yet another avenue to
strengthen regional cooperation in the long term.

the local populations beyond security and territorial
control. To tackle the persistent arc of conflict, it is
of the outmost importance that we extinguish the
fire that keeps burning, first and foremost the illegal
exploitation and trafficking of natural resources. That
has a multiplier effect on the instability.

Finally, we call upon all States in the region to
persevere in the path of an inclusive political dialogue.
No durable solution can be found without the meaningful
participation of all stakeholders, including women.

We welcome the fact that the ministers in charge
of mines have reviewed the recommendations made
in Khartoum. However, it is imperative that those
recommendations be swiftly implemented. Natural
resources can, and must be, a force for change. In
that vein, Albania believes that all offenders must be
held accountable.

Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I thank the briefers for
their comprehensive presentations. I would also like to
welcome our colleagues from the countries of the Great
Lakes region who are joining us today. I will focus my
statement on three main points.
First, on political cooperation and its positive trends
in the region, Albania has followed the diplomatic efforts
to normalize relations and strengthen cooperation
among the countries of the Great Lakes region, and
some of the achievements that we have recently seen
are positive steps in that regard, most recently at the
Nairobi conclave.
I should also note that Albania supports Special
Envoy Huang Xia in his good offices in promoting
dialogue. Regional cooperation must always encompass
all countries involved. No one should be excluded.
Secondly, regarding the situation on the ground,
despite the ongoing rapprochement among States,
the root causes of the conflicts are too complex to be
considered healed, and the challenges too far from
being over. As we heard, the security situation remains
volatile, especially when it comes to connections with
international terrorist groups. That requires enhanced
regional attention.
Albania is deeply concerned about the
consequences of the dire security environment for the
most vulnerable, as well as about the human rights and
international humanitarian law violations. We call for
all stakeholders to in particular commit themselves to
protecting women and children from sexual violence
and abuses, as well as to guaranteeing safety and
unhindered access for humanitarian partners in their
efforts to provide some relief to the population.
Thirdly, on the need for a comprehensive strategy
that provides lasting solutions, no military settlement
can alone address the security challenges in the region.
Our efforts should also be focused on the needs of
10/24

Human rights and international humanitarian
law safeguards are a prerequisite to lasting peace.
Albania considers transitional justice an important
tool for building trust and reconciliation. We therefore
encourage all parties to make significant progress in
the implementation of the 2019 Nairobi Declaration
on Justice and Good Governance. We hope that the
Kinshasa ministerial conference in May will produce
concrete results in that direction.
Albania echoes the call of the Secretary-General
for the need to repatriate disarmed foreign combatants,
particularly those of the Mouvement du 23 mars, and
to consolidate national and regional disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes. We also
welcome the launch of the operational cell of the Contact
and Coordination Group on non-military measures.
Lastly, Albania believes that the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region is still a catalyst
for peace, and we salute the steps taken by the Heads of
States during the Kinshasa tenth summit.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I have the pleasure to
deliver this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon,
Ghana and Kenya. We thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, the
Executive Secretary of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region and Mr. Dinesh Mahtani for
their briefings.
The A3 remains deeply concerned about the dire
security situation in parts of the Great Lakes region,
particularly eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We strongly condemn the hostile activities and deadly
attacks by armed and militant groups, including the
22-33167

27/04/2022

The situation in the Great Lakes region

S/PV.9023

Allied Democratic Forces and the resurgent Mouvement
du 23 mars.

fight the negative forces under the leadership of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We are glad to note that, counter to that negative
trend, there is a growing spirit of collaboration and
integration under way in the region, which promises a
breakthrough in the long search for peace and security.
In particular, we point the Council’s attention to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo formally joining the
East African Community. The Community will now
encompass a population of 300 million, and its seven
member States are continuing to undertake one of the
world’s most extensive exercises in the integration of
trade, investment and the free movement of people and,
ultimately, towards political federation.

To facilitate the implementation of the political and
military/security enforcement tracks, the leaders also
directed the following.

As members of the Council know well, economic
development is key to minimizing the risks of conflict,
and structured regional political cooperation is
essential to overcoming common security threats. The
armed groups in the region continue to exact a heavy
toll on civilian safety and security, while undermining
economic development.
In the spirit of regional cooperation and
camaraderie, we recently witnessed the successful
outcomes of the second regional Heads of State conclave
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo in Nairobi
on 21 April. The conclave was convened by President
Uhuru Kenyatta in his capacity as the Chair of the
East African Community. Its far-reaching decisions
are articulated in the communiqué issued shortly after
the meeting.
We wish to emphasize, for the attention of the
Council and with regard to its own existing mandates in
the region, the decisions made by the leaders that will
impact the peace and security of the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Like other members of the
Council, we believe that sustained regional stabilization
is to a considerable degree determined by the success of
efforts to stabilize that area.
The conclave agreed on a two-track initiative to help
bring security and stability to the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo: first, commence a political
process, under the leadership of President Uhuru
Kenyatta, to facilitate consultations to be undertaken
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
local armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; and, secondly, accelerate the establishment of
a regional force to help contain and, where necessary,

First, all armed groups in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo must participate unconditionally in the
political process to resolve their grievances.
Secondly, the failure to do so would mean that
all Congolese armed groups would be considered as
negative forces and handled militarily by the region.
Thirdly, all foreign armed groups in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must disarm and return
unconditionally and immediately to their respective
countries of origin.
Fourthly, the failure to do so would mean that those
groups would be considered as negative forces and
handled militarily by the region.
We call upon the Security Council and the United
Nations system to support that bold regional initiative.
Political will has always been, and will continue to be,
the key ingredient in resolving the protracted conflicts
and large-scale violence in the Great Lakes region.
There are few situations that have lasted as long and
been as difficult to solve as the chronic insecurity of
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We appreciate the strong support expressed by the
Secretary-General. Joined to the Security Council’s
matching support and driven by regional will, in line
with the leadership and aims of the countries of the
Great Lakes region, much can be achieved.
Beyond that promising progress regarding the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the A3 calls for
further progress in strengthening and implementing
regional networks and frameworks that will contribute
to a more secure Great Lakes region. We further
call for support for context-relevant disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes that
include the disengagement and reintegration of former
fighters of groups that utilize terrorist ideologies and
methods in their operations.
The A3 urges closer cooperation between United
Nations missions, International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) organs and the good
offices of the Special Envoy in seeking to effectively
combat armed-group activities.

22-3316711/24

S/PV.9023

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Moving on to the economic situation, the A3 notes
that poverty is a root cause and effect of conflict in that
region. It is unfortunate that the people of the region
have not benefited from the abundance of natural
resources in their countries. The illegal exploitation,
competition and export of those resources, including
by international actors and armed groups, must be
addressed to transform those resources from a curse
into a blessing.
The countries of the region should implement their
commitments under the ICGLR Regional Initiative
against the illegal exploitation of and trade in natural
resources, which include establishing internal systems
of control, monitoring and verification to eradicate the
illicit mineral trade.
The A3 recognizes the valuable role of the
Peacebuilding Commission, alongside its key partners,
particularly international financial institutions and
the Peacebuilding Fund, in supporting cross-border
cooperation in the region. We therefore welcome the
written advisory from the Peacebuilding Commission
and urge the Council to provide support in the
identified areas of work, including the implementation
of the United Nations Strategy for Peace Consolidation,
Conflict Prevention and Conflict Resolution in the
Great Lakes Region.
In conclusion, we commend the efforts of the
Special Envoy and his able team in promoting peace
and security in the region through his good offices,
advocacy, preventive diplomacy and capacity-building
activities, which are beneficial to the countries of
the region.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to begin by thanking the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes region,
Mr. Huang Xia; Executive Secretary João Samuel
Caholo; and Mr. Dinesh Mahtani for their respective
briefings. I welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representatives of Burundi, Rwanda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo at today’s meeting and look
forward to listening to their statements. I also listened
attentively to the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Kenya on behalf of the three African
countries that are members of the Security Council; we
should value their views on this matter.
The recent period has seen frequent diplomatic
engagements among the countries of the region, the
consolidation of mutual political trust and deepened
12/24

27/04/2022

regional cooperation, giving rise to a new outlook for
the region. At the same time, the security situation on
the ground remains highly fragile. The surge in violence
perpetrated by armed groups in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo is worrying, and the chronic
obstacles to the region’s peace and development need to
be further addressed. The implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region remains key to
achieving lasting peace and stability there. Today I
would like to highlight the following points.
First, it is key to maintain the political momentum of
dialogue and reconciliation. The settlement of regional
issues requires enhanced mutual trust, solidarity and
cooperation among countries of the region. China is
pleased to see the progress made in the normalization
of relations between Rwanda and Uganda as well as
between Burundi and Rwanda.
We welcome the commitment of regional leaders at
the tenth summit of the Regional Oversight Mechanism
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
to increase diplomatic engagement, promote friendly
relations and defuse tensions through political and
diplomatic channels. When dealing with complex
and sensitive issues such as cross-border security
and natural resources, upholding the aforementioned
principles has special significance and will contribute
to greater mutual political trust.
The international community should respect
the leadership of countries and organizations of the
region and support their efforts to resolve differences
independently through dialogue and consultation and
maintain the momentum of improving relations in
the region.
Secondly, it is vital to jointly maintain regional
peace and security. Both history and current realities
have shown that the countries of the Great Lakes region
are interdependent and inseparable in terms of security.
In the current situation, security risks in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo are spreading to
neighbouring countries. That development merits
our attention. All countries should adopt a common,
comprehensive cooperative and sustainable security
concept and respect one another’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
Last week, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Kenya, Burundi, Uganda and Rwanda held a regional
summit in Nairobi, demonstrating the resolve of
22-33167

27/04/2022

The situation in the Great Lakes region

countries of the region to jointly tackle common security
challenges and help launch the political process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. China is encouraged
by those developments.
We echo the Secretary-General’s call and urge
armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to participate unconditionally in the political process.
We hope that the establishment of a regional force will
help to achieve regional peace.
Thirdly, it is important to increase attention to
and investment in non-military solutions. To eliminate
the root causes of conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Great Lakes region, military
means will not work. A comprehensive approach is
needed. The key is to help lift local communities out
of poverty and prevent conflicts driven by destitution.
That is also the core purpose of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework.
When combating the illegal exploitation and
trafficking of Natural Resources, law-enforcement
measures are needed. While cracking down on illegal
activities, the countries of the region should also
promote legal trade, develop a regional industry belt
and supply chain and make natural resources a highlight
of regional cooperation.
The relevant sanctions measures of the Security
Council must not be misused, let alone become a tool
for suppressing other political and commercial players.
China looks forward to the expeditious implementation
of the outcomes of the high-level workshop on natural
resources in Khartoum and hopes that the Great Lakes
Investment and Trade Conference can provide more
opportunities for regional development.
The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes of countries of the region should focus on
providing livelihoods for ex-combatants in order to
break the vicious circle of profit-driven violence.
Fourthly, synergy must be created to support the
countries of the region in addressing challenges. At
present, increasing challenges in the global food,
energy and financial sectors, as well as the sluggish
economic recovery, have affected the Great Lakes
region in complex ways. That situation is taking
the steam out of regional responses to development,
humanitarian, refugee and pandemic issues. China will
continue to help the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to transform its resource endowment into development

S/PV.9023

advantages. We call on the international community
to increase support for the countries of the region
and promote pragmatic cooperation in priority areas
such as poverty, reduction, food security, financing
for development and industrialization so as to achieve
win-win results and common development.
We hope that the United Nations agencies in the
region will create synergies in the implementation of
the new strategy and action plan for the Great Lakes
region. Mobilized resources from various avenues can
help the countries of the region to achieve tangible
improvements in people’s well-being. China will
provide support to the Special Envoy’s Office through
the China-United Nations Peace and Development Fund
and other channels and will continue to strengthen
bilateral and multilateral cooperation with the countries
and organizations of the region to support peace,
security and development efforts.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to
thank Special Envoy Xia for his briefing. I would
also like to thank Executive Secretary Caholo and
Mr. Dinesh Mahtani.
I would like to focus today on two areas — the
importance of regional cooperation and the challenges
that must be addressed if peace and prosperity is to be
delivered to the Great Lakes region.
The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region remains central to a lasting and sustainable
peace in the Great Lakes. The resumption of meetings
of the Regional Oversight Mechanism in February
is a significant and welcome development. The
reaffirmation by signatory countries of the goals of
the Framework and its ongoing implementation is also
very welcome.
Special Envoy Xia’s briefing outlines encouraging
examples of steps being taken to normalize relations
through diplomatic outreach and dialogue. Ireland
welcomes progress in that regard.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo’s accession
to the East African Community is an important step
in terms of greater regional economic integration and
cooperation. Ireland knows first-hand the benefits of
regional partnership and cooperation in building peace
and prosperity, and we hope that membership in the
East African Community will not only lead to stronger

22-3316713/24

S/PV.9023

The situation in the Great Lakes region

economic ties, but will also support the development of
shared prosperity and lasting peace.
Last week’s conclave on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in Nairobi is further evidence of the
commitment of countries of the region to work
together to promote regional peace and security. Future
engagement by the United Nations, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), the
East African Community and other stakeholders can
further support that initiative.
Stability in the region depends, of course, on
stability in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Yet the security situation there remains fragile
and there has been an increase in the activities of
armed groups, including attacks on civilians. This is of
serious concern.
We note the ongoing joint military operations by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda. Those
operations should be conducted in line with obligations
under international law, including international
humanitarian and international human rights law, and
should ensure the protection of civilians. It is also
important that there be effective communication and
coordination with the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
The challenges facing the region cannot be
addressed solely by military means. A coherent
approach in addressing root causes and drivers of
conflict is vital. We believe that the meaningful
participation of women across peacebuilding efforts is
essential, and it is positive to see commitment to the
women and peace and security agenda. The adoption of
a regional plan of action on resolution 1325 (2000) is an
important development. Now we must ensure that this
is resourced and implemented.
We all know that the illegal exploitation of minerals
and natural resources remains a significant driver of
instability, and we commend the ICGLR for its continued
work in this area and the approval by ministers of
ICGLR member States of recommendations from the
high-level regional workshop on natural resources in
the Great Lakes region.
We heard during last week’s Arria Formula
meeting, hosted by Ireland, that — tragically — 2022
is forecast to be the most food-insecure year on record,
with conflict being a major driver. The link between
14/24

27/04/2022

conflict and hunger is evident in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which is projected to see the
highest number of people face acute food insecurity
globally. We urge all parties to ensure the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel and unhindered
access to humanitarian assistance.
Renewed efforts are needed to put an end to the
suffering of vulnerable populations. Ireland welcomes
efforts to develop a regional strategy on durable
solutions for displaced people. We remain concerned
about the significant increase in documented human
rights violations and abuses and call on all countries in
the Great Lakes region to pursue accountability for the
perpetrators of such acts.
Finally, Ireland appreciates the progress being
made on the implementation of the United Nations
regional strategy and its action plan, which has an
important complementary role to play in supporting
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. We therefore echo the Secretary-General’s
call for sustained support to its implementation.
Mr. Ravindran (India): Let me begin by thanking
Special Envoy Huang Xia for his update on developments
in the Great Lakes region. I also thank Ambassador
Caholo and Mr. Dinesh Mahtani for their briefings
and welcome the presence of the representatives of
Burundi, Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo today among us.
It is evident from today’s briefings that there have
been positive developments in the Great Lakes region
since the previous briefing to the Security Council (see
S/PV.8884). The countries of the region have continued
to engage regularly in both bilateral and multilateral
formats, including at the highest levels, in order to
strengthen relations and address outstanding issues of
common concern. Those developments need further
encouragement from the international community. The
historical challenges that continue to hinder progress
need solutions rooted in the region and owned by the
countries of the region. All of us need to work with
them together, in line with their national priorities.
One of the key developments was the convening of
the tenth Summit of the Regional Oversight Mechanism
on 24 February. We commend the resolve of the region’s
leaders to fulfilling the commitments to the Framework
Agreement, particularly to implement a comprehensive
approach towards eliminating the threat of armed groups
through both military and non-military measures.
22-33167

27/04/2022

The situation in the Great Lakes region

We also welcome the communiqué of the second
Heads of State conclave on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which convened in Nairobi on 21 April and
adopted a two-track approach of security enforcement
and political process for securing lasting peace. We
hope that the consultative dialogue process envisaged
will take place with all armed groups, and we call on all
armed groups to disarm and comply with the conditions
laid down for dialogue. We take positive note of the
initiatives of Heads of State of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) on
the joint road map for peace in the Central African
Republic and encourage the Government of the Central
African Republic to pursue their efforts in that regard.
While there has been some commendable progress
on the political track, the security situation in the
Great Lakes region remains volatile. The activities of
armed groups such as the Allied Democratic Forces
and signs of resurgence of the Movement du 23 mars
are a cause for concern and must be dealt with firmly.
The violence perpetrated by armed groups continues to
perpetuate an environment of insecurity, causing the
loss of innocent lives, displacement, loss of livelihood
and a sense of despondence among the local people.
Statistics from recent briefings to the Security Council
are alarming — cases of sexual violence have doubled
in the past two years in the Central African Republic,
and approximately 16.3 million internally displaced
persons (IDPs) were registered in the region, with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo alone recording
some 6.7 million. It would be unrealistic to expect a
voluntary return of those IDPs to their homes when acts
of violence continue to dominate.
India is concerned about the growing terrorist
attacks in the region, particularly in Uganda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in the past few
months. We strongly condemn those terrorist attacks
and express condolences to the families of those
who were killed. The linkages of armed groups in
the region to terror groups outside the region must
be continuously monitored and nipped in the bud.
Concerns about those linkages were also underscored in
the communiqué of the Regional Oversight Mechanism
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
meeting. The ongoing global fight against terrorism
cannot and should not be compromised for narrow
political gains.

S/PV.9023

India welcomes the setting up of the operational
cell of the Contact and Coordination Group in Goma
by the countries of the region. We hope that this will
be a helpful coordination point. The coordination
of the Contact and Coordination Group with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s recently validated
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization Programme will be important. India
encourages close collaboration between the Contact
and Coordination Group and the Great Lakes Judicial
Cooperation Network for ensuring accountability for
cross-border crimes committed by armed groups.
Illegal exploitation, trafficking and illicit trade of
natural resources has exacerbated the armed conflict
in the Great Lakes region. While noting the ongoing
regional efforts, we reiterate the importance of
improving traceability and certification processes for
natural resources, especially gold, given its linkages
with financing armed groups. We also endorse the call
for an exhaustive evaluation of the ICGLR Regional
Initiative on Natural Resources in each country, as well
as the integration of recommendations of the high-level
workshop on natural resources in Khartoum last year
into the national and regional mineral strategic plans of
ICGLR members.
We have no doubt that the full and equal
participation of women in peace and development is
the foundation of sustainable peacebuilding in the
Great Lakes region. We welcome such efforts aimed
at enhancing the participation of women and youth in
political processes and peacebuilding.
India has close bilateral relationships with all
countries in the Great Lakes region, driven by several
decades of people-to-people contact and the presence
of a large Indian diaspora that is contributing positively
to socioeconomic development. Our engagement covers
a whole range of sectors, including health, education,
agro-processing, infrastructure projects and capacitybuilding. As part of our overall efforts to combat the
coronavirus-disease-vaccine shortages in the region,
India has provided more than 7 million vaccines to date,
and our peacekeepers in the region are at the forefront
of supporting post-conflict reconstruction. India
remains steadfast in its commitment to supporting and
partnering with the countries in the Great Lakes region
in their quest for peace, development and prosperity.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I thank Mr. Huang Xia,

22-3316715/24

S/PV.9023

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, for his detailed briefing and express
my country’s appreciation for his efforts aimed at
supporting peace in the region. I also thank Mr. Caholo
for providing us with valuable information. We also
listened to Mr. Mahtani’s briefing and welcome
the participation of representatives of Rwanda, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi at
today’s meeting.
Since the last briefing to the Council on the Great
Lakes (see S/PV.8884), the region has witnessed several
positive developments, especially with regard to
strengthened diplomatic relations among the countries
of the region. This dynamic can be seen, for example, in
the reopening of the border between Rwanda and Uganda
last January and, more generally, through increased
stability along the borders of countries of the Great
Lakes region. The United Arab Emirates commends the
efforts made by the leaders of the States members of the
East African Community (EAC) aimed at supporting
peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region as a whole, including their
recent initiatives to strengthen constructive dialogue to
address ongoing challenges.
We also agree that the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
is essential and indispensable, as stated in the most
recent presidential statement on the Great Lakes region
(S/PRST/2021/19), which was adopted last October and
facilitated by Kenya. However, this implementation
should be accompanied by support for initiatives
that provide for exchanging views and building upon
a common regional vision for peace, in line with the
needs and aspirations of the peoples of the region. For
instance, the convening in Kinshasa of the Summit on
the Regional Monitoring Mechanism for the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework is an example of
such encouraging initiatives which endorse the United
Nations Strategy for Peace Consolidation, Conflict
Prevention and Conflict Resolution in the Great
Lakes Region.
The economic empowerment of the countries of the
region and the strengthening of trade relations remain
key factors in consolidating peace. We commend the
efforts of the Special Envoy to stimulate economic
growth and combat poverty in the region. The efforts
of the members of the Economic Community of Central
African States and the admission of the Democratic
16/24

27/04/2022

Republic of the Congo to the EAC are important steps
that will work to enhance economic integration among
the countries of the region and serve the interests of its
peoples in development and prosperity.
Given women’s active role in building peaceful,
prosperous and resilient societies in the face of
various challenges, we emphasize the importance of
ensuring the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women on all social, economic, and political tracks,
while also providing them with the protection they
need. The recent launch of the Great Lakes Women
Entrepreneurs Network is a tangible example of the
region’s commitment to achieving these goals.
As the Secretary-General has noted, achieving
stability in the region in the long term requires
addressing the root causes of conflicts, ending the
violence perpetrated by armed groups and resolving
humanitarian crises, while also allowing the peoples of
the region to take the initiative in achieving their desired
peace and prosperity. We stress that addressing violence
against civilians and humanitarian workers, especially
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, requires a collective, internationally supported
response from the countries of the region.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates stresses
our commitment to supporting the efforts of the United
Nations and all regional partners, as well as those
aimed at building confidence and consolidating peace
so as to chart a new path for prosperity and stability in
the region.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Xia for his informative briefing and for
joining us today. I also want to thank our other briefers
for their very helpful and useful briefings.
The United States continues to support the
United Nations regional strategy for the Great Lakes.
We encourage Special Envoy Xia to act as swiftly
as he can on the regional strategy by using the good
offices of the United Nations in partnership with
regional leaders to achieve concrete progress on the
objectives of the strategy’s action plan, as well as of the
Framework agreement.
We welcome the regional cooperation evidenced
by the tenth summit of the Regional Monitoring
Mechanism and now urge full implementation. We also
welcome other efforts to strengthen regional security
through new bilateral agreements and the mini-summit
22-33167

27/04/2022

The situation in the Great Lakes region

on peace and security in the Great Lakes region. We
encourage the Special Envoy to make progress on
addressing the conflict and corruption risks associated
with the region’s minerals trade, including engaging
with international investors, the trade unions that
represent miners and mine workers, and traders.
The United States recognizes the steps that the
region is taking towards regional economic integration.
We therefore note favourably the admission of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo into the East
African Community. We are encouraged by recent
subregional efforts, such as the creation of a contact
and coordination group to address armed groups in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
through non-military measures.
Of course, as we have heard, there remain great
challenges that we as the international community, the
United Nations system and the Great Lakes region must
collectively address. In the light of that, we are very
concerned about the continuing intercommunal violence
and the increase in armed-group activity, particularly
by the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria — Democratic
Republic of the Congo (ISIS-DRC), also known as the
Allied Democratic Forces, the Coopérative pour le
développement du Congo (CODECO), the Mouvement
du 23 mars and numerous local armed groups.
We remain committed to working with other States
Members of the United Nations to make robust use of the
Security Council’s 1533 (2004) sanctions regime. We
reinforce the need for accountability to end impunity
for those who fuel conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the broader Great Lakes region.
Cooperation between the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the Office of
the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region remains
very important in identifying and implementing political
solutions that will stem the flow of armed elements,
arms and natural resources that are threatening the
peace and stability of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
The United States strongly condemns all attacks
upon civilians, including the 1 February attack on the
Plaine Savo internally displaced persons camp, where
CODECO assailants slaughtered more than 60 people,
mostly women and children, before MONUSCO
intervened jointly with the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) to repel

S/PV.9023

the assault. We also lament the reported killing of at
least 32 soldiers from the FARDC.
The United States calls on all actors to end violence
and any violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights abuses. We strongly condemn all
attacks on humanitarian workers.
In conclusion, the United States welcomes
MONUSCO’s continued efforts, in coordination with
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to protect civilians from armed groups in the
eastern part of the country and to disrupt the illicit
networks fuelling their violent campaigns against
civilian populations. The United States underscores the
importance of the full implementation of the resolution
2612 (2021), noting that the entire MONUSCO force,
including the Force Intervention Brigade, must take a
dynamic and proactive approach to protecting civilians,
especially as armed groups like ISIS-DRC and
CODECO ramp up their attacks on vulnerable groups.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I also want to thank
Special Envoy Xia for his informative briefing and
Mr. Caholo and Mr. Mahtani for their valuable input.
Let me also express our deepest condolences to the
families of the recent fallen peacekeepers in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This underscores
that the safety of our Blue Helmets must be ensured at
all times.
The deteriorating security and humanitarian
situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo is deeply concerning and is resulting
in large-scale displacement. Reports also show an
increase in cross-border incidents and in the overall
activity of armed groups. This is happening despite the
current state of siege in Ituri and North Kivu provinces
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Additionally,
reported incidents of grave human rights violations
and abuses, conducted by non-State and State actors,
are also on the rise. A common denominator behind
these negative developments is rivalry related to
natural resources.
To reduce the threat to civilians, including
children, we must address the root causes of conflict.
Military measures must be accompanied by concerted
political dialogue, peacebuilding efforts and projects
to promote economic and social development, both
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the
Great Lakes region as a whole. We urge all relevant
stakeholders to combat the illicit exploitation of

22-3316717/24

S/PV.9023

The situation in the Great Lakes region

natural resources, promote sustainable approaches to
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and
further enhance regional cooperation.
Women’s involvement is essential to promoting
sustainable peace in the region. We therefore welcome
the work of regional actors, including the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) and
the Advisory Board for Women, Peace and Security.
Their work is crucial to ensuring women’s full, equal
and meaningful participation in peace and political
processes. The adoption of the regional plan of action on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)— aligned
to the regional strategy and the revised ICGLR regional
gender policy — are also important steps forward.
Implementation,
follow-up,
and
continued
consultations will be essential in the coming months.
Norway will continue to support these efforts through
our ongoing cooperation with the Office of the
Special Envoy.
Norway also welcomes efforts to strengthen
regional cooperation, and acknowledges the positive
trend of building confidence and good neighbourly
relations among the countries of the region. The tenth
Summit of the Regional Oversight Mechanism in
Kinshasa last month was an important step. It is also
positive that the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
become a member of the East African Community, and
we welcome the ongoing talks in Nairobi between the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and armed groups in the eastern Congo.
In February, the International Contact Group for the
Great Lakes region discussed regional developments,
as well as the United Nations regional strategy. The
next step is to use these platforms to enable action.
We urge all stakeholders to do their utmost to ensure
the implementation of the action plan endorsed by the
Council last year.
Instability has for too long defined the lives of the
people of the Great Lakes region. Sustainable peace
must be ensured to give people the future they deserve.
Norway stands ready to work with all actors to that end.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegations thanks today’s briefers: the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, the Executive
Secretary of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, and the civil society representative,
Mr. Mahtani.
18/24

27/04/2022

At the outset, I highlight the very important
diplomatic work that continues to be carried out at the
regional level. One example of that are the commitments
undertaken at the tenth Summit of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, which took place in
Kinshasa in February. We encourage the intensification
of these exchanges with the aim of promoting goodneighbourliness and cooperation.
In the field of economic integration, Mexico
welcomes the admission of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in the East African Community. This is
a significant step for the creation of socioeconomic
opportunities and the development of the region.
Similarly, the efforts of that organization to promote
peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are encouraging, especially given the
deterioration of security in that country. We welcome
initiatives on both those tracks, in particular in view of
the deterioration of the security situation in the country.
Secondly, I note with concern the increased activity
of armed groups, such as the Allied Democratic Forces,
the Coopérative pour le développement du Congo and
the Mouvement du 23 mars, in the eastern provinces
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in addition
to cross-border incursions and incidents. We condemn
the violence that has occurred in recent weeks, in
particular the attack on personnel of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in which a member
of the Mission was killed. We must always remember
that deliberate attacks on peacekeeping personnel
constitute war crimes, which is why we underline the
need to investigate this situation, as well as the crash
of a helicopter in the Rutshuru region that caused the
death of eight people .
Despite extraordinary measures, such as the state
of siege that will soon be one year old, the increase in
violence demonstrates yet again that there are no purely
military solutions. We reiterate the importance of
addressing the root causes of violence, including hate
speech that generates intercommunity tensions. We also
call for prioritizing the implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes in the
region and other non-military measures that favour the
creation of economic opportunities for the population
and build trust.
22-33167

27/04/2022

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Thirdly, in terms of accountability, we highlight
the actions taken to strengthen judicial cooperation
among the countries of the region. We hope that these
efforts will prioritize the fight against impunity for
crimes such as the exploitation and illicit trafficking of
natural resources, as well as the irresponsible transfer
of small and light weapons. Both phenomena materially
sustain the cycles of violence and represent yet another
obstacle to the development of the region.
Fourthly, we highlight the importance of the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women in conflict
prevention processes in the region, as well as in the
creation of opportunities for economic development.
The launch of the Great Lakes Women Entrepreneurs
Network is a positive step that should be maintained
and replicated.
Finally, we reiterate our support for the work of
the Special Envoy for the implementation of the action
plan for the Great Lakes, as well as for the work of the
International Conference of the Great Lakes Region
and other subregional organizations that work together
to face common challenges.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Huang Xia, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, and
Mr. João Samuel Caholo, Executive Secretary of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
for their briefings. We listened very attentively to the
briefing provided by Mr. Dinesh Mahtani.

S/PV.9023

condolences to the families and loved ones of all the
peacekeepers killed. A thorough and transparent
investigation into the circumstances surrounding
the crash must be conducted, including through the
Secretariat, and to ensure that those responsible are
brought to justice.
We note with concern the information about the
links between some illegal armed groups operating
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and terrorist
organizations. We reiterate our commitment to
combating international terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations.
However, we continue to believe that long-term
normalization in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
cannot be achieved through military measures alone.
Efforts need to be made to ensure the full implementation
of the 2013 Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. Every effort must also be made to
improve the socioeconomic situation in the region,
effectively implement disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes for former combatants
and promote national reconciliation processes.
The illegal exploitation of natural resources, which
are used by militants to finance their activities and
strengthen their combat capabilities, also remains an
urgent issue.

It is clear that the dire situation in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo is still having a
major impact on the situation in the Great Lakes region.
Unfortunately, despite the joint military operations
undertaken by Congolese and Ugandan army units and
the efforts of the peacekeepers of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we are seeing increased
activity in the eastern part of the country by illegal
armed groups.

In general, we have a positive assessment of the
momentum for dialogue among States of the Great
Lakes region and their readiness to develop practical
cooperation to stabilize the situation in the region.
We welcome the peacekeeping role played by leaders
of States of the Great Lakes region, as well as by
subregional organizations, such as the Southern
African Development Community and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region. We hope that
the meeting of Heads of State and Government of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework that took place in February
will foster subregional cooperation and expedite the
peace process. We also note the recent summit in
Nairobi, where States of the region were able to reach
some important agreements.

Yet another tragic illustration of that scenario were
the events of 29 March, when a helicopter deployed
by the United Nations Mission was downed by the
fighters, with Russian military observer Lieutenant
Colonel Alexei Mizura on board. We offer our heartfelt

We fully support efforts of the United Nations
to promote the United Nations Strategy for Peace
Consolidation, Conflict Prevention and Conflict
Resolution in the Great Lakes Region, as well as United
Nations work on the action plan for its implementation.

We welcome the presence among us the
representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and other countries of the region.

22-3316719/24

S/PV.9023

The situation in the Great Lakes region

For our part, we stand ready to promote stabilization
in the Great Lakes region by encouraging dialogue and
constructive cooperation among the countries of the
region. We are committed to meaningful cooperation
with the relevant institutions of the United Nations
system and its representatives
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
Let me begin by thanking Special Envoy Huang
Xia, Ambassador Caholo and Mr. Mahtani for their
briefings today, as well as the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission for the written advice provided to the
Council on the Great Lakes region. I will focus this
statement on the security dynamics in the region.
The United Kingdom remains extremely concerned
by the fragile security situation in the Great Lakes
region, in particular the increased violence as a result
of greater activity by armed groups, including the
Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), the Coalition des
démocrates Congolais, and the Résistance pour un État
de droit au Burundi, as well as the re-emergence of the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) and the reported links
between the ADF and the Islamic State-Central Africa
Province. Those are all stark reminders of the need to
address the security vacuum in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
We also remain concerned about the humanitarian
situation in the Great Lakes region, with the large-scale
displacement of more than 16 million persons and
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights, mainly as a result of violence in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are particularly
concerned about the protection of civilians as a result
of intercommunal violence in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo’s Ituri province, including the recent
targeting of internally displaced person camps.
The multidimensional challenges facing the Great
Lakes region require a multidimensional response.
The United Kingdom welcomes the positive trend of
enhanced diplomatic outreach and dialogue among
countries of the region. That includes steps towards
normalization between Rwanda and Uganda and the
recent regional Heads of State conclave on the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, hosted by President
Kenyatta in Nairobi.
We call upon countries of the region to intensify
those efforts in order to improve regional cooperation
20/24

27/04/2022

and turn commitments into tangible action to address
shared security challenges, improve humanitarian
access and reduce violence.
I also call upon Special Envoy Huang Xia and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region to
continue to work in close coordination, including with
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo where relevant,
in support of the countries of the region to holistically
tackle the threat posed by the M-23 and other armed
groups, to foster confidence-building among the States
of the region and to enable the implementation of the
United Nations action plan for the Great Lakes region.
The final point that I would like to make is on
natural resources, whose illegal exploitation is a source
of funding for armed groups and a driver of conflict
across the Great Lakes region, as we heard across the
Council today. We strongly support the designation of
sanctions against those individuals and entities found
responsible for the exploitation of natural resources. We
will continue to work with the international community,
including through the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to ensure that those individuals
and entities are held accountable for their actions.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gatete (Rwanda): First and foremost, the
Republic of Rwanda congratulates the United Kingdom
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of April, and we express our appreciation for
it having organized this important briefing.
I thank the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Huang Xia, the Executive Secretary of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
Ambassador Samuel Caholo, and the independent
expert on the Great Lakes region, Mr. Dinesh Mahtani,
for their insightful briefings. I also thank Security
Council members for their statements.
Today’s briefing is important on many counts.
First, it comes at a time when the Great Lakes region
economies and socioeconomic systems are overcoming
the consequences of the coronavirus disease pandemic,
which exacerbated pre-existing challenges in the region.
22-33167

27/04/2022

The situation in the Great Lakes region

S/PV.9023

On another note, the Great Lakes region is
experiencing positive political developments and the
normalization of relations among member countries,
which is driving the momentum for regional cooperation
and greater integration.

Let me conclude by reaffirming Rwanda’s
unwavering commitment to peace, security and
development in our region and beyond.

This meeting also comes at an opportune moment
when the Democratic Republic of the Congo recently
joined the East African Community, which is another
milestone towards achieving security in the region.

Mr. Maniratanga (Burundi) (spoke in French):
The delegation of Burundi welcomes the holding of
this important meeting and would like to thank the
President of the Security Council for the month of April
for having convened this meeting.

Rwanda is encouraged by the measures taken
during the second regional Heads of State conclave
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, hosted by
the Chairperson of the East African Community, His
Excellency Mr. Uhuru Kenyatta, President of the
Republic of Kenya, on 21 April 2021, three weeks after
the Democratic Republic of the Congo officially joined
the Community.
Rwanda welcomes the outcome of that meeting,
which includes a political process that involves
domestic armed groups in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the disarmament and repatriation of
all foreign armed groups. That initiative, which has
been supported by the African Union, is expected to
restore peace and stability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
The successful disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of armed groups are key to creating and
maintaining sustainable peace and development in the
Great Lakes region. We therefore call upon the Security
Council to support such regional efforts, which
complement the existing peace and security framework
to build sustainable peace in the Great Lakes region.
We welcome the Special Envoy’s efforts to
implement peacebuilding priorities, as specified in
the action plan of the regional strategy, based on
the principles of ownership, complementarity and
partnership. Those actions complement the efforts led
by the East African Community.
However, addressing the security situation is
not enough. It is imperative that we also strengthen
cooperation on economic development in the Great
Lakes region. That is already being done through
regional investment and the cross-border trade that
exists in both the central and the northern corridors of
East Africa, which facilitates the smooth movement of
goods and people.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Burundi.

The delegation of Burundi commends the
Independent Expert on the Great Lakes region,
Mr. Dinesh Mahtani; Mr. João Samuel Caholo,
Executive Secretary of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes region; and the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for their briefings. We especially
welcome the active involvement of the Special Envoy
and his commitment to facilitating cooperation and
development in the Great Lakes region.
While welcoming regional cooperation in the area
of intelligence and the recommendations that came
out of the Bujumbura meeting on national intelligence
services, my delegation calls on the international
community to become more involved in achieving
peace and development in the Great Lakes region.
Regarding paragraphs 13 and 14 of the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2022/276), the delegation of
Burundi refutes the allegations contained in paragraph
13 alluding to the presence of elements of the Burundi
National Defence Force and members of Imbonerakure
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I should like to make three remarks in that respect
concerning that paragraph. Burundi did not formally
react to that information because it does not deem it
advisable to react to any and all provocations and
rumours that surface on social networks. Nonetheless,
Burundi would like to state most formally that it did
not deploy its army in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Burundi welcomes the communiqué issued by
the summit of Heads of State of the East African
Community and calls on all negative forces, including
RED Tabara, to lay down their arms and to repatriate to
their countries of origin.
Secondly, the RED Tabara terrorist group, based
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the

22-3316721/24

S/PV.9023

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Congo, which emerged after the failed coup d’état in
2015 in Burundi, has members who wear the uniforms
of various armies in our region, obtained in a variety
of ways. It cooperates with other terrorist groups, in
particular the Allied Democratic Forces, and poses a
threat to peace and security not only in Burundi and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo but also in the
subregion as a whole.
The armed terrorist group RED Tabara has crossed
the Congo border several times to conduct terrorist
acts in Burundi, including the throwing of grenades at
innocent civilians in urban areas, the theft of property
and deadly ambushes against the vehicles of defenceless
civilian passengers.
Thirdly, as regards young people, it is very
surprising to hear talk of their presence in the
Imbonerakure in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
at a time when Burundi is considered to be a model of
the successful integration of youth with a view to their
empowerment. We take this opportunity to bring to the
attention of the members of the Security Council and the
international community that the integration model for
Burundian youth, through the cooperatives initiated by
the Government of Burundi, is being facilitated by the
creation of the Youth Investment Bank and a women’s
investment bank, which has led to the positive result
of a massive urban exodus, with young people leaving
cities for villages and creating cooperative development
associations, devising projects and benefiting from the
funding provided by the Youth Investment Bank.
Young people in Burundi are operating within the
framework of development, not within the framework of
what is mentioned in paragraph 13 of the report before
us today. They are so well supported in this that Burundi
has just held a continental dialogue on youth, peace and
security, with the participation of Youth Ambassadors
for Peace of the African Union, the African Union
Commission Special Envoy on Youth and members of
the Group of Experts of the African Union Peace and
Security Council. The dialogue was endorsed by the
Bujumbura Declaration on Youth, Peace and Security.
All the young people who participated virtually and in
person in that dialogue saw that Burundian youth should
be used as a model for all young people in Africa.
We therefore categorically reject the information
contained in those paragraphs, which is the result of
political manipulation by the opposition in exile.
22/24

27/04/2022

In conclusion, Burundi will spare no effort to bring
about peace and development in the subregion and is
actively preparing to take over, in 2023, the rotating
presidency of the Regional Oversight Mechanism under
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Nzongola-Ntalaja (Democratic Republic of
the Congo) (spoke in French): I should like to thank
you, Mr. President, for having invited us to this meeting,
and I would also like to thank all members for their
comments made here. I have taken note of them, and
we will certainly consider them as we take decisions
regarding the peace and development strategy in the
eastern part of our country.
At the outset, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on
your presidency of the Security Council for April and
for having taken the initiative to organize this meeting
on the situation in the Great Lakes region in general
and on the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region.
I would also like to welcome among us the presence
of His Excellency Mr. João Samuel Caholo, Executive
Secretary of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes region, and Mr. Dinesh Mahtani, Independent
Expert on the Great Lakes region. I wish also to extend
my thanks to all members of the Security Council, as I
said earlier.
My delegation has taken note of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region (S/2022/276),
just introduced to us by Ambassador Huang Xia,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes region, whom I had the honour of meeting two
days ago, when we had a very good exchange on what
is happening in our region. My delegation welcomes
the report before us, but we would like to make a few
comments on issues referred to therein and concerns
expressed by members of the Security Council.
We need hardly recall the importance of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
which remains an important instrument for bringing
22-33167

27/04/2022

The situation in the Great Lakes region

S/PV.9023

about security, peace and stability as a precursor to the
sustainable development of the Great Lakes region.

able to defeat and disarm in 2013, must absolutely be a
thing of the past.

The President of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, His Excellency Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi
Tshilombo, has, since coming to power, worked
tirelessly to change the narrative in the Great Lakes
region. He has pursued his policy of strengthening
good-neighbourliness and cooperation with all
the leaders of the region. The holding of the tenth
summit of the Regional Monitoring Mechanism of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
on 24 February 2022 in Kinshasa, the participation of
the Head of State at various high-level meetings in the
region, the signing of numerous bilateral agreements
with countries in the region, such as the agreement to
cooperate with Uganda in the fight against the Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF), illustrate this determination.

To this end, while continuing our efforts aimed
at reforming the defence and security sector and the
strengthening of the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo, my country has endorsed
the implementation of a comprehensive approach
to neutralizing negative forces. This was one of the
decisions made at the Nairobi summit. Joint military
operations in the context of states of siege and in terms
of military cooperation will continue together with
non-military measures. The Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which is currently in talks in Nairobi with
the armed groups, calls on the international community,
the Security Council and the region, united in the
Contact and Coordination Group, for clear support
in forcing the armed groups operating in the east to
surrender their weapons and join the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration scheme at both the
national and regional levels.

The eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo must be brought back to peace. This goal
must be achieved. The unspeakable suffering of the
population in this part of the country must be brought to
an end, as we are talking about a state of affairs that has
lasted for more than 25 years. We must put an end to the
suffering of this population and give them the chance to
improve their living conditions. My delegation invites
all signatories, guarantors and multisectoral partners to
work consistently to this end, which is beneficial not
only for the Democratic Republic of the Congo but also
for the entire region. This momentum in the destiny of
the Great Lakes region must not be wasted but rather
capitalized upon.
My delegation certainly recognizes that much
has already been done and that there has been an
improvement in the evolution of the situation, as the
report before us also highlights, but the major objectives,
namely, peace, stability and development, have not yet
been achieved. All challenges that delay and jeopardize
stability in the region must be identified and addressed.
Owing to time constraints, I will focus my
statement on just a few of these challenges. With regard
to the actions by armed groups of internal and external
origin, my country is concerned at the resurgence of
their negative activities. The ADF and their links with
terrorist entities at the global level, the Coopérative
pour le développement du Congo and other armed
groups, together with the unacceptable resurgence of
attacks by the Mouvement du 23 mars, which we were

With regard to the illicit exploitation of natural
resources and the illegal trafficking of arms and
ammunition, the region must continue to act to strengthen
the fight against these scourges. The resolutions of the
Khartoum conference and the efforts undertaken within
the framework of the International Conference of the
Great Lakes Region for the certification of minerals are
positive steps for my country and for the region.
With regard to the humanitarian challenge, which
is also largely the consequence of the aforementioned
armed-group activity, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, beyond its partnership with the United Nations
under the humanitarian response plan launched on
17 February 2022, remains open to any additional
positive regional initiative that could help meet
the challenge.
With regard to the challenge of respecting human
rights, the Democratic Republic of the Congo would
like to reassure the Council that it is continuing to make
efforts to achieve this objective. The reforms undertaken
in the justice system and the operationalization of
transitional justice will certainly help in this pursuit.
As I noted earlier in my statement, while challenges
remain, the positive developments in the region and the
efforts aimed at rebuilding trust and confidence in the
Great Lakes region are worthy of encouragement. That
is why my country is asking the United Nations and the

22-3316723/24

S/PV.9023

The situation in the Great Lakes region

international community to support the efforts of all
leaders of the Great Lakes region.
I cannot conclude my remarks without thanking the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region for the sequential implementation of his
2021-2023 action plan for the region, as well as for the
efforts he continues to make within his mandate to
restore peace throughout the Great Lakes region, and
more specifically in my country.

24/24

27/04/2022

To all the members of the Security Council, I
reiterate the gratitude of the people and the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo for their
dedication and commitment to the cause of my country
and the region.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting
so that the Council can continue its discussion on the
subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

22-33167
