United Nations

S/PV.6711

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6711

th meeting
Saturday, 4 February 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Menan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Togo)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Haroon
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-22356 (E)

*1222356*

S/PV.6711

The meeting was called to order at 11.50 a.m.

Against:
China, Russian Federation

Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in French): As this is the
first meeting of the Council for the month of February
2012, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Baso Sangqu, Permanent Representative of South
Africa, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of January 2012. I am sure I
speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Sangqu and his
delegation for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Bahrain, Egypt, Jordan, Kuwait,
Libya, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, Turkey, the
United Arab Emirates and the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2012/77, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Bahrain, Colombia, Egypt,
France, Germany, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Morocco,
Oman, Portugal, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Togo, Tunisia,
Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.
In favour:
Azerbaijan,
Colombia,
France,
Germany,
Guatemala, India, Morocco, Pakistan, Portugal,
South Africa, Togo, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America

2

The President (spoke in French): There were 13
votes in favour and two against. The draft resolution
has not been adopted, owing to the negative vote of
two permanent members of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, Sir, allow me to offer Morocco’s
congratulations to you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month. Similarly, our
great appreciation goes to Ambassador Baso Sangqu
and his delegation for their presidency of the Council
last month.
I wish to express my delegation’s great regret and
disappointment over the Council’s failure to adopt the
draft resolution (S/2012/77) we submitted three days
ago, as well as our sincere hope that the Council’s
failure will not serve as a pretext for further dangerous
backsliding in the humanitarian situation in brotherly
Syria and increased innocent civilian casualties.
It should be recalled that in their recent
presentations to the Council (see S/PV.6710), Sheikh
Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr Al-Thani, Chairman of the
current session of the Ministerial Council of the
League of Arab States, and Mr. Nabil Elaraby,
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, made a
clear and urgent request for the Council’s support of
the regional organization’s bold, decisive and
comprehensive initiative based on dialogue, mutual
understanding and national reconciliation, aimed at
achieving a peaceful solution for a situation that has
only continued to worsen with time.
In assuming its responsibility as the Arab member
of the Security Council and in close cooperation with
other States members and non-members of the Council,
in particular many of the Arab countries, Morocco,
almost a year after the start of the crisis in brotherly
Syria, continues to work to achieve consensus in order
to enable the Council to speak with a single voice.
Morocco highly appreciates the initiative of all
the Council members that joined us in sponsoring the
draft resolution. I refer to the Council’s unanimous
response to the proposals made by one of its members.
We duly appreciate the spirit of consensus and

12-22356

S/PV.6711

flexibility reflected in the draft resolution, of which
members are well aware.

exercised in October by the same members, of a text
that was as moderate as today’s.

Through our efforts, we have endeavoured to live
up to the firm principles demanding an immediate and
complete end to all hostilities and acts of violence, and
to encourage political dialogue in order to enable the
Syrian people to establish its national political
institutions, preserve Syria’s territorial integrity and
social, pluralistic unity and, equally important, to
forestall any external military intervention. Now that
the Council has failed to reach a decision to support the
Arab initiative, the road map remains the only tool as
an exemplary framework for implementation by the
League of Arab States.

What has happened over these past 10 months?
More than 6,000 Syrians have fallen victim to
repression, and the situation could well be worse than
we know. Ten days ago, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights Pillay told us that she
was no longer able to count the victims of repression.
The Secretary-General has called tirelessly on the
Council to act to stop the crimes against humanity
being committed in Syria. And the Council has
remained silent.

We are terribly pained by the horrendous events
unfolding before us. We ask God to bless all the
victims without exception, and we call for the
bloodshed to end and for all factions of the Syrian
people to establish a democratic State and open a
single, unified society enjoying understanding and
harmony. We hope that the Security Council will not
have to address the situation yet again, although it
seems to be deteriorating. We hope that now that the
Council has been unable to reach decision, all those
who have leverage with the parties will spare no effort
to ensure that no further innocent victims are claimed
and that the violence and counter-violence will come to
an end.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): It is with
great sadness and concern that I note the exercise today
of a double veto against a draft resolution on Syria that
had been supported by all other members of the
Council. This is a sad day for the Council; it is a sad
day for the Syrians; and it is sad day for all the friends
of democracy.
Above and beyond the thousands of dead,
wounded, tortured and imprisoned since the repression
began almost a year ago, history has compounded our
shame because today is the anniversary of the Hama
massacre and falls only one day after another massacre
in Homs. The father killed on a mass scale; the son has
followed in his footsteps. Horror would seem to be
hereditary in Damascus.
We have been discussing Syria for 10 months,
and all we have managed to adopt is a mere
presidential
statement
on
3
August
2011
(S/PRST/2011/16) because of the exercise of the veto,

12-22356

The Human Rights Council has thrice noted the
overwhelming responsibility of the Syrian regime, and
the Security Council has remained silent.
Some 133 members of the General Assembly
have solemnly condemned these criminal acts and
called for an immediate end to them. And the Council
has remained silent.
Only three days ago in this very Chamber (see
S/PV.6710), the League of Arab States called on the
Council to support its action in the face of the Syrian
regime’s refusal to listen and the implications of that
refusal for the entire region. The Secretary-General of
the Arab League and the Prime Minister of Qatar called
here for a solution that is the only credible road to a
peaceful settlement of the Syrian crisis. A draft
resolution that was submitted by Morocco, broadly
co-sponsored within and outside the Council, and
deemed by most to be consensual, offered the
Council’s support for regional efforts — nothing more,
nothing less — and yet the Council will remain silent.
We cannot and must not overlook the harrowing
conclusion that two permanent members of the Council
have systematically obstructed all its action. They do
so in the full knowledge of the tragic consequences of
their decisions for the Syrian people. And in so doing,
they are making themselves complicit in the policy of
repression being implemented by the Damascus
regime. Whatever they may claim, they have de facto
taken the side of the Al-Assad regime against the
Syrian people.
I know the arguments that will be made by those
who today opposed the Council’s action. I have already
heard them say that only a few more days would have
sufficed for us to reach an agreement. How can one
speak of a few more days when hundreds of Syrians

3

S/PV.6711

are dying every day? We could wait no longer,
especially as the draft resolution represents the
broadest possible consensus of the international
community in support of the efforts of regional actors
to find a peaceful solution to the crisis.
For the past 10 months, we have been accused of
seeking regime change and preparing for military
intervention. That is patently false. We have fully
answered those concerns. In this Chamber three days
ago, our Ministers confirmed that there was no
question of imposing a political regime on Syria. On
that point and on the issue of armed intervention, the
draft resolution was crystal clear. How much time have
we squandered responding to these debating points?
The procrastination, scheming and hesitancy are not
commensurate with the tragedy being experienced by
the Syrian people.
History will judge harshly those countries that
have prevented the Council from offering its support to
the courageous efforts of the Arab League to
implement its plan. In so doing, they have without
scruple aligned themselves with a regime slaughters its
own people. In so doing, they have judged that their
presence in the Middle East now depends on the future
of the Al-Assad. That presence and that regime will
endure the same fate.
As I said, today is sad day. But we will not stop
here. We have no right to abandon the Syrian people to
its tragic fate. I tell the Syrians that France will
continue to work in all forums and with all partners
that share its values towards the objective that should
have united us here today — an end to the Syrian
nightmare. We will continue to work with the Arab
League, whose plan remains on the table even though it
has not been endorsed by the Council. We will continue
to support the peaceful Syrian opposition that is
rallying around the Syrian National Council. We will
continue to up the pressure by imposing further
sanctions of the European Union.
I save my final word for the Syrian people, who
with untold courage have kept their eyes on the prize
of future freedom for the past 10 months. From this
Chamber, I offer them France’s full support and resolve
relentlessly to pursue our action. We weathered a first
double veto and returned to the Council; today, we
have weathered a second on the part of the same
countries. However, for the sake of the principles that
guide the Council and the work of the United Nations,

4

and for the sake of our responsibility as a permanent
members, that will not stop us.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Germany and the
overwhelming majority of Council members supported
the draft resolution that was submitted by Morocco on
behalf of the Arab States. However, two permanent
members of the Council chose to exercise their veto.
That is to say that, after more than 11 months of brutal
violence and repression by the Syrian Government;
after more than 5,500 deaths; after the killing of almost
400 children; and after far too many peaceful protesters
have been detained, tortured, raped and abused, today
the Security Council again failed to assume its
responsibilities and to live up to its mandate to
maintain international peace and security.
In short, the people of Syria and the region have
been let down again, and that is a crying shame —
even more so in the light of the recent massacres in
Homs; even more so in the light of one the bloodiest
days of the Arab Spring; and even more so on the
tragic thirtieth anniversary of the Hama massacre. And
that is the real scandal.
Germany’s position is very clear. The Council
should urge Al-Assad to stop the killing. His regime
has to put an immediate end to the violence. It has to
stop the massive, gross and systematic violation of
human rights. That was the first major element of the
draft resolution before us (S/2012/77).
Many of the demands expressed in the draft
resolution were actually accepted by the Syrian
Government on 19 December 2011. The Syrian
Government agreed to the cessation of violence, to the
release of all political prisoners, to the withdrawal of
its armed forces, and to the unhindered freedom of
movement of observers and journalists. According to
the League of Arab States, however, none of those
commitments was fully met by the Syrian Government.
Last Tuesday, this Council heard a remarkable
plea by the League of Arab States (see S/PV.6710). The
Arab States urged the Council not to let the Syrian
people down; they urged the members of the Council to
support them in resolving the crisis in Syria. That was
the second major element of our draft resolution — to
answer the call from Arab States and large parts of the
international community to fully support the initiative
of the League of Arab States, which is aimed at finding
a political, Syrian-led solution to the crisis. That was
the call of the draft resolution.

12-22356

S/PV.6711

The draft resolution did not foresee an arms
embargo or a sanctions regime, as we had wished for;
nor did it mandate a commission of inquiry into human
rights violations, as we had advocated. We regret that it
did not, but we negotiated in a spirit of compromise,
and we were ready to make substantial concessions.
The draft also did not call for regime change, as some
maintained. What it did, however, was to support a
political framework set out by the League of Arab
States. That framework is intended to facilitate a
Syrian-led political transition to a democratic and
plural political system, because that is what it is all
about — to have the Syrian people itself decide on its
own political future. That is the way for peace and
security to best be achieved, in Syria and beyond. And
that is what the majority here in the Council agrees
upon. We regret that two Council members disagreed.
The violence in Syria has to stop. A political
dialogue has to begin under the auspices of the League
of Arab States. There is a political way out of this
crisis. We are afraid, however, that today’s decision
will spur further violence and make it harder to reach a
political solution. Nevertheless, Germany will continue
to work with all partners in the region to support the
League of Arab States.
As much as we regret today’s decision, let me
reassure members of the Council that Germany remains
ready to work with all of them to overcome our
division and to bridge the gaps. We owe that not only
to the Syrian people, but also to the mandate of this
Council, which is the maintenance of peace and
security.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): The United
States is disgusted that a couple of members of this
Council continue to prevent us from fulfilling our sole
purpose here, which is to address an ever-deepening
crisis in Syria and a growing threat to regional peace
and security. For months, this Council has been held
hostage by a couple of members. Those members stand
behind empty arguments and individual interests, while
delaying and seeking to strip bare any text that would
pressure Al-Assad to change his actions. That
intransigence is even more shameful when we consider
that at least one of those members continues to deliver
weapons to Al-Assad.
The United States has long said that it is past time
for the Council to assume its responsibilities and to
impose tough, targeted sanctions and an arms embargo

12-22356

on the Al-Assad regime, as many individual countries
have already done. But today’s draft resolution
(S/2012/77) did not even do that. The text simply
supported an Arab League plan that Al-Assad himself
already agreed to uphold and the subsequent Arab
League decision towards a peaceful resolution of the
crisis. The sponsors of the draft resolution truly went
the last mile to try to reach consensus on a draft that
already more than accommodates the concerns of a few
Council members about the use of force and sanctions.
Subsequent attempts today to introduce wrecking
amendments at the eleventh hour, only to further delay
Council action, are unforgivable.
Since yesterday, the Syrian Government has
waged and intensified an especially horrific campaign
in Homs to murder hundreds, including women and
children, with artillery, tanks and other indiscriminate
violence. Syrian forces continue to prevent hundreds of
innocent and injured civilians from seeking medical
help. The international community must protect the
Syrian people from that abhorrent brutality. But a
couple of members of this Council remain steadfast in
their willingness to sell out the Syrian people and to
shield a craven tyrant.
The United States, by contrast, stands fully and
irrevocably with the long-suffering people of Syria.
Since those same two Council members vetoed
the last draft resolution on Syria, we have heard reports
from the High Commissioner for Human Rights that
the regime may be committing crimes against
humanity. We also heard from Arab League SecretaryGeneral Elaraby and from Qatari Prime Minister
Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr Al-Thani, who noted that
the Assad regime has “failed to make any serious effort
to cooperate” (see S/PV.6710, p.4) with the Arab
League and that Assad’s “killing machine continues
effectively unabated” (ibid., p.5).
Since those two members last vetoed a draft
resolution on Syria, an estimated 3,000 more civilians
have been killed, with another almost 250 killed just
yesterday. Many thousands more have been held
captive and tortured by Al-Assad and his Shabia gangs.
Since those two members last vetoed a resolution,
however, and despite the absence of Security Council
action, we have seen more and more Syrians speak out
in peaceful demonstrations against the regime.
Once again, the courageous people of Syria can
clearly see who on this Council supports their yearning

5

S/PV.6711

for liberty and universal rights and who does not. And
during this season of change, the people of the Middle
East can now see clearly which nations have chosen to
ignore their calls for democracy and instead to prop up
desperate dictators. Those who oppose the draft
resolution have denied this last chance to end
Al-Assad’s brutality through peaceful means under
Arab League auspices. Any further bloodshed will be
on their hands.
The Governments that once again stymied
Council action today need to reverse course and to
heed the voices of the Syrian people — for their own
sake, for the sake of Syria, for the sake of the Middle
East, and for the sake of this Council.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): This is indeed a
sad day for the Security Council. Once again, it was
unable to act to send a forceful and united message to
the Syrian authorities to stop killing and torturing their
people, even though in the recent hours hundreds more
have been killed.
How long will this Council allow the Syrian
killing machine to continue to push the country into a
bloody sectarian conflict? How many more dead and
maimed will it take to finally force this Council into
action? It is indeed regrettable and particularly
worrying that the Security Council was unable to
unanimously support the decision of the League of
Arab States of 22 January to facilitate a political
transition to a democratic, pluralistic political system
in which all Syrians are equal, regardless of their
affiliations or ethnicity or beliefs, and are de facto
citizens of their country.
A Syrian-led political transition based on a
serious political dialogue between the Syrian
Government and the whole spectrum of the Syrian
opposition: that is exactly what those who did not
support this resolution today had been demanding.
The Security Council was unable to respond to
the plea of the League of Arab States that it support the
Arab world’s attempt to end the killing and reach a
peaceful political solution to the Syrian crisis — two
goals that are, I believe, shared by all on this Council.
Yet again the Council has failed to meet its
responsibilities towards the Syrian people and to fulfil
its role as the primary body entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security. Not
only is this extremely disappointing; it is simply
unacceptable.

6

As was made perfectly clear in this Council last
Tuesday, the situation in Syria is untenable and is
rapidly spiraling towards civil war. Clear and
unanimous support by this Council for the efforts of
the Arab League is essential if we are to counter such a
dangerous development. It was made abundantly clear
in this Chamber that this draft resolution was not about
regime change, nor did it seek to impose changes on
Syria from outside, much less to allow for the use of
force or impose sanctions. The sole objective of this
resolution was to put an immediate end to the violence
and enable a Syrian-owned political dialogue that
would allow the Syrian people to determine their own
future peacefully.
As my minister stated here earlier this week (see
S/PV.6710), we fully support the efforts of the League
of Arab States regarding Syria, including its decision of
22 January 2012 and the political road map therein.
They represent the only viable way to solve this crisis
peacefully, through political means.
Portugal remains fully committed to the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
national unity of Syria. We urge all parties in Syria to
immediately halt all violence and engage in a serious
political dialogue under the auspices of the League of
Arab States. Portugal will continue to work actively
with the Arab League towards the fulfilment of these
objectives.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom is appalled by the decision of Russia
and China to veto an otherwise consensus resolution,
submitted by Morocco, the United Kingdom, the
United States, France, Germany, Portugal, Colombia,
Togo, Libya, Bahrain, Jordan, Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Egypt, Tunisia,
Oman and Turkey.
It has been 10 months since the Syrian people
bravely demanded their universal rights, and 10 months
since the Syrian regime responded by violently
repressing and killing its own people.
Six months ago the Council adopted a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2011/16) condemning
the widespread violations of human rights and the use
of force against civilians by the Syrian authorities. It
called for an immediate end to violence and
compliance with obligations under international law,
and for the Syrian Government to implement its stated
commitments to reform. On that day, the death toll in

12-22356

S/PV.6711

Syria stood at approximately one thousand. But the
Syrian regime only continued its brutal repression.
Four months ago, two Council members vetoed
an attempt to send a clear message to the Syrian regime
to end the bloodshed. That day, the death toll stood at
three thousand, and the Syrian regime only continued
its brutal repression.
The death toll today stands at around six
thousand. The Syrian regime has ferociously escalated
its already brutal repression in the last 24 hours,
subjecting the citizens of Homs to artillery and heavy
weaponry. The death toll will be high. Those who
blocked Council action today must ask themselves how
many more deaths they are prepared to tolerate before
they support even modest and measured action.
Last Tuesday, this Council and the world heard
from His Excellency Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin
Jabr Al-Thani of Qatar and from the Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States (see S/PV.6710). They
came with a simple request for Security Council
support for the Arab League’s plan to facilitate a
political transition and bring about a peaceful
resolution to the crisis. The original Moroccan draft
resolution did just that. From the outset it had support
from the vast majority of Council members and had the
backing of the Arab League.
Yet some Council members argued that the draft
resolution imposed regime change. It said no such
thing. But in an attempt to reach consensus, we
provided further assurances in the text. The same
minority argued that the text could somehow be used to
authorize military intervention. It did no such thing. It
was a Chapter VI resolution. But in an attempt to reach
consensus, we provided further assurances in the text.
The same minority argued that very modest language
expressing concern about weapons was somehow
tantamount to an arms embargo. It was not. But we
took it out. They said that mere mention of Arab
League sanctions was tantamount to United Nations
sanctions. It was not. But we took it out in an effort to
reach consensus.
The facts speak for themselves. There is nothing
in this text that should have triggered a veto. We
removed every possible excuse. The reality is that
Russia and China have today made a choice to turn
their backs on the Arab world and the support tyranny
rather than the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people. They have failed in their responsibility as

12-22356

permanent members of the Security Council, and they
have done so on the most shameful of days of the
Syrian killing machine’s three hundred days of
oppression.
The United Kingdom will continue to support the
Arab League’s efforts to bring about a peaceful
transition in Syria. We shall continue to support the
brave Syrian people in their demands for change. The
regime must cease the violence. There must now be a
transition to a new political dispensation. Should the
regime continue on its current bloody trajectory, we
will once again bring the issue back to this Council, in
consultation with our colleagues in the Arab League.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of Colombia, I wish to state my disappointment
and regret at the outcome of the vote, which denies the
member countries of the League of Arab States, and
this Organization itself, the support that has been
requested of us for a plan intended to bring an end to
the tragedy being experienced in Syria and to defend
the lives and rights of the people of that country.
Since the beginning of the violent repression by
the Syrian Government of the civilian population more
than ten months ago, we have made many attempts,
many appeals to find a solution to the crisis. The
response has been a continuous escalation of the brutal
use of force and the violation of all the human rights of
the people of that country.
Throughout this process we have engaged in
ongoing dialogue with the Arab countries. We always
took into account their guidance and requests to permit
and facilitate Arab League action before the Council
took a decision. This was done until their efforts were
no longer responded to, and they specifically
requested, last week, that this Council support their
political transition plan in order to achieve peace and
establish a democratic regime in Syria.
Colombia supported and voted in favour of the
draft resolution submitted by Morocco in response to
the request formally presented to the Council by the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States (see
S/PV.6710), convinced that the Syrian people must be
rescued from the terrible tragedy that they are suffering
today.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Our position on the situation in Syria was fully

7

S/PV.6711

explained by our Minister for Foreign Affairs last
Tuesday in the Chamber (see S/PV.6710).
Our prime objective is to help to put an end to the
spiral of violence afflicting the Syrian population and
to find a political solution to the crisis experienced by
that country. We believe that the League of Arab States
has adopted an initiative that meets both goals (see
S/2012/71, annex). We therefore voted in favour of the
draft resolution just put before us (S/2012/77).
We regret that our vote was in vain owing to the
very particular voting system that governs our
decision-making process. That adds to the ranks of
those affected by this matter ─ not only the victims of
the violence, whom, I underscore, are our prime
concern, but also the effectiveness of the Security
Council in adequately responding to the challenges
facing it.
In conclusion, our delegation deeply regrets that
we have failed to meet the request made of us by the
League of Arab States. We urge its member countries
to persevere in its initiatives, including that of
22 January.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I want to start
by congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February. My
delegation and I look forward to working with you to
make your presidency truly successful. In an earlier
incarnation, I had the opportunity to have visited your
beautiful country. I would also like to take this
opportunity to complement South Africa, Ambassador
Baso Sangqu and his team for their wise and able
stewardship of the Council in January.
The Syrian Arab Republic has historically played
an important role in the Middle East. Prolonged
instability and unrest in Syria have implications for
peace and stability in the wider region. India is
concerned about the present situation in Syria, which
has resulted in the deaths of thousands of civilians and
security forces personnel over the past 10 months.
Therefore, since the beginning of the protest, we have
called for a peaceful and inclusive political process to
address the grievances of all sections of Syrian society.
We strongly condemn all violence, irrespective of
the perpetrators. We also condemn all violations of
human rights. India holds the rights of expression and
peaceful assembly among the fundamental values that
should be respected, while ensuring the stability and

8

security of society. India has conveyed that message to
the Syrian leadership, both bilaterally and with our
partners Brazil and South Africa. We have impressed
upon the Syrian side to abjure violence and pay heed to
the aspirations of the people of Syria. That message
was also contained in the presidential statement issued
by the Council in August 2011 under India’s
presidency (S/PRST/2011/16).
We are firmly of the view that a political process
for the resolution of the present crisis should be led by
the Syrians themselves. We believe that the main role
of the international community, including the Council,
is to facilitate engagement of the Syrian people with all
sections of Syrian society for an inclusive political
process that takes into account the legitimate
aspirations of all Syrians, while ensuring respect for
the country’s sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity.
We note that the draft resolution enjoins the
Government to protect its population, indicating that it
should have the capacity to do so. The League of Arab
States is an important regional organization and should
play its required and historic role in promoting
political dialogue among the Syrian parties.
In that context, we welcome the deployment of
the League’s observer mission across several areas of
the country, which had a calming effect on the level of
violence and provided a more accurate picture of
developments. We hope that the mission can return
soon.
Our support for today’s draft resolution is in
accordance with our support for the efforts of the Arab
League for a peaceful resolution of the crisis through a
Syrian-led inclusive political process. We note that the
draft resolution expressly rules out any measures under
Article 42 of the Charter and calls for a serious
political dialogue between the Syrian Government and
the whole spectrum of the opposition under the
auspices of the League of Arab States.
We believe that the leadership of Syria is a matter
for the Syrian people to decide. It would be necessary
for all opposition forces in Syria to peacefully engage
in constructive dialogue with the authorities. We hope
that that would create a new environment for peace and
facilitate a political process. That political dialogue
should build upon the political reforms already
announced by the Syrian leadership, with the necessary
changes for them to find acceptance among all sections
of Syrian society.

12-22356

S/PV.6711

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The bloodshed and violence in Syria must be
immediately ended. To that end, the Russian Federation
has undertaken active diplomatic efforts in contacts
with the Syrians, Syria’s Arab neighbours and other
members of the international community. Today, it was
announced in Moscow that, on instructions from
President Medvedev of the Russian Federation,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation
Lavrov and the Director of the Foreign Intelligence
Service of the Russian Federation, Mr. Fradkov, are to
visit Damascus on 7 February for a meeting with
President Al-Assad of the Syrian Arab Republic.
In the Security Council, we have actively tried to
reach a decision for an objective solution that would
truly help to put a prompt end to violence and start a
political process in Syria. The decision of the Security
Council should be just that, but from the very
beginning of the Syrian crisis some influential
members of the international community, including
some sitting at this table, have undermined any
possibility of a political settlement, calling for regime
change, encouraging the opposition towards power,
indulging in provocation and nurturing the armed
struggle.
The work of the Security Council was not taken
to its conclusion. The draft resolution put to the vote
(S/2012/77) did not adequately reflect the true state of
affairs in Syria and sent a biased signal to the Syrian
sides. The sponsors of the draft resolution did not take
into account our proposed amendments to the draft
resolution to the effect that the Syrian opposition must
distance itself from extremist groups that are
committing acts of violence, and calling on States and
all those with any relevant opportunity to use their
influence to stop those groups committing acts of
violence. Nor has account been taken of our proposals
that along with the withdrawal of the Syrian armed
forces from the cities, there should be an end to attacks
by armed groups on State institutions and
neighbourhoods. Nor has there been support for the
proposal to show more flexibility for the intermediary
efforts of the League of Arab States, which would
increase the chances for the success of an inclusive
Syrian political process.
Under these conditions, the Russian delegation
voted against the draft resolution submitted. We greatly
regret such an outcome of our joint work in the
Security Council. We believe that intensive efforts by

12-22356

the international community will be continued, with a
view to an immediate end to the violence and a
successful beginning and conclusion of an inclusive
Syrian political process and to withdrawal of that
country from a profound crisis.
Russia, for its part, will continue to work
precisely in that direction.
Mr. Li Baodong (China)(spoke in Chinese): The
Security Council has just voted on the draft resolution
on Syria (S/2012/77), and China voted against it.
China has, all along, followed closely the
developments in Syria. We call on all parties in Syria
to stop the violence and in particular to avoid
casualties among innocent civilians, to restore order in
the country as soon as possible and to respect the
request of the Syrian people for reform and for the
safeguarding of their own interests. This is in the
fundamental interest of Syria and its people. We
support the good-offices efforts of the Arab League to
resolve the Syrian crisis so as to promote an early
launch of an inclusive political process led by the
Syrian people and in which all parties extensively
participate, to peacefully resolve differences and
disputes through dialogue and negotiations, and to
restore stability in Syria.
The international community should provide
constructive assistance to help achieve these goals. At
the same time, the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Syria should be fully respected.
The actions of the Security Council on the Syrian issue
should comply with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and help ease the
tensions, help promote political dialogue and diffuse
disputes, and help maintain peace and stability in the
Middle East region, rather than complicate the issue.
Under these principles, China participated
actively in the consultations on the draft resolution and
supported the efforts of the Arab League to facilitate a
political settlement of the Syrian issue and to maintain
stability in the region. Like many Council members,
China maintains that under the current circumstances,
to put undue emphasis on pressuring the Syrian
Government for a prejudged result of the dialogue or to
impose any solution will not help resolve the Syrian
issue. Instead, that may further complicate the
situation.

9

S/PV.6711

China supports the amendments proposed by the
Russian Federation and has noted that the Russian
Foreign Minister will visit Syria next week. The
request by some Council members for continued
consultations on the draft resolution is reasonable. It is
regrettable that these reasonable concerns were not
taken into account. To put through a vote when parties
are still seriously divided over the issue does not help
maintain the unity and authority of the Security
Council nor help to properly resolve the issue. In this
context, China voted against the draft resolution.
Syria is an important country in the Middle East.
Peace and stability in Syria serve the common interests
of the Syrian people and the international community.
China will continue to work with the international
community and to play a positive and constructive role
in the proper settlement of the Syrian issue.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Many congratulations,
Mr. President, on assuming the post of Council
President, and with such an important world issue at
the very start of your tenure.
The problem in Syria has assumed dimensions
that are not only regrettable but condemnable. We have
to understand that while we have made civilization, we
have also condoned expressions like “collateral
damage”, and so many others, which it is not my
intention to name here today. But I believe that we
accept too much too easily. It reminds me of when, two
thousand years ago, Pontius Pilate washed his hands
and said, “I have nothing to do with this.” Two
thousand years later, we still see that humanity suffers
from that particular viewpoint.
Pakistan had some serious concerns, mainly
against killings, the massacre of innocents. But also, on
a point of principle of the Charter, we were not happy
about any infringement on the sovereignty or integrity
of Syria.
There was a very spirited attempt, as related by
Sir Mark just now as well, to take care of issues and
concerns, and we are thankful for that. I believe that it
became important to be able to end killings by asking
both sides — in fact, forcing both sides — to
acknowledge that it is unacceptable, and based on the
strong moral point that the Arab League draft
introduced into this.
There was a question of amnesty. I also believe it
was an accepted fact that everyone has to get involved

10

to stop it. Do not forget that nothing succeeds
anywhere in the world against a government without
external help. That is a point of history that cannot be
ignored.
It is easy for those of us who today voted in the
majority to sit back and say, “Well, we have done our
bit.” No, we have not. We cannot wash our hands of this.
We must continue and seek — as the Russians and the
Chinese have stated that they will continue to seek —
the way forward. I believe that the best vehicle is the
Arab League plan and the very substantial moves that
have been accepted over the last few days.
I believe that the offer of no regime change, of
plurality, and the promotion of democracy are
important aspects of this situation. We have stood by
that. I believe that even today our system has indeed let
us down. We have been very clear, without taking
political benefit out of it, that this aspect of the veto is
always a heart-wrencher. It cuts both ways, benefitting
one side at one moment and the other at another
moment. Either everyone should have the veto, and
then see how the world gets on, or perhaps we should
all consider not using it whatsoever.
I also think we have arrived at a situation that
demands we persevere in our efforts to strengthen the
relationships among us. Today our decision mattered a
great deal to our Arab brethren, who have been so
important to us. We had to stand with them on principle
because they wanted our support pretty unanimously. I
raised a question a couple of days earlier, noting that I
did not then see present either Tunisia, Egypt or others
that are such strong proponents on this issue; and I am
glad to see their presence today. That is a great plus, in
my mind.
I would like to close with a few words of
reminder that all this was done with good intentions on
all sides. I am not going to beat anyone with a stick. I
believe consensus was achieved, though there were
some drop-outs from it, and I believe we can still work
towards that consensus. There is a visit to Syria
scheduled in the next few days. I am sure that some
more points may arise.
This matter should not be allowed to die. The
draft resolution should remain an active matter before
this Council, and we should address it again as soon as
possible, with the help even of those that decided today
not to vote for it. By keeping the matter active, we
would give hope to those who are expecting action

12-22356

S/PV.6711

from us. Having made these few remarks, I urge the
Council to keep its engagement on this matter alive.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): Let me start by
congratulating you, Sir, and Togo on your assumption
of the Council presidency for the month of February.
Please be assured of South Africa’s full support.
The world is watching with great concern as the
crisis in Syria unfolds and degenerates by the day,
claiming civilian lives and injuring and displacing
many people, including children. As we have said
before, we remain deeply concerned about the
deteriorating political, security, socio-economic and
humanitarian situation in Syria. It continues to
deteriorate despite calls from the international
community on the Syrian Government and the armed
opposition to stop the violence and settle their
differences in a peaceful manner. We condemn the
violent loss of life in Syria and call for maximum of
restraint from all parties to the conflict. We urge the
parties to stop the violence immediately and commit
themselves to finding a peaceful, political solution
through a Syrian-led and owned, transparent and allinclusive political process that will fulfil the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people.
The political process will guarantee, among other
things, the people’s fundamental political rights and
freedoms and restore their dignity through the delivery
of democracy, political reform, justice, human rights
and socio-economic development. We believe that such
a solution will indeed ensure long-term peace and
stability. We regret the slow progress in the
implementation of the reforms already announced, and
encourage the Syrian Government to implement these
reforms expeditiously. We urge the opposition to
commit to fully participating in the implementation of
these reforms.
South Africa believes that the efforts of the
League of Arab States, as the organization with
knowledge of and proximity to the situation in Syria,
should be supported and given the necessary political
space to find a solution to the Syrian crisis. South
Africa supports the efforts of the League of Arab States
to facilitate the Syrian-led political process, as stated in
the draft resolution. It is important that the Syrian
people be allowed to decide their own fate, including
their future leadership.
Fundamentally, no foreign or external parties
should interfere in Syria as its people engage in the

12-22356

critical decision-making process on the future of their
country. Any solution must preserve the unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria. We are
also satisfied that the final draft resolution (S/2012/77)
was not aimed at imposing regime change on Syria,
which would be against the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter.
We sincerely hope that the Syrian Government
and the opposition will continue to cooperate with the
League of Arab States in its efforts to assist them to
reach a peaceful political solution. We further call on
the international community to render support to this
process and refrain from actions and statements that
may polarize the parties and delay, or even paralyse,
the League of Arab States process.
The current political environment in the Middle
East, a region whose geopolitics cannot afford to have
a weak or conflict-ridden Syria, warrants us to act
responsibly in the interest of regional and international
peace and security. South Africa voted in favour of the
draft resolution today because we believe that it has the
potential to help facilitate a Syrian-led political process
and dialogue between the Syrian parties, and to bring
long-term peace and stability to the country, in
accordance with the aspirations of the Syrian people.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): Azerbaijan is deeply
concerned at the continuing crisis and widespread
violence in Syria that have resulted in the death of
many people. Despite the repeated calls of the
international community, the situation in Syria
continues to deteriorate, causing scores of deaths and
injuries. Azerbaijan has from the very beginning
supported the efforts of the League of Arab States, and
is looking forward to their continuation with a view to
ending the violence, overcoming the crisis and finding
a solution by peaceful means and through dialogue.
The only solution to the crisis in Syria is through
an inclusive and Syrian-led political process with the
aim of effectively addressing the legitimate aspirations
and concerns of Syria’s people, without external
interference. This understanding is clearly expressed in
the draft resolution (S/2012/77). It is crucial that
obligations with respect to the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of Syria and all
other States of the region be fully observed and
respected. It is important that the draft resolution
emphasizes that the current political crisis in Syria
must be resolved peacefully, and notes that nothing

11

S/PV.6711

authorizes measures under Article 42 of the United
Nations Charter.
Azerbaijan supported the draft resolution on the
aforementioned understanding and with the hope that
its adoption would contribute to ongoing efforts aimed
at encouraging dialogue, overcoming the crisis and
putting an end to human suffering.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Togo.
Togo had hoped that the situation that has
prevailed in Syria for almost a year would allow the
Security Council to send a strong message to the
leaders and opposition in that country to end the
violence and embark on a process of political
negotiation that is inclusive and transparent. It was for
that reason that Togo voted in favour of the draft
resolution submitted by Morocco, and was a sponsor of
the text. Unfortunately, the Council was not able to
send this message to the Syrian political class, and my
country deplores this state of affairs. Our Council,
which has the primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, has failed once again
to bring peace and security to Syria by speaking with a
single voice.
Despite that failure, the Council should be able to
continue to seek ways and means to bring peace to
Syria. The Syrian people should not continue to suffer,
cry and bury their dead as our Council remains
impassive. The Security Council must act. Togo
continues to believe that it is not too late for it to
resolutely commit itself on the path of the necessary
action that must be taken.

I think that drawing inspiration from history in
this Chamber is an extremely important exercise.
Invoking examples from the cultures and literatures of
peoples and nations is a critical experience. As I say
this, I recall the literary masterpiece by the German
author Johann Wolfgang von Goethe entitled Faust. It
is a work that speaks in symbolic terms of the risks
inherent in a person’s — even a very wise one —
selling his soul to Satan. That symbolic story
summarizes the idea with which I would like to begin
my statement, which is that a human being should not
sell his or her soul to Satan in exchange for illusory
gains that could destroy that person’s hopes for
freedom further down the road.
My delegation has examined the text of the draft
resolution put before the Council. Given our firm belief
in the pan-Arab principle, we had hoped that the
examination of the question of Syria would have
remained, first, exclusively within the Syrian
household, and then in the larger supporting Arab
household structure.
However, the rush by some parties to invite
international intervention — and we know in advance
what their objectives are in dealing with Arab issues,
which are first and foremost the question of Palestine
and the Israeli occupation of Arab territories — is a
cause for concern. It is indeed a cause for sadness,
deep sadness for the regrettable state of affairs in
which we now find ourselves.
At this point, I would like to quote in English a
sentence spoken some 22 years ago by former United
States Attorney General Ramsey Clark:
(spoke in English)

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

“The United Nations, which was created to prevent the
scourge of war, has become an instrument of war.”

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

(spoke in Arabic)

Mr. Ja´afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I congratulate your friendly country, Togo,
and you yourself, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
wish you all success in that sensitive stewardship. I
would also like to congratulate my colleague
Ambassador Sangqu of South Africa on presiding over
the Council for the past month.

12

My delegation has followed with great
appreciation the efforts by the advocates in the Council
for human rights and the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter, especially the inadmissibility
of intervention in the internal affairs of countries, of
waging wars against countries to gain exclusive control
of their geographic location and their lucrative natural
resources, and of resolving the economic problems of
the Western Powers at the expense of the peoples of
developing nations. To those States that safeguard
international peace and security, we express our deep

12-22356

S/PV.6711

gratitude and appreciation, and the annals of history
will record the noble positions they take.
Is it not strange that over a period of 45 years —
from its creation in 1945 to 1988 — the Security
Council adopted only 690 resolutions, whereas in the
following 20 years it adopted three times that number?
That indicates that the current world is less secure, less
just and less fair and that the provisions of the United
Nations Charter are seriously threatened.
In this context, I would like to stress that the
Syrian Arab Republic, a founding member of this
world Organization, has been targeted by some Powers
for punishment because of its commitment to
international legal norms, especially on the issue of
defending the human rights of peoples. Today, Syria is
being sacrificed in a crisis manufactured by parties that
do not want the best for Syria and its people. That is
evident from their support — in funding, arms and
favourable media coverage — for armed terrorist
groups that kill, abduct and intimidate Syrian citizens
and destroy and sabotage infrastructure, including
power generation equipment, oil and gas pipelines,
Ministry of Justice buildings and railroads.
Is there a sensible person who would believe that
any government would commit massacres in any city
on a day when the Security Council is scheduled to
hold a meeting to examine the situation in that
country? Would any entity put itself in such a position?
The most convincing proof of the criminal nature
of those armed groups lies in the acts committed this
very morning, which killed innocent people and
destroyed homes as well as the buildings housing
Syrian embassies in many capitals, all of that without
any condemnation by the Secretary-General or the
Council. The goal is to send a misleading message
aimed at influencing the Council by swaying its
decision-makers with respect to the draft resolution.
The best proof of our good intentions in our
dealings with the League of Arab States is reflected in
the contents of the report of the observers of the
League of Arab States (see S/2012/71, annex, enclosure
4). What is very strange is that Council members did
not examine that report in due time, for reasons known
to all of them. The report confirms that Syria has
fulfilled its obligations under the protocol.
Here, and for the fourth time at least, let me
stress that if the killing had ceased, if those who pay

12-22356

lip service to democracy had ceased to implement their
designs against Syria, if those States that provide
generous funds — billions of dollars — and the most
modern weapons and means of communication to the
armed groups, hosting them in their capitals in order to
facilitate their criminal acts against the Syrian people
and their property, if they had ceased to do so, Syria
would have fulfilled the League of Arab States plan of
action and the relevant protocol under that plan.
Certain Arab Gulf States have dragged the
League of Arab States to the Security Council, with a
view to leveraging the Council’s power against Syria
and to internationalizing a purely Arab issue, contrary
to the provisions of the Charter of the League of Arab
States. That is in spite of the fact that since the
beginning of the crisis, all of the Arab politicians in the
League of Arab States have been competing among
themselves to stress that they are not seeking the
internationalization of the crisis in Syria.
The report of the observer mission that I
mentioned earlier stresses that Syria has fulfilled its
obligations despite the acts of violence. Let me quote
here from the report:
“The mission noted that the Government
strived to help it succeed in its task and remove
any barriers that might stand in its way. The
Government also facilitated meetings with all
parties. No restrictions were placed on the
movement of the mission and its ability to
interview Syrian citizens, both those who
opposed the Government and those loyal to it.”
(S/2012/71, annex, enclosure 4, para. 73)
About two and a half months ago, the Qatari
Al-Jazeera satellite channel broadcast from Doha a
political programme hosted by a well-known journalist.
The two guests on that programme were the current
President of Tunisia — who was not the President at
that time — and a Syrian political activist. During that
programme, its host said, addressing the current
Tunisian President, “Do not ask me about my sources,
but I have received information from the highest levels
in Doha to the effect that the Syrian regime will change
on 22 January” — that is, the very day on which the
League of Arab States met in Cairo and took the
decision to come before the Security Council.
It is indeed strange that the calls for reform,
respect for human rights and the right to peaceful
demonstration apply to Syria only, not to any other

13

S/PV.6711

State in the region, especially those that sponsored the
draft resolution submitted against Syria. Some of the
Arab States that sponsored the draft are the very same
ones that prevented the Arab League from endorsing
the integrated initiative submitted by Syria to the
League of Arab States on bolstering the process of
democracy, reform and human rights in all Arab States.
That initiative included a demand for the issuing of a
decision by the Council of the Arab League that would
put forward a comprehensive Arab vision aimed at
promoting democracy and reform in all Arab countries
and fulfilling the aspirations of the masses in the areas
of freedom; human rights; a multiparty system;
freedom of information; fair and transparent elections;
freedom of expression; the right of assembly and
peaceful demonstration; and respect for the rights of
minorities, alien residents and expatriate workers on
their territory.
Is it rational that among the sponsors of the draft
are States that prevent women from attending a soccer
match? And those States are calling on Syria to be
democratic?
Peaceful demonstration is a basic right
guaranteed under Syrian law. The right to demand
reform is the right of every Syrian citizen, and no one
can deny that. But what no law can prevent and no
State can accept is terrorism, chaos and the sabotaging
of public and private property — the destabilization of
a country. Every peaceful demonstrator, every person
who calls for genuine reform aimed at safeguarding the
Syrian homeland from major schemes and all those
who seek dialogue as a way to resolve the crisis are not
only welcome partners but key components of any
effort to end the crisis in Syria as well as an integral
part of reform and development in Syria.
The draft resolution which the Council failed to
adopt today emphasizes the importance of the dialogue
that has been mentioned here. We are in favour of such
a dialogue and wish to see it continue and succeed. But
those who wish to be parties to such a dialogue have
refused to engage in dialogue openly, and the Security
Council and the League of Arab States are fully aware
of that. Also aware of that fact are those countries that
have sought, and continue to seek, to host such a
dialogue. This comes at a time when my country has
agreed, in the Council, to undertake immediately a
national, comprehensive dialogue that is inclusive of
all parties, but under the auspices of the homeland.
However, the other side, which has stonewalled the

14

undertaking of such a dialogue as a result of
encouragement by some who wish to adopt dominating
positions, has rejected dialogue and continues, even as
we speak, to reject it.
It is our hope that the parties still supporting the
opposition and armed groups — and those parties
spoke about themselves, as some of my colleagues
indicated in their statements — will sincerely advise
their friends to foster a national dialogue, abandon all
intentions to destroy Syria and to abandon all attempts
to authorize outside military intervention. Indeed, they
must join the ranks that will build Syria as it
endeavours to renew itself.
Syria will enjoy security and stability as it always
has. Syria will continue to be the homeland of
tolerance and openness. Syria will remain the
homeland of all Syrians, irrespective of their
affiliations and political positions. There will be no
majority and no minority. All of that will be developed
on the ground in an initiative involving national
ownership by the Syrian themselves and without
external intervention. Syrians do not need to wait for
lessons on democracy and human rights from Powers
that deal with those lofty humanitarian concepts as if
they were commodities to be traded speculatively on a
stock exchange.
My colleague, the representative of the United
States of America, said that she was disgusted at the
use of the right of veto by two permanent members of
the Security Council. I am not evaluating what she
said. I respect her point of view. Nonetheless, I would
like to ask her if her disgust also applies to the 60
vetoes that have been cast in this Chamber to prevent
the establishment of a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the region, the fair resolution of the ArabIsraeli conflict and the settlement of the question of
Palestine.
The statements made by some colleagues betray
the true and genuinely hostile intentions of their
countries towards the country, people and Government
of Syria. All along, the tone of their statements has
been undiplomatic, and their description of the Syrian
Government as a regime is inconsistent with the
principles of international law. They used inappropriate
language to refer to the President of the State of Syria.
It is only natural for us to say that the use of those
words in this Chamber by some colleagues betrays
their direct involvement in attempts to fan the flames

12-22356

S/PV.6711

of violence, escalation and bloodshed in Syria and
among Syrians. We do not accept any of that.
I do not wish to speak at length, but I would like
to conclude my remarks by raising an important matter.
Today, a journalist working for Al-Jazeera’s English
channel in London said on record that the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Qatar had instructed the channel to
increase and intensify its coverage just hours before the
convening of this meeting. I leave it to Council
members to draw their own conclusions from the

12-22356

political instructions given to that self-proclaimed
news channel to falsely step up the pressure on the
Security Council by claiming that massacres are being
carried out in Syria.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

15
