Re10ladom adopted on the reporta of tile Foarth Committee

SS

should be read with the earlier reports approved in 1952
and 1955;

istration of Non-Self-Governing Territories to abolish
discriminatory laws and practices in those Territories,

2. Invites the Secretary-General to transmit the 1958
report to the Members of the United Nations responsible for the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories to the Economic and Social Council, to the
Trusteeship Council and to the specialized agencies concerned, for their consideration.

Noting the need for providing more adequate information on human rights,

789th plenary meeting,
12 December 1958.

1327 (XIII). International collaboration in respect of Non-Self-Governing and Trust Territories in Africa
The General Assembly,
Having regard to the objectives set forth in Chapter
XI, and particularly Article 73 d, and in Chapter XII
of the Charter of the United Nations,
Having regard to its resolution 331 (IV) of 2 December 1949 on international collaboration in connexion
with economic, social and educational conditions in NonSelf-Governing Territories,
Considering that the terms of reference contained in
Economic and Social Council resolution 671 A (XXV)
of 29 April 1958 establishing an Economic Commission
for Africa take fully into account measures to be taken
towards the economic advancement of Non-Self-Governing and Trust Territories in Africa, including its social
aspects, these measures lying within the scope of tJie
Commission's activities,
Considering that many Territories on which information is transmitted by the Administering Members concerned under Article 73 e of the Charter and a majority
of Trust Territories are in Africa, and that the terms
of reference of the Economic Commission for Africa
provide for such Territories to become associate members of the Commission,
1. Welcomes the establishment of the Economic Commission for Africa as an important step towards the
further raising of the levels of living in N on-Self-Governing and Trust Territories in Africa ;

2. Expresses the hope that all African Territories
will apply for associate membership in the Economic
Commission for Africa through 'the Member States
responsible for their administration ;

Noting further that the progress made in certain
Territories towards the removal of practices and the
abolition of laws based on racial grounds has been
limited,
Having regard to the fundamental importance of race
relations, particularly under modern conditions, for the
attainment of the objectives of Chapter XI of the Charter
of the United Nations,
Recognizing the necessity of intensifying the promotion and encouragement of respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all, regardless of race,
sex, language or religion,

1. Reaffenns its resolution 644 (VII), and draws the
particular attention of the Administering Members to
the recommendation contained in paragraph 2 thereof
concerning the examination of existing discriminatory
law~, statutes and ordinances, and their application, with
a. 'Y!ew to the ab?lition of any such discriminatory prov1s1ons and practices ;
2. Urges all Members responsible for the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories to pay special
and constant attention in the future to the implementation of the terms of its resolution 644 (VII) ;
3. Invites the Administering Members to include in
the annual reports submitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter of the United Nations information on the measures taken by them for the implementation of the present
resolution.
789th plenary meeting,
12 December 1958.

1329 (XIB). Economic development of
Non-Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Having regard to the objectives of Chapter XI and
particularly Article 73 a of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling its resolution 1152 (XII) of 26 November

1957,

3. Requests the Member States concerned to encourage and expedite such applications for associate
membership;

Bearing in mind the terms of Economic and Social
Council resolution 671 (XXV) of 29 April 1958, which
established the Economic Com.•1ission for Africa,

4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to the Economic and Social Council
and to the Economic Commission for Africa at their
forthcoming session.
789th plenary meeting,
12 December 1958.

Considering that the assocfation of some Non-SelfGoverning Territories with the European Economic
Community is likely to affect their economic development and their attainment of the objectives set forth
in Article 73 b of the Charter,
Invites the Administering Members to examine the
advisability of adopting in the Non-Self-Governing Territories an investment policy which will ensure balanced
economic development and the progressive increase of
the per capuJ income of the inhabitants of those Territories.
789th plenary meeting,
12 December 1958.

1328 (XIII). Racial discrimination in
Non-Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 644 (VII) of 10 December
1952 inviting the Members responsible for the admin-
