S/2012/344

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 May 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 18 May 2012 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council have
agreed to send a mission to Liberia, Côte d’Ivoire and the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and Sierra Leone from 18 to 24 May 2012. The
Liberia segment of the mission will be co-led by Ambassador Susan Rice of the
United States of America and Ambassador Mohammed Loulichki of Morocco. The
Côte d’Ivoire and ECOWAS segment of the mission will be co-led by Ambassador
Gérard Araud of France and Ambassador Kodjo Menan of Togo. The Sierra Leone
segment of the mission will be co-led by Ambassador Mark Lyall Grant of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Ambassador Baso
Sangqu of South Africa. The members of the Council have agreed to the attached
terms of reference for the mission (see annex).
The composition of the mission is as follows:
Ambassador Agshin Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan)
Counsellor Lin Tian (China)
Ambassador Néstor Osorio (Colombia)
Ambassador Gérard Araud (France)
Ambassador Peter Wittig (Germany)
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal (Guatemala)
Ambassador Hardeep Singh Puri (India)
Ambassador Mohammed Loulichki (Morocco)
Ambassador Raza Bashir Tarar (Pakistan)
Ambassador João Cabral (Portugal)
Ambassador Nikita Zhukov (Russian Federation)
Ambassador Baso Sangqu (South Africa)
Ambassador Kodjo Menan (Togo)
Ambassador Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom)
Ambassador Susan Rice (United States)
I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex
circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Agshin Mehdiyev
President of the Security Council

12-34762 (E) 240512

*1234762*

S/2012/344

Annex
Terms of reference for the Security Council mission to West Africa,
from 18 to 24 May 2012
Mission to Liberia
Co-led by Ambassador Susan Rice (United States of America) and Ambassador
Mohammed Loulichki (Morocco)
1.
To reaffirm the continued support of the Security Council for the Government
and people of Liberia as they rebuild their country and strengthen the foundations of
sustainable peace, constitutional democracy and economic development.
2.
To express support for the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) and its
efforts to promote peace and security in Liberia.
3.
To review progress in the implementation of the mandate of UNMIL and
assess the appropriate timing and modalities for the Mission’s drawdown in the light
of the report of the Secretary-General dated 16 April 2012 (S/2012/230).
4.
To assess the institutional operational capacity, growth potential and
sustainability of the Liberian National Police and other national security institutions
throughout the country, and assess progress made in determining the appropriate
role for the Armed Forces of Liberia.
5.
To encourage the Government of Liberia to enhance its preparation of national
security institutions to assume greater responsibility, particularly beyond Monrovia,
and to develop the justice and corrections sectors, taking into account a phased
reconfiguration of the UNMIL troop presence.
6.
To welcome and encourage further efforts of the Government of Liberia to
promote national reconciliation, combat corruption and promote efficiency and good
governance to consolidate peace.
7.
To encourage the Government of Liberia to address political divisions and to
ensure an inclusive and representative Government.
8.
To assess security challenges and capability gaps along the Ivorian border, to
assess and encourage the use of inter-mission cooperation between the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) and UNMIL, to underline the need for
continued attention to illicit weapons flows in the region and to explore methods to
strengthen regional cooperation.
9.
To emphasize the importance of promoting and protecting the rights of
civilians, in particular women and children, and assess progress in combating sexual
and gender-based violence.
10. To underline the support of the Security Council for civil society, including
women’s groups.
11. To welcome and assess the performance of the Peacebuilding Commission’s
contribution to security sector reform, rule of law and national reconciliation.
12. To encourage the Government of Liberia to develop the skills and job prospects
of unskilled, unemployed, war-affected youths who lack livelihood opportunities.

2

12-34762

S/2012/344

13. To underscore the need for full implementation of the Security Council
sanctions regime on Liberia as long as the sanctions are in place.

Mission to Côte d’Ivoire and the Economic Community of West
African States
Co-led by Ambassador Gérard Araud (France) and Ambassador Kodjo Menan (Togo)
1.
To welcome the progress towards restoring stability and peace since the end of
the post-electoral crisis and reaffirm the continued support of the Security Council.
2.
To assess the progress made by the Government of Côte d’Ivoire with the
assistance of UNOCI in stabilizing the security situation in Abidjan and the rest of
the country.
3.
To assess the progress made in security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reinsertion, to encourage the Government of Côte d’Ivoire,
including through its recently created working group on security sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization and reinsertion, to develop and implement a
comprehensive national plan and to encourage the assistance of UNOCI and the
United Nations country team in this regard.
4.
To assess the security and humanitarian situation at the border areas, especially
the border with Liberia, and to assess and encourage the use of the inter-mission
cooperation between UNOCI and UNMIL.
5.
To engage with UNOCI on its future, based on the recommendations contained
in the special report of the Secretary-General on UNOCI dated 29 March 2012
(S/2012/186).
6.
To welcome the holding of national parliamentary elections, to encourage the
Government to continue reaching out to the opposition and to encourage the
opposition to engage constructively in political life.
7.
To call on the Government of Côte d’Ivoire and all Ivorian actors to join their
efforts to promote reconciliation at the national and local levels, to ensure inclusive
governance, to fight impunity and ensure impartial justice and to review the
progress made towards addressing the underlying causes of the Ivorian crisis.
8.
To encourage the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to
develop, with the support of the United Nations Office for West Africa and other
regional stakeholders such as the Mano River Union, a subregional security strategy
to address the threat of cross-border movements of armed groups and weapons as
well as their impact on population movements with the view to contribute to the
overall stabilization of Côte d’Ivoire in the long run.

Meeting between the Security Council and the Economic
Community of West African States in Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire,
on 21 May
1.
To develop an effective partnership between the Security Council and
ECOWAS on issues of common interest in the region, within the overarching

12-34762

3

S/2012/344

framework of the partnership between the African Union Peace and Security
Council and the Security Council.
2.
To assess the situation in Mali and to discuss further joint steps to continue
supporting regional efforts to restore the constitutional order, to uphold the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Mali, to combat the increased terrorist
threat in the north of Mali and to address its main humanitarian requirements.
3.
To assess the situation in Guinea-Bissau and to discuss further joint steps to
restore constitutional order and to address critical priorities for the stability of the
country, such as security sector reform, including the demobilization of the military
and police, fighting impunity and drug trafficking.
4.
To assess the regional efforts to tackle the transnational threats in West Africa
such as drug trafficking, organized crime and armed robbery at sea, with the
assistance of the United Nations, including the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and in coordination with
other regional entities.

Mission to Sierra Leone
Co-led by Ambassador Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland) and Ambassador Baso Sangqu (South Africa)
1.
To reaffirm the support of the Security Council for continuing efforts by the
national authorities and people of Sierra Leone to consolidate peace.
2.
To assess the progress achieved by the national authorities and people of Sierra
Leone in peacebuilding in a number of areas, including national reconciliation, the
promotion of gender equality and the preparations for national and local elections on
17 November 2012.
3.
To emphasize the importance of the upcoming elections for the consolidation
of peace and security in Sierra Leone.
4.
To reiterate the call upon all political parties by the Security Council to engage
constructively in an honest and open dialogue aimed at furthering national cohesion
and to intensify their efforts to foster an environment that is conducive to the
holding of peaceful, transparent, free and fair elections.
5.
To reiterate the calls upon the leadership of the political parties by the Security
Council to undertake cross-party confidence-building measures, promote political
participation and non-violence among their membership and ensure full adherence to
due process of law and to the recommendations of the joint communiqué of 2 April
2009, which, inter alia, calls for the establishment of an independent police
complaints committee to reinforce the neutrality and professionalism of the police,
and a code of conduct for political parties.
6.
To underscore the importance of the country’s national authorities responding
proportionately to threats to the security of all citizens in Sierra Leone and of
maintaining a commitment to uphold human rights and applicable international law.
7.
To reiterate the call upon the Independent Media Commission by the Security
Council to proactively monitor the media and to ensure compliance with the media
code of conduct, and to reiterate the Council’s call on the national authorities to

4

12-34762

S/2012/344

address the administrative and financial challenges facing the Sierra Leone
Broadcasting Corporation.
8.
To reaffirm Council support for the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone and the United Nations country team’s contribution to the
peacebuilding and development priorities of Sierra Leone, in particular through the
integrated Joint Vision of the United Nations Family for Sierra Leone.
9.
To emphasize the important role of regional organizations such as the African
Union, ECOWAS and the Mano River Union, as well as the country configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, in supporting Sierra Leone to achieve its
peacebuilding, security and long-term development goals.
10. To assess the work of the Transnational Organized Crime Unit and to reiterate
the calls upon the authorities of Sierra Leone by the Security Council to work with
the country’s neighbours and regional partners to intensify their joint efforts to
consolidate regional peace and security, including through tackling the challenges
posed by drug trafficking and organized crime.

12-34762

5
