United Nations

A/52/PV.87

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-second Session

87th plenary meeting
Thursday, 4 June 1998, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Udovenko

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ukraine)

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 120 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (Article 19 of the
Charter) (A/52/785/Add.7)

In connection with this item, the Assembly has
before it a draft resolution recommended by the Economic
and Social Council, which is issued as document
A/52/L.74.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/52/L.74.

The President: In a letter contained in document
A/52/785/Add.7, the Secretary-General informs me that,
since the issuance of his communications dated 4 February,
23 and 31 March, 27 April, 6 and 15 May and 2 June 1998,
Ecuador and Yemen have made the necessary payments to
reduce their arrears below the amount specified in Article
19 of the Charter.

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/52/L.74, entitled “Follow-up to the Fourth
World Conference on Women and full implementation of
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action”.

May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes
note of this information?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/231).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 106?

It was so decided.

Agenda item 106 (continued)

It was so decided.

Implementation of the outcome of the Fourth World
Conference on Women
Draft resolution (A/52/L.74)

Agenda items 21 and 60 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly

The President: Members will recall that at its 86th
plenary meeting on Tuesday, 2 June 1998, the Assembly
decided to consider this item directly in plenary meeting.

98-85394 (E)

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/52/L.74?

Report of the Secretary-General (A/52/856)
Draft decision (A/52/L.76)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned, within one month of the date of the meeting, to the Chief of the Verbatim
Reporting Service, Room C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a
consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Report of the Secretary-General (A/52/855)
Draft resolution (A/52/L.77)
The President: As members will recall, the General
Assembly began consideration of both items at its 86th
plenary meeting on 2 June 1998. In my letters of the same
date transmitting to the Permanent Representatives texts of
the draft decision under agenda item 21 and the draft
resolution under agenda item 60, I stated that, in the
absence of any objection by 12 noon yesterday, 3 June
1998, I would have the revised texts issued as “L”
documents. I should like to inform members that I have
received a reply from only one delegation, which reads as
follows:
“I would like to inform you that my delegation
has carefully studied the revised texts following the
debate in the General Assembly yesterday and is in
complete agreement that you can now proceed
accordingly.”
I hope that all those present will associate themselves
with this letter.
With this concurrence, the Assembly therefore has
before it a draft decision submitted under agenda item 21,
issued as document A/52/L.76, and a draft resolution
submitted under agenda item 60, issued as document
A/52/L.77.
I should like to draw the attention of Member States
to a slight correction in the English version of draft
resolution A/52/L.77.
The first “of” in the second line of the first
preambular paragraph should be replaced by the words
“contained in”. The first preambular paragraph should
therefore read:
“Having considered the aspects concerning the
organization of work of its regular sessions contained
in the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of General Assembly resolution
51/241,”.
In draft decision A/52/L.76, the General Assembly
welcomes the views expressed by the Presidents of the
Assembly at its forty-ninth, fiftieth and fifty-first sessions,
commends the efforts made by the Main Committees in the

2

87th plenary meeting
4 June 1998
streamlining of their agenda and method of work, and
decides to continue the consideration of the revitalization
process of the General Assembly at its fifty-third session.
With regard to draft resolution A/52/L.77, members
will recall that the General Assembly held informal
consultations immediately after the adjournment of the
86th plenary meeting to discuss the text of the draft
resolution on the organization of work of the regular
sessions of the General Assembly. Draft resolution
A/52/L.77 is the result of the consultations.
In the preambular paragraphs of draft resolution
A/52/L.77, the General Assembly recalls resolution
51/241, whereby it adopted the recommendations of the
Open-ended High-level Working Group on the
Strengthening of the United Nations System, and notes
the provisions of resolution 36/67 of 30 November 1981
concerning the opening date of the regular session as well
as the observance of the International Day of Peace. In
the operative part, the General Assembly sets the date of
8 September 1998 for the closing of its fifty-second
session and 9 September for the opening of its fifty-third
session. By this draft resolution, the Assembly would
continue to observe the International Day of Peace on the
opening day of the regular session, and include in the
provisional agenda of its fifty-third session the item
entitled “Strengthening of the United Nations system” for
further consideration.
In view of the urgency of the matter before us and
the desire of the members to dispose of these items
expeditiously, I should like to consult the Assembly with
a view to proceeding immediately to consider the draft
decision under agenda item 21, contained in document
A/52/L.76, and the draft resolution under agenda item 60,
contained in document A/52/L.77. In this connection,
since both documents A/52/L.76 and A/52/L.77 have been
circulated only this morning, it would be necessary to
waive the relevant provision of rule 78 of the rules of
procedure. However, I should like to remind members
that the texts of the draft decision and the draft resolution
have been made available to delegations as annexes to my
letters dated 2 June 1998 to all Permanent
Representatives.
The relevant provision of rule 78 reads as follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be
discussed or put to the vote at any meeting of the
General Assembly unless copies of it have been

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
circulated to all delegations not later than the day
preceding the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objection, I will take it that the
Assembly agrees with this proposal.

87th plenary meeting
4 June 1998
of which was orally corrected by the Chair. May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/52/L.77, as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/52/L.77, as orally corrected, was
adopted (resolution 52/232).

It was so decided.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft decision A/52/L.76, submitted under agenda item 21,
and draft resolution A/52/L.77, submitted under agenda
item 60.

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 21?
It was so decided.

I shall now call on a representative who wishes to
make a statement in explanation of vote. May I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.

The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 60?

I should like also to remind members that when we
started discussing these items, only three statements were
made by representatives, and none of them exceeded 10
minutes.

The President:I would like to remind you that we
close this session on 8 September and open the next
session on 9 September.

Mrs. Castro de Barish (Costa Rica) (interpretation
from Spanish): The delegation of Costa Rica, which
proposed the International Day of Peace — observed each
year on the opening day of the regular session of the
General Assembly — is in full agreement with the
proposed change, which is being made because the session
of the General Assembly is to begin on an earlier date. For
that reason, we support the decision and express our
appreciation for the continued observance of the
International Day of Peace on the opening day of the
session of the General Assembly.

Agenda item 97 (continued)

The President: We have just heard the only speaker
in explanation of vote before the vote.

The President: Members will recall that at the 82nd
plenary meeting, on 31 March 1998, the General
Assembly reopened the consideration of this sub-item and
decided to consider it directly in plenary meeting, so that
the Assembly could take note of the letters from the
Chairman of the Second Committee relating to the timing,
modalities and focus of the two-day high-level dialogue
on the theme of the social and economic impact of
globalization and interdependence and their policy
implications.

The Assembly will first take a decision on the draft
decision under agenda item 21 (A/52/L.76), then on the
draft resolution submitted under agenda item 60
(A/52/L.77).
We turn first to draft decision A/52/L.76 submitted
under agenda item 21. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt the draft decision?
Draft decision A/52/L.76 was adopted.

It was so decided.

Sustainable development and international economic
cooperation
(a) Renewal of the dialogue on strengthening
international economic cooperation for
development through partnership
Letters from the Chairman of the Second
Committee (A/52/832, A/52/919

In this connection, the General Assembly has before
it two letters from the Chairman of the Second Committee
circulated in documents A/52/832 and A/52/919.

The President: We turn now to draft resolution
A/52/L.77 submitted under agenda item 60, the English text

3

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to take note of
documents A/52/832 and A/52/919?
It was so decided.
The President: I should like to recall for the attention
of delegations that, by taking note of these two letters, the
General Assembly has thus decided, inter alia, that the
high-level dialogue on strengthening international economic
cooperation for development through partnership will take

4

87th plenary meeting
4 June 1998
place on 17 and 18 September 1998, as part of its fiftythird session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (a) of
agenda item 97?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 3.35 p.m.
