UNITED

NATIONS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

11 APRIL 1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. , .. . . . , . , . . . , , . . . . . . . . . .. . . , . . . . . . . .

1

of the agenda , , . . . . . , , , . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Zambia against South Africa:
Letter dated 8 April 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13878) . , , . . . . , . , . . , . . . , , , . . , . . , . . . , . . , , . . . . . , . . . I. *. . . . . . . . . .I.

1

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2210)

S/PV.2210

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Recods qf‘ the Security Corlncil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions rrrzd
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

-

2210th MEETING
Neld in New York on Friday, 11 April 1980, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. Porfirio

MUfiOZ

LED0

(Mexico).

ante with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to Participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

The representatives
of the following
Present:
States: Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway,
Philippines, Portugal,
Tunisia,
Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Zambia.
Provisional

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bedjaoui
(Algeria),
Mr Sinclair (Guyana), Mr. Humaidan
(United Arab Emirates) and Mr. Buketi Bukayi (Zaire)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/2210)

1. Adoption of the agenda
3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/13886, which contains the
text of a letter dated 10 April from the representative of South Africa addressed to the President of the
Council.

2. Complaint by Zambia against South Africa:
Letter dated 8 April 1980 from the Permanent
Representative
of Zambia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13878)

4. The first speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia, whom I invite to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

The meeting was called to order at I I. I5 a.m.

Adoption

of the agenda

5. Mr, KOMATINA
(Yugoslavia): The Security
Council is faced once again with a dangerous problem
resulting from the continued policy of aggression of
the South African regime, and from the apparent
inability of the United Nations and the international
community as a whole to put an end to the terrorist
acts perpetrated by that regime-acts
that pose a
threat to the security of the whole African continent.

The agenda was adopted.

Complaint by Zambia against South Africa:
Letter dated 8 April 1980 from the Permanent
Representative of Zambia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13878)
I. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spanish):
In accordance with the decision taken at the
I invite the representatives of
2209th meeting,
Angola, Cuba, Liberia, Mauritius, Nigeria and Yugoslavia to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote.

6. We are intervening in this debate in order to
express our full solidarity with friendly, non-aligned
Zambia, which is again the victim of the South African
soldiery, who are armed to the teeth and do not
shrink from using their Fascist methods against the
unarmed and innocent civilian inhabitants of Zambia
in order to destabilize the situation in that peaceloving country. We are also intervening in order to
contribute to the universal condemnation
of the
anachronistic South African regime whose very
existence is a slur on contemporary civilization.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola), Mr. Roa-Kouri
(Cuba),
Mr. Tubman
(Liberia), Mr, Ramphul (Mauritius),
Mr. Clark (Nigeria) and Mr. Komatina
(Yugoslavia)
took the
Places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber,

7. It is obvious that by such treacherous raids the
South African racists are trying to regain selfconfidence, in the hope that they will thus be able to
forestall their own internal disintegration. The racists
harbour vain hopes that by sabre-rattling they will
be able to put off the day of their final collapse and
succeed in weakening international solidarity with the

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
1 wish to inform the members of the Council that
1 have received letters from the representatives of
Algeria, Guyana, the United Arab Emirates and Zaire
in which they request to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In accord1

and also of international
solidarity,
in which the
United Nations played a notable role. The example of
Zimbabwe has a wider significance because it has
shown that no power on earth can arrest the advance
of a people determined to decide its own destiny.
Even the racist regime, which seeks to find comfort
for the loss of its privileges in senseless and irresponsible behaviour, should be aware of this.

peoples of southern Africa in their struggle against
racism, apartheid and the illegal occupation of Namibia-a solidarity in which Zambia holds a prominent
place.
8. The most recent acts of aggression against Zambia
provide yet another proof that the system now in
power in South Africa constitutes a cancerous tissue
which poses a constant threat to peace and security
in the region and beyond. That system constantly
spurns, as in the past, the decisions and stands taken
by the Security Council, the General Assembly and
the whole international community.

13. We are particularly concerned over the fact that
the aggressive actions in question were launched also
from the Territory of Namibia-a
Territory that South
Africa continues to occupy illegally, in contravention
of the relevant decisions of the United Nations and in
defiance of world public opinion. This fact further
dramatizes the existing situation and calls for the
adoption of urgent measures in the direction of the
liberation of Namibia, implementation
of the plan of the
United Nations and support for the South West
Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) as the sole
authentic representative of the people of that country.

9. Needless to say, such a form of State terrorism,
which is striving to become legal and is relying on the
short-sighted interests of transnational corporations
and their imperialist appetites, engenders further complications in international relations, thus creating a
favourable climate for the expansion of the area of
confrontation
between extra-regional forces in the
region, and this can only have a negative impact at
a broader international level. It is all the more important, therefore, to prevent such developments, in
view of the fact that the international situation in
general is constantly deteriorating, owing to a widespread use of force, military intervention and interference in internal affairs, and bloc rivalries-all
aimed
at disrupting the independent development of peoples
and countries and at drawing them into spheres of
interest.

14. The non-aligned countries, whose support for the
liberation struggle against colonialism and racism was
and has remained one of the basic postulates of their
policy, have persistently expressed their solidarity
with the victims of aggression and have, in the United
Nations and at their various meetings, called for the
adoption of comprehensive and effective measures for
the total elimination of racial discrimination
and aggression in southern Africa. Zambia is deserving of OUI
solidarity. My country will, in accordance with the
principles of our foreign policy and our traditiona
friendship with the people of Zambia, and within the
limits of our possibilities, offer Zambia all necessary
moral, political and material support.

10. Such behaviour on the part of the South African
regime calls for a proper and energetic response from
the United Nations, which is again confronted with an
open challenge. The Security Council must react to
the most recent acts of provocation in accordance
with the Charter-that
is, in a way expected of it by
the international community.

IS. To this end we shall support every action taken
by the Council aimed at restraining the aggressive
racist regime and at preventing a repetition of its
provocative acts against the neighbouring
African
countries and peoples. In doing so, we are contributing not only towards extinguishing a fire but
also towards improving the international situation in
general.

1I. We are faced in this case with a dangerous situation which is of neither a narrow African nor a
regional nature, but of a global character. The Council’s reaction must, in our view, be such as to prevent
the current attacks on sovereignty and integrity, and
the present provocation, and to remove the danger of
aggression once and for all. All the greater, therefore,
is the responsibility of the Council and the United
Nations as a whole to put a stop to the constant
rampaging of racists who, by provoking new tensions,
endeavour to ensure their own survival, and to safeguard the security of non-aligned and peace-loving
Zambia, which is a perennial victim of aggression
because it pursues policies that are in harmony with
the provisions of the Charter.

16. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (interpretation
from
Mr. President, first of all, on behalf of the
Chinese delegation, I should like to express our warm
congratulations to you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the current month and
I should also like to extend our warm welcome to
Mr. Reuben C. Kamanga, member of the Central
Committee of the United Independence
Party of
Zambia and Chairman of the Political
and Legal
Committee of the Central Committee, who has come
specially to attend these deliberations,

Chinese):

12. The responsibility of all of us is therefore most
directly involved, as these acts of aggression are being
committed at a time when another country in the
region-Zimbabwe-is
on the point of enjoying its
first days in the freedom and independence it won as
a result of tremendous sacrifices made by its people

17. Since early this year, the troops of the South
African racist authorities have repeatedly been guilty
of military harassment and invasion of Zambia from
the Territory of Namibia they are illegally occupying,
2

.na
iny
for1
bon.
that
also
juth
tion
d in
ther
the
the
‘the
i’est
SOIt2

try,
the
was
heir
rity
ited
the
; for
ag
our
the
Inal
the
;ary
ken
sive
’ its
can
:0lP

but
n in
rorn

the
arm
the
and
: to
ltral
of

and their military aircraft have frequently intruded into
Zamhian airspace, thus grossly violating the sovereignty of Zambia and inflicting heavy losses of lives
and property on the Zambian people. The Chinese
delegation therefore expresses its utmost indignation
at these criminal acts of aggression committed by the
South African racist authorities and strongly condemns them. There exists a traditional friendship
between China and Zambia, and the respected
president Kenneth Kaunda of the Republic of Zambia
is now paying a friendly visit to China. On this occasion, we wish to extend our deep sympathy and
solicitude to the Zambian Government and people
which have been subjected to aggression.

for national independence and liberation of the opPressed Peoples. We are deeply convinced that, with
the support of Zambia and other front-line States and
that of other African States and ali justice-loving countries and Peoples of the world, the African people in
southern Africa, who have accumulated rich experience in their struggle, will strengthen their unity,
Persist in their struggle, do away with the intervention
and sabotage of hegemonist forces from outside and
win the final victory in their just struggle.
20. The Chinese Government and people firmly
support the Zambian Government and people in their
just struggle to safeguard their national independence,
State sovereignty and territoriai integrity; they support
their just position of assisting in the struggle of the
Peoples in southern Africa and they support all the
necessary measures the Zambian Government and
people have taken to counter the aggression by the
South African racist authorities. In the view of the
Chinese delegation, the Council should strongly
condemn the acts of aggression by the South African
racist r&gime and demand that it immediately
and
unconditionally cease its aggression against Zambia
and that it withdraw forthwith all its aggressor troops
from the territory of Zambia. The Council should
also demand that the South African authorities implement immediately and unconditionally the resolutions and the plan of the United Nations on the solution of the Namibian question so as to put an end to
their illegal occupation and colonial rule in Namibia.

18. The ever-escalating
armed aggression by the
South African racist authorities against Zambia is not a
coincidence. It has occurred under circumstances in
which southern Africa is witnessing tremendous
change. As is known to all, late last February an election for independence was held in Zimbabwe and the
Zimbabwe African National Union led by Mr, Robert
Mugabe and other patriotic forces won a brilliant
victory. This is the result of the Zimbabwean
people’s perseverance in a prolonged and valiant
struggle and the result of the full support and assistancegiven by the many African countries and peoples,
the front-line countries in particular. It is also a result
ofthe smooth implementation
of the agreement reached
at the London Conference convened by the United
Kingdom. The Zimbabwean people are now looking
forward to the forthcoming independence celebrations
with pride and joy. The peoples of various countries also heartily rejoice at the victory of the Zimbabwean people. The independence won by the Zimbabwean people has given encouragement to the
Namibian and Azanian peoples who are waging
arduous struggles and is serving as a powerful impetus to their struggles for national independence and
liberation. It has also dealt a heavy blow to the South
African racist forces, forcing them into even greater
isolation. Nevertheless, the South African authorities
have never been reconciled to their defeat, and
instead of accepting it they are putting up a desperate
struggle. In Namibia, they are continuing brutally to
suppress the nationalist
forces, to step up their
schemes for an “internal settlement” and stubbornly
to obstruct the implementation
of the relevant
resolutions and the plan of the United Nations. At the
same time, they have been committing military incursions into Zambia and other front-line countries, in
an attempt to coerce them into abandoning their
assistance to Namibian nationalist forces. All these
hostile acts of the South African authorities are aimed
at maintaining their illegal occupation and colonial
rule in Namibia,

22. your country, Mexico, has always been a strong
supporter of the United Nations and its principles.
This is amply demonstrated by the important initiatives that Mexico has taken towards the strengthening
of international co-operation to promote peace and
development. It is a source of great SatiSfaCtiOn
to
Jamaica that warm relations of friendship and COoperation continue to grow between our two countries
in a spirit of partnership and for the promotion of the
common interests of the peoples of our region.

19. However, the sinister designs of the South
African racist authorities are doomed to failure. The
:ontinued victories won by the African people in their
struggle to achieve and safeguard national indepenhce have proved that no one can check the struggle

23. Since this is’the first time that I have spoken
in the Council this month, I also wish to thank YOU,
Mr, President, and the other representatives who have
spoken for their kind words concerning the conduct
of the presidency during the month of March.

21. Mr. MILLS (Jamaica): Mr. President, it gives
me particular pleasure to extend to you, as a fellow
member of the Latin American group, my delegation’s
warmest congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. You assume
this responsibility at a time when the Council is seized
of issues of paramount importance in world affairs
which require firm and decisive action. We are certain
that your wide experience as a statesman in the service
of your country, your profound understanding of
international affairs and your outstanding skills in
diplomacy will guarantee effective leadership of the
Council during the month of April.

3

24. Once again, the Council has before it one of the
troubling aspects of the situation in southern Africa,
and here I wish, on behalf of my delegation, to
welcome Mr. Reuben Kamanga, Chairman of the
Political and Legal Committee of the Central Committee of the United National Independence Party of
the Republic of Zambia. My delegation listened with
great attention and concern to the account given
yesterday [2209th meeting] by Mr. Kamanga of the
persistent and intensified acts of aggression committed by South Africa against his country. These
have extended over a period of months and have been
intensified in recent weeks in the Western Province
of Zambia. These outrageous acts have resulted in
grievous loss of life among the civilian population,
as well as damage to property and infrastructure in
that country. Zambia, which has suffered so much in
the past from the hostility of white racist regimes,
is once more the victim of armed aggression and the
forces of the racist South African regime have
remained in Zambian territory up to this date.

Africa that we demand the immediate
cessation of
acts of aggression and the complete withdrawal of its
troops from Zambian territory. South Africa should
be left in no doubt that non-compliance
will lead to
the imposition
of effective enforcement
measures
under Chapter VII of the Charter.
28. The Council cannot afford simply to condemn
and make empty threats that undermine its authority.
These acts of aggression have to be stopped. This
objective will not be achieved if some members of the
Council continue to prevent this body from acting
effectively and decisively against the racist regime.
We join together in a determined effort to bring to
an end all the suffering and bloodshed that white
racism has inflicted on southern Africa. We owe this
duty both to the people of Zambia and to Africa.
29. The PRESIDENT
(interpretatiorz from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative
of Zaire.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

25. Jamaica strongly condemns the racist regime of
South Africa for these latest acts, a series of wanton
and unprovoked
acts of aggression, which taken
together constitute a flagrant violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Zambia. They are a
most serious violation of the principles of the Charter
and the norms of international
behaviour. The facts
presented to us once more demonstrate the pernicious
nature of the apartheid regime and its arrogant
contempt for international law and the principles of the
Charter. They confirm that the white minority regime
is a dangerous menace to the security of African
States and poses a serious threat to international
peace and security. The tactics of intimidation through
violence and terror used against the front-line African
States indicate the determination of the racist regime
to undermine the efforts of the United Nations towards
achieving self-determination
and independence for the
people of Namibia. The front-line States and SWAP0
have co-operated fully in this effort, but South Africa
continues to use every strategy it can to cause delay
and to create tensions in the region.

30. Mr. BUKETI
BUKAYI
(Zaire) (interpretation
from French): Mr. President, I should like, first, to
thank you on behalf of the delegation of Zaire for
having given me this opportunity to address the Council on a matter affecting both human dignity and the
maintenance
of international
peace and security.
Before entering into the substance of the matter,
I should like to tell you how happy my delegation is
at seeing an experienced diplomat and a representative of Mexico, a country with which my own enjoys
excellent relations, presiding over the Council in
April. The Zairian delegation is convinced that you will
conduct the proceedings of the Council to a successful conclusion.
31. I should also like to congratulate the representative of Jamaica for the efficient way in which he
conducted the proceedings of the Council last month,
32. The Zairian delegation endorses the statements
made yesterday in the Council [ibid.] condemning the
dangerous actions constantly
being taken by the
Pretoria regime.

26, The responsibility of the Council is clear: it is to
ensure the maintenance of international
peace and
security and to impose its authority, using its powers
under the Charter. Zambia, a peace-loving country,
has shown patience and restraint in the face of naked
aggression. It has appealed to the Council for action,
with the faith and trust that the international community will act in accordance with its principles to
terminate the invasion of Zambia’s territory. There is
every reason for the Council to act with firmness
and unanimity, on the basis of the facts presented,

33. If my delegation is speaking, even though highly
qualified persons have spoken on behalf of all Africa,
it is to stress once again that it is important for
Zaire, situated as it is in the vicinity of the frontline countries, to see Zambia and Angola living in
peace and security; and the security of those countries is affected by the independence
of Zimbabwe
and Namibia.
34. Once again the racist and backward South
African regime is in the dock. It will be recalled that
in November 1979 the Republic of Zambia addressed
the Council to complain of the escalation and intensification of the acts of aggression committed by the
former illegal regime of Rhodesia in collusion with

27. Jamaica fully supports the proposals made
yesterday in the statement of the representative of
Zambia. They represent the absolute minimum the
Council can do in the present grave situation, The
clear and unambiguous message must be sent to South
4

the South
African racists, At the same time, the
People’s Republic of Angola had also been the victim of
repeated
acts of aggression committed by those very
People,
who, ever since the creation of the United
Nations,
have constantly defied the world Organization.
The representative of Zambia was explicit
enough
yesterday for it to be unnecessary for my
delegation
to repeat the facts behind this meeting of
the Council.

39.

In the course of the debate on the problem of
at the thirty-fourth session of the General
Assembly,
the representative
of Zaire raised the
following questions:

aparthid

“Why are there countries that continue assisting
a country which practises a policy that has been
affirmed to be a crime against humanity? Is it
solely for economic and commercial reasons? Is it
because South Africa-in which there prevails an
insecurity inherent in its political system-is a more
interesting
and important market than that constituted by the rest OF the independent African
States, which represent approximately 280 million
persons and a whole range of resources and raw
materials in demand throughout the world? Is it
because protection
and surveillance of the route to
the Indies is of more concern than all the other
interests of Europe in the rest of free Africa?

35. For some time now, some people have been
wondering
why South Africa, in spite of the many
measures adopted by the United Nations, continues to
defy the international
community.
The uportheid
rhime
that is in such disgrace, instead of learning the
lesson of the irreversibility
of history, is strengthening
itself to the point where there is no longer the shadow
of a doubt of its nuclear capability. This dangerously
increases
tension in southern Africa and constitutes
a serious
threat to the peace and security of the
African
continent, in particular, and the world, in
general.

“No. We have the impression that apcrr/heid is
a policy in the service of a policy whose name one
does not wish to utter. Indeed, we have the impression that, between Pretoria and its principal partners . . . there is an identity of views and a convergence of interests concerning the purpose sought
but a divergence
on the means used by Pretoria,
namely ffpartlzeid.“’

36. Are we not ourselves encouraging South Africa
in its stubbornness
by failing to respect the numerous
resolutions
we have adopted with sd much clamour?
HOW many times have we listened to moving statements condemning
the racist rCgime of Pretoria, while
at the same time the countries concerned have been
acting as its accomplices through transnational
and
other private
companies and giving it support and
reinforcement?
We will one day have to decide
before it is too late to abandon this two-faced policy.

40. Indeed, how else could we expIain the arrogance
with which Pretoria defies the decisions of the United
Nations if there were not a much deeper underlying
reason that we have not perceived and which justifies
the incorrigible
stubbornness of the South African
leaders? Let it suffice to refer to the way in which
South Africa has sabotaged the plan of the five
Western Powers on Namibia.

37? We
must denounce the much-used and oftinvoked
subterfuge of an argument according to which
the official
Government
effectively does not cooperate
with South Africa but, by virtue of the
principle
of freedom of action, private companies
cannot be brought within the ban, The time to shed
crocodile
tears and to wring one’s hands about the
plight of the poor Africans is gone for ever. All Africa
is awaiting
from the rest of the world sincere and
loyal co-operation
free from all political and economic
restraints.
Ever since the legitimization
of the struggle
of the oppressed peoples by the Declaration on the
Strengthening
of International
Security [General Assembly
t-esolutiorl
2734 (XXV)],
it has become an
imperative
moral duty for all States which love peace
and freedom
to assist and support liberation
movements.

41. For its part, Zaire believes that the interests of
the principal partners of Pretoria do not lie solely in
South Africa but also, and particularly, in the rest of
the continent. Satisfying the liberation aspirations of
the 280 million
Africans is the only way of guaranteeing them Iong and fruitful co-operation in the
enlightened self-interest of all.
42. South Africa must learn the lesson of Zimbabwe’s
independence,
which has tolled the knell for its disgraceful policy. On 4 October 1973 General Mobutu,
President of Zaire, said the following in the General
Assembly:

38. By helping Zimbabwe yesterday and by continuing today to assist the freedom fighters of Namibia,
Zambia
is simply acting in accordance with that
principle
and responding to the historic appeal issued
by Africa.
At this crucial time in the struggle for the
total liberation
of the African continent, Zaire would
like to take this opportunity to pay a tribute to the
p&ple
and Government of Zambia and the other frontline countries
for the indescribable sacrifices they have
made for the sacred cause of Africa.

“Despite the huge organization created to perpetuate the slavery of the black man, the whites of
Europe could not extinguish the flame of freedom
and dignity of black Africa. Thus, about 1960 an
irresistible and irreversible feeling for freedom seized
all the peoples of Africa and led to disarray among
the colonialists
who were not prepared for it. The
black man broke his shackles and said ‘No’ to
exploitation
and to his alienation by the West.
5

‘“A fruit falls only when it is ripe; but before the
storms and the tempests of history the fruit falls,
whether ripe or not.“2

because I wish to spare the Council’s time, thereby
making it possible for us to attempt to put an end to
this intolerable aggression at an early date.

43. Twenty years have elapsed since the wave of
African independence. With the independence
of
Zimbabwe, the storm of history has opened a breach
in the last bastions of colonialism and racism, situated
chiefly in southern Africa. Tomorrow it will be Namibia and, finally, the abolition of apartheid.

We are convinced that the continuation of the
of apurtheid and aggression pursued by the
Government of Pretoria constitutes not only a threat
to peace and security in southern Africa but also a
threat to international peace and security. The Council
must therefore take effective action to put an end to
this flagrant violation of the Charter. We think that it
should adopt the following measures: first, a categorical condemnation
of the racist South African
rkgime for its violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Zambia; second, a
request for the immediate withdrawal of South African
armed forces from the Republic of Zambia; third, a
serious study of the possibility of implementing
the
measures contained in Chapter VII of the Charter
against the racist South African regime with a view to
forcing it to abandon its policies of aprtrthcid and
aggression.

50.

policy

44. In conclusion, Zaire, through my humble voice,
is making a solemn appeal to South Africa’s principal
partners, asking them to undertake to do everything
in their power to ensure that the crisis in southern
Africa is brought to an end by peaceful means; otherwise, their continual support will serve only to increase
the resentment of the African peoples which aspire to
freedom and dignity. It is for them to choose where
their true interests lie.
45. For the time being, South Africa must be strongly
condemned and compelled to leave Zambia’s territory
as soon as possible so as to create a propitious
climate which could lead to a positive approach that
would free Africa for ever from all humiliations.

51. Finally, I wish to renew the appeal that has so
frequently been made for all international
organizations and all countries that love peace and justice
to offer effective assistance to Zambia and the other
front-line countries in order to put an end to the
criminal and racist aggression of South Africa.

46. The PRESIDENT
(interpret&ion jkom Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of the United
Arab Emirates, who wishes to make a statement in
his capacity as Chairman of the Group of Arab States
at the United Nations for the month of April. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

52. The PRESIDENT
(interpretcltim fiotn Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Algeria.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

47. Mr. HUMAIDAN
(United Arab Emirates) (interpretation fronz French): First of all, I should like to
thank you, Mr. President, and the other members of
the Security Council for giving my delegation an opportunity to take part in the discussion of this important question. Since this is the first time that I have
spoken in the Council in this month of April, I should
like to extend to you and to your country, Mexico,
my sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council.

53. Mr. BEDJAOUI
(Algeria) (iutcrpretation
jwn
French): Mr. President, when His Holiness Pope
John Paul II went to your beautiful country in January
of last year, to the applause of your Government
and of throngs of Mexicans, he spoke to all those who
throughout the world continue to flout the individual OI
collective dignity of man.
“It is our era”-he
said-“that
man and anthropocentrism have been talked about most. However,
paradoxically, this is also the era of man’s deepest
anxieties regarding his own identity and his destiny,
the era when human values have been trampled
underfoot as never before.”

48. I should also like to point out that I am speaking
in this debate on behalf of the Group of Arab States,
which I have the great honour of presiding over this
month.

54. Alas, we do not have the slightest hesitation
in placing South Africa in the forefront of the countries stigmatized by His Holiness for that policy of
contempt for man by reason of its domestic policy of
apartheid and its policies of colonization in Namibia
and of destabilization in neighbouring States.

49. It is obvious-and
I think the representatives
have all noted this-that this is not the first time that
Zambia has been a victim of criminal aggression at the
hands of the racist rkgime of South Africa; but this
time South Africa has carried its aggression to the point
of large-scale penetration and even occupation
of
Zambia’s national territory. Yesterday, we heard a
detailed presentation by the head of the Zambian
delegation containing an astounding list ‘of acts of
aggression by South Africa against his country since
the beginning of the year. I shall not go over that list

55. A compatriot of John Paul II, Copernicus, once
had the fantastic power of mind to immobilize the sun
and to make the earth revolve around it, Today, the
racist and aggressive South African Government, in
its madness, wants to do the opposite, to immobilize
6

syu

the earth, make history stand still, stop the irresistible
Course of the liberation of all peoples and attack the
sovereignty of States whose colour is not’to its liking.
South Africa is short-sighted about history, incapable
of looking beyond the present, and even unable to
decipher the meaning of today’s events.
56, Every day we hear the unanimous condemnation
of the bellicose and aggressive policy of South Africa,
whose contempt for the independence of the African
States of the area and of their territorial integrity is
matched only by its obsessive faith in the suicidal
logic of apartheid, which will inevitably lead it to a
historical dead-end. As Mussolini said in his raving
cynicism, “Distrust the deadly trap of consistency”.
well, in its headlong forward course in obedience to
this absurd logic, South Africa, born from the same
fascist matrix, has never allowed itself to be burdened
by scruples. For South Africa, the end justifies the
means and truth depends on circumstances; there is
only its own truth, fed from the poisoned springs
of racism and aggression.
57. That is why, as they take up their consideration
today of the situation arising from the continuation
and intensification of South African aggression against
Zambia, the members of the Councii, like the entire
international community,
will no doubt make the
connection between the stark facts which the Zambian
delegation reported here and the threats that the
leaders-I was about to say the misleaders-of
South
Africa have not ceased to utter publicly against the
front-line countries. These threats are to be found even
in official letters which the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the apartheid regime has recently addressed
to the Secretary-General
and which have been issued
as Council documents.
58. We know from experience that, following the
insane logic of a secure and dominating country and
for the moment assured of relative impunity, South
Africa is pursuing a policy of intransigence which
has the merit of leaving no doubt or illusion as to its
aggressive intent. South Africa has made defiance a
rule of international conduct, the arrogant use of force
a tool for intimidation
and domination, and racism a
philosophical belief and State ideology. With its recent
acts of aggression against the sovereignty of Zambia,
South Africa is today still persisting in its criminal
defiance, thus openly showing its determination to
follow through on all the threats of reprisal which it
iS constantly making to intimidate the front-line COUntries and, by extension, all the countries of the African
continent.
59. The act of aggression against Zambia is therefore
not an isolated matter. It is only one link in a long
chain of acts of war which have been regularly cornmitted by South Africa against the territorial integrity
of the States of the region.
60. Zambia, as the natural logistic hinterland for
African nationalist movements, has long been a choice

’ 0 i. ” - ’

target for white colonialism in southern Africa. Aggression against the neighbouring countries has therefore become a permanent policy of that moribund
regime, which is constantly being shaken by the
struggle being waged by the entire liberation movement
in the African continent and which is continuing in
southern Africa,
61. Today’s struggle in Namibia is supported not
only by all the African peoples but also by the entire
international community. The assistance given to the
national liberation movement in Namibia by the neighbouring countries, and in particular by Zambia, is
therefore not only the expression of a natural solidarity
with another African country involved in a struggle
whose ideals they share, but also a duty which they
discharge as members of the international community
committed to giving their full support to national
liberation movements.
62. One might therefore be tempted to see a link
between the intensification of South African aggression against Zambia and the attitude of Zambia to the
question of Namibia. But South Africa has only itself
to blame. It owes its failure to its continuing illegal
occupation of Namibia. SWAP0 is recognised today
by the General Assembly as the sole and legitimate
representative of the Namibian people; it has become
the only legitimateauthority for the people ofNamibia.
63. The recent victory in Zimbabwe, endorsed by
the massive vote of the people of that country, not in
support of the puppets who were forced upon them
one by one during the colonial period, but in support
of the true patriots, has finally placed South Africa in
a position of political and diplomatic isolation which
it has never known before. This has been accentuated
by the collapse of the Southern Rhodesian colonial
bastion, which had been its only ally in the southern
part of Africa.
64. But it is not likely that the Namibian question,
or even that of Zimbabwe, could have served 01
could now serve as a pret.ext for South Africa to
intensify its acts of aggression against Zambia.
Zambia, like all the other front-line countries, and
even SWAPO, has been ever ready to seek the peaceful solution of the Namibian decolonization problem.
More recently, as stated in the Secretary-General’s
report of 31 March concerning the implementation
of
Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978)
[S/l3862], the United Nations mission, after going to
South Africa, held constructive talks with the Governments of the front-line countries, including Zambia,
and with SWAPO. All those concerned in the talks,
with the exception of South Africa of course, clearly
stated that their primary objective was to secure the
speedy
implementation of resolution 435 (1978), and
they assured the mission of their full co-operation in
this connection. The front-line States also made it quite
clear that, if the South African Government committed
itself firmly to the speedy implementation
of the

in the light of day. And the day will inevitably dawn
when this urgent dream of life cherished by the
enslaved peoples of southern Africa and the threatened
front-line States will become a reality. It is a dream,
is it not, for those children living under racist cruelty
and in the hope of liberation to think of a homeland,
of a nation, of a land, and of peace? No doubt that
is too much for the petty lords of apartheid and professional aggressors. But that is just what history will
inevitably bring about.

resolution, they would deem it possible to resolve the
pending questions
satisfactorily.
They reaffirmed
their position regarding the proposal to establish a
demilitarized
zone as a means of settling unresolved
questions which constitute an obstacle to the implementation
of resolution
435 (1978). The SecretaryGeneral concluded:
“I should like to take this opportunity
to place
on record my deep gratitude and appreciation to the
heads of State and the Governments
of the countries visited by the mission for the co-operation
and facilities extended to it.” [Ibid., pnra. 20.1

69. While looking forward to the adoption of the
realistic measures demanded by the situation as the
outcome of the Council’s deliberations, the Algerian
delegation, which followed with emotion and respect
the statement of the head of the Zambian delegation
to the Council, wishes to reiterate here Algeria’s complete solidarity wit.h the people and the Government
of Zambia and to assure them that it will act in
accordance with its firm commitment
to the liberation
of our continent, in this cruel period which they are
living through.

65. Obviously,
there can be no mistaking the full
responsibility
of South Africa for this entire situation,
which is a constant threat to international
peace and
security. The international
community,
and more
particularly the Council, whose primary responsibility
is the maintenance of international
peace and security,
must no longer tolerate such provocative, arrogant and
aggressive behaviour as that persistently displayed by
the South African regime.

70.

Democratic Republic)
Once again the Council is seized of the question of the acts of aggression
of the racist regime of South Africa against a sovereign African State. Those acts are well known. The
representative of Zambia, a member of the Central
Committee of the United National Independence Party
of the Republic of Zambia and Chairman of the
Political and Legal Committee of the Central Committee, Mr. Kamanga, gave the Council a detailed and
cogent account of those acts yesterday. The sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of
Zambia are being violated deliberately and systematically by the racist regime of South Africa. Aircraft
of the South African racists have repeatedly penetrated
the airspace of Zambia and have bombed peaceful
villages. Mercenaries of the apartheid regime have
invaded defenceless villages, murdered many people
and destroyed roads and bridges. Today, South
African troops are still to be found on the sovereign
territory of Zambia.

66. The Algerian delegation believes that it has a
duty to remind the Council that today’s challenge
to Zambia concerns not only that country, but also
all of Africa and, by extension, the entire third world.
The facts before the Council today, which involve
the loss of innocent human lives and the destruction
of economic centres and large communication
networks which are of vital importance to a land-locked
country with serious economic problems,
are challenges which cannot be met unless the Council fully
understands the gravity of those deliberate acts of
aggression. It is our profound belief that the Council
must put an end to those repeated acts of aggression,
which are orchestrated in order to destabilize a frontline African country and thereby also to undermine
the natural solidarity among the African peoples. To
put an end to those many acts of aggression which
today are being committed against Zambia, the Council must, as Africa and practically the whole international community
have long been demanding,
apply
the binding sanctions provided for in Chapter VII of
the Charter.

Mr.

FLORIN

(intcrprctation

jbn

(German

Russia):

71. The German Democratic Republic most vigorously condemns the barbarous acts of aggression of
South Africa and calls for the immediate withdrawal
of all mercenaries of the racist regime from Zambian
territory.
We are aware of the innumerable losses
sustained by the people of the Republic of Zambia,
led by the United National Independence Party, in their
struggle for the liberation of the African continent
from the last remaining bastions of colonialism and
racism, And once again, aggression and terror are
being used to prevent the Zambian people from coming
to the assistance of the other peoples of Africa in their
struggle for liberation. Today, the Government and
people of Zambia can rest assured of the firm
solidarity and unshakeable support of the Government
and people of the German Democratic Republic.

67. This constant aggressive and arrogant attitude of
the South African racists has unfortunately
been
fostered and encouraged
by those who, notwithstanding the decisions of our Organization
and the
appeals of the international
community,
continue to
supply South Africa with all the types of military,
technological
and nuclear assistance which it needs for
its military
build-up. Recent information
confirming
that South Africa now has! the nuclear weapon only
increases our concern and clearly shows that the South
African regime is undeniably an obvious threat and a
danger to international
peace and security.
68. But we have hope and we shall continue to hope,
for it is in the dark of night that it is glorious to believe
8

”

a
le

:d
n,
tY
4
at
Dill

le
le
m
ct
)n
nnt
in
In
re

cl
nIn
rrle
al
tY
le
nId
:rof
n1ft
:d
id
ve
ile
th
;n
)I+of
‘al
3n
es
a,
:ir
nt
Id
re
ng
:ir
nd
*m
nt

72, There can be no doubt that the policy of aggressicn still pursued by the ruling circles of Pretoria is
continually increasing the danger to peace and security
ia southern Africa. This dangerous development
has already been discussed in the Council in connection with the acts of aggression against the People’s
Republic of Angola and the continued illegal occupation by South Africa of Namibia.
73. Disregarding the Council’s numerous appeals to
the Government of South Africa to desist forthwith
from its acts of aggression and provocation, Pretoria,
in flagrant violation of international law, is continuing
its acts of aggression to this very day. Moreover,
those acts of aggression have also been extended to
other African States.
74, With the electoral victory of the patriots in Zimbabwe, it has become impossible for the South African
racists to use their stooges in Salisbury as accomplices. They have therefore embarked on the course
of a further strengthening of their military presence
in Namibia. At the present time there are 70,000 South
African mercenaries in that Territory. The task of that
army is to do just one thing: ruthlessly and pitilessly
to continue its campaign to suppress the struggling
people of Namibia and its national liberation movement, SWAPO, and by constant acts of aggression to
intimidate neighbouring
African States, particularly
Zambia and Angola. The South Africans are doing
everything possible to retain Namibia, to keep it in
the fetters of colonial oppression by means of the
apartheid regime and with the assistance of imperialist
monopolies.
75. What credence can be given to the assurances of
the South African Government that it is interested in
a peaceful settlement, in view of its arrogant defiance
of world public opinion?
76. The front-line
States and SWAPO, the sole
legitimate representative of the Namibian people, have
once again shown, by their constructive policy and
their readiness to compromise that they are ready to
do everything possible to bring about a genuine SOlUtion to the Namibian problem.
77. But why have the resolutions of the Council,
which have shown us the way to independence for
Namibia, not been implemented?
The brunt of the
responsibility must of course be borne by the ruling
circles of Pretoria. We have heard statements in connection with the situation in southern Africa in which
a supposed rivalry between blocs has been alleged.
Of course what has been happening in southern Africa
cannot be explained that way. Everyone knows who is
the aggressor there. Nor can a solution to the conflict
there be promoted by our remaining silent about the
responsibility of not only the ruling circles in Pretoria
hut also certain imperialist circles. It is a pleasure to
he able to point out that this responsibility is becoming
ever more widely acknowledged.

(!”

1

78. How can it be that for more than 10 years the
Pretoria regime has been able to disregard United
Nations decisions and to continue its aggression and
terrorist policies with impunity, even though it has
been strongly condemned by an overwhelming
majority of Member States? The answer to that question is to be found in the statement of the representative of Zambia, when he said that
“The Western Five, the countries that initiated
the Proposal for a settlement, have not demonstrated
any willingness to pressure South Africa in a meaningful way to co-operate in the implementation
of
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council for
Namibia’s independence. It is also in the nature of
the Western Five to be ambivalent in their reaction
to South Africa’s acts of aggression against independent African States.” [22&&h meefirza, para. 22. I
79. The delegation of the German Democratic
Republic concurs in that assessment. Indeed, South
Africa is able to disregard and scorn the vital interests
of whole peoples only because it can rely on the
economic, political, military and also nuclear cooperation of the forces of imperialism at all levels.
It is those same circles which are doing everything in
their power to prevent the Council from taking a decision to adopt effective measures. As recent events
have once again confirmed, imperialist circles in the
United States, for example, do not hesitate for a
moment to impose sanctions against States in which
revolutionary changes have been occurring, but will
not do so against Fascist regimes such as the one in
power in South Africa.
80. The delegation of the German Democratic
Republic believes that the time has come not only to
comply strictly with the prohibition of arms deliveries
to South Africa-indeed,
to extend the relevant provisions of that prohibition-but
finally to apply the sanctions provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter against
the racist regime, measures which should have been
adopted long ago. Any delay by the Council will only
serve to encourage the insensate racists to commit
new crimes.
81. South Africa, like Israel in the Middle East, is
attempting to justify its constant acts Of aggression
by invoking the liberation struggle of the peoples
of Namibia. That, however, is a liberation struggle
waged by an oppressed people, a struggle supported
by the United Nations and by the majority of its
Member States. No one can curb this just struggle.
Peace and security for all-including
the white population of Namibia and South Africa-will
be ensured
only when Namibia becomes independent and when
apartheid comes to an end in South Africa.
82. In the course of an official visit to Zambia by
a delegation of the Party and the Government of the

83. The delegation of the German Democratic Republic supports the just demands made by the representative of Zambia in the Council.

German Democratic Republic, the General Secretary
of the Central Committee of the Socialist Unity Party
of Germany and Chairman of the State Council of the
German Democratic
Republic
praised the valiant
participation
of fh*$ &people and Government
of
Zambia, under the leadership of President Kaunda, in
the cause of the liberation of the African continent
from the last remaining bastions of colonialism
and
racism. In a joint declaration,, President Kaunda for
his part stated his high opinion of the foreign policy
of the German Democratic
Republic,
aimed, as it
is, at ensuring peace and strengthening
international
detente. He also praised the anti-imperialist
solidarity
of the German Democratic Republic with all peoples
struggling for their national liberation.

Litho in United Nations. New York

The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

NOTES

00400

X3-hl46?-August

1986-44~~
