VI.

153

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committe"

Noting with appreciation the efforts of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in the field of the education of migrant workers
and their families,
Having taken note of the report of the Economic
and Social Council, 73
I. Calls upon all States, taking into account the
provisions of the relevant instruments adopted by the
International Labour Organisation and of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination, to take measures to prevent
and put an end to all discrimination against migrant
workers and to ensure the implementation of such
measures;
2. Invites all States, particularly host countries,
to give the widest possible dissemination, inter alia
through the mass media, to information aimed at
promoting better public understanding of the contribution of migrant workers to the economic growth and
social and cultural development of those countries and
at fostering a climate of mutual understanding;
3. Also invites the Governments of host countries
to adopt the necessary measures to prevent any activity
that might be prejudicial to the interests of migrant
workers;
4. Again invites the Governments of host countries to give consideration to adopting definitive measures to promote in their territories a normal family
life for migrant workers by reuniting families;
5. Expresses the hope that the Commission on
Human Rights will submit to the Economic and Social
Council at its first regular session of 1979 the study
recommended in General Assembly resolution 32/120,
on the basis of the concrete proposals formulated by
the Working Group established pursuant to Council
resolution 1978/22;
6. Calls upon all States to give consideration to
ratifying the Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975, adopted by the General
Conference of the International Labour Organisation;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to explore with
Member States and in co-operation with the United
Nations agencies, particularly the International Labour
Organisation, the possibility of drawing up an international convention on the rights of migrant workers;
8. Invites the Governments of host countries to
adopt measures to ensure that the children of migrant
workers receive genuinely equal treatment in the field
of education and training;
9. Also invites those Governments to co-operate
with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization with a view to enabling migrant
workers and their families to benefit from all necessary
opportunities in the field of education in order to
enable them to participate fully in the life of the society
of the host country while preserving their national and
cultural identity.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
73 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/33/3 ), paras. 319-321.

33/164.

Assistance to South
refugees

African

student

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31/126 of 16 December
1976 and 32/119 of 16 December 1977 concerning
assistance to South African student refugees,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 417 ( 1977)
of 31 October 1977 and Economic and Social Council
resolution 1978/55 of 2 August 1978, in which, inter
alia, an appeal was made to all Governments, organizations and United Nations agencies to make generous
contributions to the United Nations emergency programmes of assistance to South African student
refugees,
Deeply concerned by the discriminatory education
policies and repressive measures being applied by the
Government of South Africa against black students
in that country,
Noting that the Governments concerned expect
the flow of student refugees from South Africa into
their countries to continue while these discriminatory
policies and repressive measures are maintained,
A ware that the continued influx of South African
student refugees fleeing from these repressive policies
continues to cause pressure on the available educational and other facilities in neighbouring countries
offering asylum to those students,
Recognizing the need to provide assistance to those
countries to help them to provide adequate facilities
to the student refugees,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral74 containing the findings of the review missions
sent by him to Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and
Zambia in May and June 1978 to examine the status
of the programmes of assistance to South African
student refugees,
Recognizing that the international assistance provided so far has made possible the implementation of
major components of the emergency assistance programmes for South African student refugees in the
region, but that further international assistance is still
required for their care, subsistence and education,
1. Endorses the assessment and recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General and
commends him and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on their efforts to mobilize resources and organize the programmes of assistance to
South African student refugees in the host countries;
2. Notes with appreciation that the Governments
of Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia continue
to grant asylum and make educational and other
facilities available to the student refugees in spite of
the pressure which the continuing influx of these
refugees exerts on facilities in their countries;
3. Notes with satisfaction the contributions made
by various States, United Nations agencies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
towards meeting the needs of South African student
refugees;
4. Expresses concern that, in spite of the contributions made so far, the needs of South African student
refugees continue to increase;
5. Requests all agencies and programmes of the
United Nations system, including the United Nations
74 A/33/163

and Corr.I.

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

154

Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the
United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations
Development Programme, the International Labour
Organisation, the United Nations Trust Fund for S<;mth
Africa and the World Food Programme, to contmue
assisting the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees in carrying out the humanitarian function
entrusted to him;
6. Urges all States, United Nations agencies and
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
to contribute generously to the assistance programmes
for these students, both through financial support and
by offering further opportunities for their educational
and vocational training, as well as by financial and
material contributions for their care and maintenance;
7. Requests the Secretary-General and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to continue
all efforts necessary for an effective programme of
educational and other appropriate assistance for the
South African student refugees in Botswana, Lesotho,
Swaziland and Zambia;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to keep the matter under review and to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session,
through the Economic and Social Council at its second
regular session of 1979, on the progress made in these
programmes.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978

33/165.

Status of persons refusing service in
military or police forces used to enforce

apartheid
The General Assembly,
Mindful that the Charter of the United Nations
sets forth, as one of the purposes of the Organization,
the achievement of international co-operation in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights
and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Recalling article 18 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 75 which states that everyone has the
right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion,
Conscious that the Proclamation of Teheran,76 the
Lagos Declaration for Action against Apartheid77 and
other United Nations declarations, conventions and
resolutions have condemned apartheid as a crime
against the conscience and dignity of mankind,
Having regard to section II, paragraph 11, of the
Lagos Declaration, which proclaims that the United
Nations and the international community have a special responsibility towards those imprisoned, restricted
or exiled for their struggle against apartheid,
Taking note of the report of the Special Committee
against Apartheid,78
75 Resolution
7 6 Final Act

217 A (III).
of the International Conference on Human
Rights, Teheran, 22 April-13 May 1968 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.68.XIV.2), chap. II.
77 Report of the World Conference for Action against Apartheid, Lagos, 22-26 August 1977 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.77.XlV.2 and corrigendum), sect. X.
78 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/33/22 and Corr.I).

l. Recognizes the right of all persons to refuse
service in military or police forces which are used to
enforce apartheid;
2. Calls upon Member States to grant asylum or
safe transit to another State, in the spirit of the Declaration on Territorial Asylum, 79 to persons compelled
to leave their country of nationality solely because of
a conscientious objection to assisting in the enforcement of apartheid through service in military or police
forces;
3. Urges Member States to consider favourably
the granting to such persons of all the rights and
benefits accorded to refugees under existing legal instruments;
4. Calls upon appropriate United Nations bodies,
including the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the specialized agencies and non-governmental organizations, to provide all necessary assistance to such persons.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978

33/166.

Question of a convention on the rights
of the child

The General Assembly,
Having in mind its resolution 31 / 169 of 21 December 1976, in which it proclaimed the year 1979
International Year of the Child,
Recalling its resolution 32/109 of 15 December
1977, in which it, inter alia, reaffirmed that the major
focus of the International Year of the Child should
be at the national level, but that this should be supported by regional and international co-operation,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 20 (XXXIV) of 8 March 197880 and Economic
and Social Council resolutions 1978/ 18 of 5 May 1978
and 1978/40 of 1 August 1978,
Bearing in mind that, since the adoption of the
Declaration of the Rights of the Child, 81 nineteen
years have already elapsed, and that during this time
the principles of the Declaration have played a significant part in the promotion of the rights of children
in the entire world as well as in shaping various forms
of international co-operation in this sphere,
Considering that during these nineteen years the
conditions to take further steps by adopting a convention on the rights of the child have been created,
Conscious of the need to strengthen further the
comprehensive care and the well-being of children all
over the world,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the decision of
the Commission on Human Rights at its thirty-fourth
session, in its resolution 20 (XXXIV), to continue
at its thirty-fifth session, as one of its priorities, its
consideration of a draft convention on the rights of
the child;
7 9 Resolution

2112 (XXII), annex.
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
8 1 Resolution B86 (XIV).
80 See
