A /68/PV.67

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

67th plenary meeting

Friday, 13 December 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

In the absence of the President, Mrs. Miculescu
(Romania), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda items 70 and 71 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
Report of the Secretary-General (A/68/489)
Draft resolution (A/68/L.24)
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/68/84,
A/68/87 and A/68/89)
Draft resolutions (A/68/L.25 and A/68/L.27)
(b) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Report of the Secretary-General (A/68/76)
Draft resolution (A/68/L.22)
(c) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
(d) Strengthening of international cooperation
and coordination of efforts to study, mitigate
and minimize the consequences of the
Chernobyl disaster
Report of the Secretary-General (A/68/498)
Draft resolution (A/68/L.21)

Assistance to survivors of the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda, particularly orphans, widows and victims
of sexual violence
Report of the Secretary-General (A/68/497)
Mr. Khan (Indonesia): Indonesia aligns its
statement with that delivered by the representative
of Brunei Darussalam on behalf of the countries
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (see
A/68/PV.66).
At the outset, my delegation would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his reports, which provide
a comprehensive review for the agenda item under
consideration. A major concern that the reports bring
to our attention is the increasing number of people
affected by humanitarian emergencies, including those
associated with natural disasters. Along with that rise
in the numbers affected, the situation on the ground
has also become more complex. It demands scaledup efforts in the global humanitarian architecture for
improved modalities and capacities that will enable
an effective response to the growing demands on
humanitarian assistance.
With an international humanitarian landscape
that is characterized by an intertwined web of various
actors — Governments, the private sector, community
leaders, intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, and even the military — improving the
coordination and cooperation among those actors, and
putting in place a coherent response to any complex
emergency, particularly at the field level, is key.
Effective and accountable international humanitarian
responses must be strengthened, and efforts continued

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-61803 (E)

*1361803*

A/68/PV.67

to build capacities, frameworks and resources. Despite
all the complexities, however, my delegation wishes to
reiterate that the guiding principles of humanitarian
assistance, which are humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence, remain relevant. They should
be fully adhered to and respected by all actors in all
humanitarian operations.
We appreciate the update on the work of the Central
Emergency Response Fund (CERF), which we commend
for its role in the recent heartbreaking devastation that
our brothers and sisters in the Philippines have had to
endure, owing to Typhoon Haiyan. In the less than a
decade that has passed since its inception, the Central
Emergency Response Fund has played a crucial role
in supporting humanitarian responses to nearly every
major emergency worldwide, including through its
multisector interventions. My delegation underscores
the importance of continuing efforts to ensure and
increase the predictability, sustainability and rapid
disbursement of CERF’s funding, as a complement to
existing humanitarian funding mechanisms.
According to the estimate of the Internal
Displacement Monitoring Centre for 2012, more than
30 million people in 82 countries were displaced
because of natural disasters — almost double the
number for 2011. Moreover, the damages and losses
amounted to more than $138 billion, meaning that
2012 marked the third consecutive year that economic
disaster losses exceeded $100 billion. The series of
unfortunate events that created complex emergencies
in 2012 strengthen the case for a timely, effective and
well-targeted humanitarian response. Such staggering
figures also build a strong case for linking emergency
relief seamlessly with early recovery and development,
thus enabling an affected country to offset its economic
losses. It also helps affected populations to get past the
crisis and start rebuilding their lives, securing their
livelihoods and planning for the future. For that reason,
resources and investment should be channeled into
strengthening capacities for humanitarian assistance
and disaster risk reduction and preparedness, especially
in developing countries.
Reducing disaster risks helps to address the
complexities of humanitarian emergencies while
mitigating the damage done to economic and social
development. Let us therefore continue building our
disaster risk reduction and resilience efforts, and look
at all the possible ways to integrate comprehensive,
effective and inclusive disaster reduction measures

2/21

13/12/2013

into development frameworks, including the post-2015
development agenda.
My delegation reaffirms that it is the States
concerned that play the primary role in initiating,
organizing,
coordinating
and
implementing
humanitarian assistance. However, the United
Nations has a central role in providing leadership for
coordinating the international community’s support
to the affected country. With its universality and its
mandate, the United Nations must be able to play a
pivotal role in the global humanitarian architecture, not
only in financing, but also in coordinating, delivering
and reporting on the response to humanitarian crises.
When it comes to the performance of that role, my
delegation emphasizes the importance of cooperation
and coordination between the United Nations and
regional organizations, including in ensuring the timely
and effective delivery of humanitarian assistance.
The United Nations system and the relevant actors
should continue to enhance humanitarian capacities,
knowledge and institutions, including through the
transfer of technology and expertise to developing
countries. The international community, development
entities of the United Nations system and other relevant
institutions and organizations should support national
authorities in reinforcing their capacity to build
resilience, mitigate disaster risks and prepare for and
respond to disasters.
Governments, humanitarian and development
organizations need to develop a common understanding
of the various risks that could lead to a humanitarian
crisis. In that regard, it is important to develop local,
national and regional emergency preparedness plans
that draw upon community knowledge and focus on
education and institution-building. The development
of comprehensive plans needs to involve all relevant
stakeholders and actors, including local communities,
women, persons with disabilities and private sectors.
Finally, I would like to close by reiterating my
delegation’s support for the Secretary-General’s
initiative to convene the World Humanitarian Summit in
2016, and our commitment to engaging constructively
in the preparations that will culminate in the Summit.
Mr. Kim Saeng (Republic of Korea): My delegation
would like to express its sincere appreciation to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his leadership in
dealing with international humanitarian affairs and for
his comprehensive report on humanitarian assistance. I

13-61803

13/12/2013

would like to extend my gratitude to Ms. Valerie Amos
and her staff at the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for their dedicated work
in coordinating international humanitarian aid.
Recently, the frequency and severity of natural
disasters has been on the rise with the growing impact
of climate change. We are also witnessing larger-scale,
man-made conflicts, which are profoundly impacting
the lives of those affected. Against that backdrop,
there is an increasing need for stronger leadership
of the United Nations to cope with international
humanitarian issues. In particular, given the rise in
the number of humanitarian actors, including States,
non-governmental organizations and international
organizations, the effective coordination by the United
Nations of international relief effort is becoming
increasingly important.
In that regard, we appreciate OCHA’s effective
coordination in the Philippines, which was severely
damaged by Super-Typhoon Haiyan in November. Since
the beginning of the crisis, OCHA has successfully
coordinated internal and external relief activities based
on close cooperation with the Philippine Government.
In partnership with the United Nations, the Republic
of Korea also carried out humanitarian activities in the
Philippines. We dispatched the Korea Disaster Relief
Team and delivered essential items to the affected
people of the Philippines.
My delegation believes that in order to
strengthen the coordination of United Nations
emergency humanitarian assistance, it is essential
that the Organization continue to implement the
recommendations contained in the transformative
agenda of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee. That
will lead to improvement in humanitarian leadership,
coordination and accountability in the field.
The increasing intensity of natural disasters has
strongly demonstrated the need to ensure an adequate
level of preparedness in disaster-prone countries.
Enhancing preparedness capacity is essential for a rapid
and effective emergency response. Such efforts should
be made primarily at the national and local levels and
supported by the international system in a harmonized
manner. Building a capacity for preparedness at the
national and local levels and implementing a prepared
and anticipatory system is not an option, but a must. To
that end, efforts to build national and local capacities
in preparedness deserve more attention and should be a
priority on the agenda.

A/68/PV.67

Two and a half years have passed since the Syrian
crisis began in March 2011. We are deeply concerned
about the current humanitarian situation inside Syria.
We welcome the second high-level international
humanitarian pledging conference for Syria, to be
held in Kuwait in January 2014. The current crisis is
having a profound impact, not only on Syria, but also
on the countries that host Syrian refugees. It is time
for the international community to focus more on the
long-term socioeconomic needs of the host countries by
strengthening cooperation and coordination between
humanitarian and development actors. We therefore
need to design a new framework for more inclusive
partnerships between humanitarian and development
agencies that may create synergies among different
actors and increase the effectiveness of aid.
Women, people with disabilities and children are
more greatly affected by humanitarian crises than
others, which makes it very important to understand the
different needs of these vulnerable groups of people.
There is an increased risk of gender-based violence,
in particular as physical and social protection become
weakened or destroyed in emergencies. We hope that
the humanitarian organizations and Governments
will do more to protect women in humanitarian crises
by providing and funding specific programmes that
address gender-based violence concerns.
In conclusion, we welcome the initiative of the
Secretary-General to hold the World Humanitarian
Summit in Istanbul in 2016, with a view to sharing
knowledge and best practices in the humanitarian field
in order to enhance the effectiveness of humanitarian
responses. We hope that OCHA will ensure an inclusive,
consultative and transparent preparatory process for
the Summit. The Republic of Korea will also do its
part by actively participating in global and regional
consultations.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): People around the
world continue to suffer the devastating impacts of
both natural disasters and man-made conflicts. With
an increasing number of affected populations globally,
more must be done to ensure that the United Nations
is working as effectively as possible. Canada salutes
Ms. Valerie Amos and her colleagues in the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for their
efforts in the face of multiple global humanitarian
crises. We note the progress made to date under the
auspices of the transformative agenda to improve the
humanitarian response model.

13-618033/21

A/68/PV.67

However, much work remains to ensure that these
normative principles — particularly on leadership,
coordination and accountability — are fully
operationalized and implemented in the field. Canada
is particularly interested in seeing further performance
measures put in place so as to better assess our
collective impact as a system and better communicate
our results to the broader community. Accountability
to affected populations is critical to improving how
we respond to and meet life-saving needs. Canada
also remains committed to working with a range of
stakeholders to strengthen international efforts and
coordination to protect and better meet the needs of
vulnerable populations, including religious minorities.
That includes working to prevent and respond to sexual
violence in humanitarian emergencies and ending the
scourge of child, early and forced marriage.
(spoke in French)
Canada has taken decisive measures to mitigate
the disastrous consequences of Typhoon Haiyan in
the Philippines by working in close cooperation with
the rescue bodies and the Philippine Government to
provide ongoing support to those in the greatest need.
Our thoughts and our prayers continue to be with those
in the Philippines who have been affected by Typhoon
Haiyan.
Canada is currently providing assistance to
ensure that the most vulnerable persons in the region
immediately receive the emergency assistance they
need. Canada has provided $20 million in humanitarian
assistance in the form of intervention following
Typhoon Haiyan, and that assistance is contributing
to meeting the needs of peoples affected by the
Typhoon throughout the affected region. Moreover,
Canadians — individually or through companies — have
donated more than $35 million to registered Canadian
philanthropic organizations in support of their efforts
to respond to the crisis.
(spoke in English)
We remain extremely concerned about the ongoing
humanitarian crisis in Syria and its impact on refugee
host countries and the overall stability of the region.
We recognize the immense pressure that the influx
of refugees is placing on refugee host countries and
communities. We commend deeply the generosity
of neighbouring States — Turkey, Jordan, Lebanon,
Iraq and Egypt — in welcoming refugees fleeing the

4/21

13/12/2013

violence in Syria. Their generosity is born of a genuine
spirit of humanitarianism.
(spoke in French)
Canada applauds the courageous efforts of the
humanitarian agents in Syria and in the context of other
humanitarian emergencies throughout the world, who
are willing to risk their own lives to provide crucial
assistance to persons in crisis situations. We express
our deepest gratitude and sincere condolences to the
families, friends and organizations of those who have
given their lives in order to save other people.
(spoke in English)
We call upon the Government of Syria to fully
implement the Security Council’s call of 2 October
(S/PRST/2013/15) for improved humanitarian access
to Syria, and to allow humanitarian actors, including
health-care providers, full and safe access to those
affected by the violence, and to remove obstacles to
aid delivery. The people of Syria must be safe from
oppression and attacks. Civilians denied the necessities
of life require humanitarian assistance to meet their
basic needs. We urge all parties to the conflict to fully
respect their obligations, especially their obligation to
take constant care to spare the civilian population from
the effects of hostilities.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand extends
its deepest sympathy to the families and colleagues of
those United Nations humanitarian personnel who lost
their lives or were injured in the course of their duties
this year. We applaud the dedication of all national
and international humanitarian personnel working
in and with the United Nations — people who work
in dangerous and difficult circumstances providing
support for those in need of humanitarian assistance.
Against the background of the sacrifice of some and
the humanitarian work of many, New Zealand welcomes
progress towards enhancing the United Nations security
management system and to managing the risks to which
personnel are exposed. We also extend our sympathy to
all the victims of natural and man-made disasters — the
blameless victims who require humanitarian relief, not
least our friends in the Philippines who have suffered
so much in recent weeks.
The year has 2013 presented us with many highly
publicized and deeply disturbing images of children and
adults in appalling humanitarian situations. But this has
also been a year in which too little media attention has

13-61803

13/12/2013

been given to other humanitarian emergencies — all
of which expose the complexity of the environments in
which humanitarian actors must operate. Like others,
New Zealand is committed to the core humanitarian
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence, and believes that, as we form new
partnerships with new actors, we must be vigilant in
adhering to those principles. They are essential to
ensuring timely, secure and unimpeded access to those
who need humanitarian assistance.
We also believe that we — Member States and the
United Nations system — must address gender-based
violence in humanitarian emergencies and ensure
that measures are in place to protect the victims and
survivors, including through the provision of sexual
and reproductive health services.
The protection of all people with humanitarian
needs is paramount. Humanitarian actors must be
granted access to those in need of assistance without
undue delay, and permitted to do so free from the threat
of being attacked, kidnapped or harassed. New Zealand
particularly deplores the increased targeting of medical
personnel. The protection of medical professionals is
essential to ensuring that necessary, often life-saving,
medical attention is provided to the wounded and sick.
New Zealand is pleased that we are today adopting
draft resolution A/68/L.24, reaffirming the obligations
of States and parties to armed conflict to protect and
respect medical personnel, facilities and transport, and
to ensure that the wounded and the sick receive the
medical attention they require without undue delay. We
also commend the willingness of many States bordering
conflict-affected areas to provide safety and assistance
to large numbers of people in need.
It is essential that, wherever and whenever
possible, we prevent emergencies from occurring
by strengthening the resilience of communities and
building their capacities to deal with shocks. Like
Lithuania, Malaysia, Thailand and others, New Zealand
recognizes that disaster risk reduction provides the
best value for money in mitigating the impact of
humanitarian crises and in reducing the loss of life
and livelihoods. One dollar invested in prevention is
estimated to save up to $7 in humanitarian response.
The impact of climate change and the increased
frequency and intensity of natural disasters highlight,
as Indonesia has so recently emphasized, the need for
closer coordination and collaboration among those

A/68/PV.67

working in the humanitarian, development, political
and security-related areas. New Zealand welcomes
the focus on the linkages between those aspects, as
recognized in the humanitarian draft resolutions we
will also be adopting today.
New Zealand supports the Secretary-General’s
proposal to hold the World Humanitarian Summit in
2016, and it congratulates Turkey on its successful
bid to host the Summit. We look forward to working
with others in making humanitarian action fit for the
challenges of 2015 and beyond. We also commend
Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos and her staff
for their impressive efforts to promote a more efficient,
faster and better coordinated humanitarian response,
and for her leadership of and improvements to the
Central Emergency Response Fund. She has taken up a
great task, and we support her in that.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his reports on the
progress of the humanitarian activities of the United
Nations system. We would also like to commend the
tireless efforts of Under-Secretary-General Valerie
Amos to ensure the effective coordination of the
delivery of humanitarian assistance.
Recently, the world has been facing a growing
number of natural and man-made disasters. Although
the global capacity to respond to these challenges
is increasing in parallel, the huge damage and loss
of life caused by various disasters remain cause for
concern. The effective coordination of humanitarian
assistance and cooperation among relevant stakeholders
are essential. The Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) plays a central role in
realizing these goals.
Disaster preparedness significantly reduces
risks and damage, thereby ensuring the continuity of
economic and social life. Adopting a comprehensive
approach to humanitarian efforts, including disaster
risk management, early response and recovery, is
necessary. Disaster mitigation and relief efforts must
be part of the comprehensive development agenda.
This understanding is set to be reflected in
the process leading up to the World Humanitarian
Summit, which will be held in Turkey in 2016.
The Summit process will address the issues of aid
effectiveness, serving people in need, innovation and
risk management, with the aim of sharing best practices
and broadening partnerships in the humanitarian field.

13-618035/21

A/68/PV.67

We commend the Secretary-General and OCHA for
developing this holistic, inclusive and comprehensive
approach, and we look forward to working together
with all humanitarian partners, including civil society
bodies and non-governmental organizations.
We believe that the World Humanitarian Summit,
together with post-2015 development agenda efforts,
will mark a new era in our understanding and conduct of
risk management and humanitarian assistance. The key
to success in these areas undoubtedly lies in increasing
the capacity of local and national institutions and in
building the resilience of communities.
As the crisis in Syria approaches its third year,
the suffering of the Syrian people has intensified and
the ramifications of the conflict have become more
alarming. As we continue to hope to find a longlasting political solution to the crisis in Syria, Turkey
will continue to provide the necessary assistance to
the Syrian people, in close cooperation with United
Nations agencies.
Over the past four years, Turkey’s humanitarian
assistance increased from $31 million to more than
$1 billion in 2012. Reaching out to various parts of the
globe, from Haiti to the Philippines and from Myanmar
to Somalia, Turkey has spent more than $2 billion for
Syrian refugees in Turkey in only the past two years. The
Global Humanitarian Assistance Report 2013 indicates
that Turkey was the fourth-largest Government donor in
2012. Turkey has also been a contributor to the Central
Emergency Response Fund. Turkish contributions to
the Fund have now reached $2 million since the Fund’s
inception.
Turkey is also willing to exchange experience and
knowledge on humanitarian issues. The HOPEFOR
initiative, sponsored by Turkey, the Dominican Republic
and Qatar, is a case in point. The initiative aims to
strengthen the coordination of civil and military assets
in natural-disaster relief operations.
In closing, I would like to reiterate that Turkey
will continue its cooperation with the international
community and the United Nations system, in particular
in the process leading up to the World Humanitarian
Summit. As President Gül highlighted during the highlevel week of the General Assembly (see A/68/PV.5),
humanitarian diplomacy is a key objective of Turkish
foreign policy.
Ms. Derderian (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the Secretary-General’s
6/21

13/12/2013

reports, which describe the accomplishments and
continuing challenges in international humanitarian
assistance.
We would like to acknowledge the tremendous
pressure that national and international humanitarian
staff are under and the great sacrifices they are making
in responding to the multiple crises going on around the
world. It is also important to recognize the contributions
made by persons affected by conflict even in the most
dire of situations.
The United States is pleased to be a leading
humanitarian donor and to support responses to crises
around the world. We continue to strongly support the
international humanitarian system. Our commitment
to working with the United Nations and other partners
to protect and assist civilians uprooted by conflict
and devastated by natural disasters remains firm. We
fully endorse the Inter-Agency Standing Committee’s
transformative agenda, and we urge all United Nations
agencies, non-governmental organizations and other
humanitarian actors to continue to implement the
various elements of the Agenda so that together we can
help to make the system more coherent, coordinated
and effective.
We share the Secretary-General’s concern about
the increase in the number of persons displaced by
conflict and other violence to 28.8 million at the end of
2012 — the highest figure ever recorded by the Internal
Displacement Monitoring Centre. It is logical to assume
that this number has only grown in 2013, with new
displacements in Syria, Mali and the Central African
Republic, among other places. We call on the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), UNICEF, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
other United Nations actors to redouble their focus and
efforts on such populations, in particular as they relate
to durable solutions and cooperation with development
actors. We strongly back the mandate of the Special
Rapporteur on the human rights of internally displaced
persons, and urge all Member States to fully support
his efforts.
We continue to note that as the world becomes
increasingly urbanized, so do humanitarian crises.
Of the more than 1.1 million new refugees in 2012,
many found refuge outside of camps and in urban
and other settings. We urge the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners to continue to rethink
13-61803

13/12/2013

their responses in non-camp settings and to develop
appropriate tools, strategies and programming that best
serve those in need. More often than not, this will mean
connecting refugees and others to services rather than
providing direct aid.
The United States was pleased to participate in a
panel discussion in October with Under-SecretaryGeneral and Emergency Relief Coordinator Valerie
Amos to discuss OCHA’s recently released report
on the impact of counter-terrorism measures on
principled humanitarian action. As we noted during the
Washington, D.C., event, the United States has taken
several steps to address these issues and looks forward
to continued dialogue and cooperation on sanctions,
counter-terrorism and humanitarian assistance.
The United States completely endorses the wide
variety of efforts aimed at increasing compliance with
international humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law. We agree with the Secretary-General that
protecting people from harm requires a comprehensive
response from the humanitarian community, involving
legal, policy, operational and advocacy elements. Such
an approach is necessary to address issues ranging
from access and legal documentation to gender-based
violence.
As we look back at humanitarian responses over the
past year, we continue to be deeply troubled by the lack of
access, risks to the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel, and attacks against medical and healthcare workers, hospitals and other medical facilities
that are protected under applicable international law.
Such attacks are unacceptable and remind us of the
extreme risks that humanitarian personnel take each
day to perform their basic duties. To help mitigate such
risks, humanitarian actors must be able to operate in
an independent, neutral and impartial manner and be
perceived by local populations as doing so.
We also call on States and parties to conflict to
facilitate rapid and unimpeded access for humanitarian
and medical personnel to civilians in need, including by
simplifying and expediting procedures for humanitarian
personnel and goods. Further, the consent of States and
parties to conflict should never be withheld arbitrarily.
Those and other issues are some that we hope the
Secretary-General will consider advancing at the 2016
World Humanitarian Summit, an event that we fully
back.

A/68/PV.67

The United States plans to be centrally involved in
the consultations leading up to the Summit and looks
forward to working with the United Nations, Member
States, other humanitarian organizations and affected
populations to make the international humanitarian
system more inclusive, responsive and effective.
Mr. Umemoto (Japan): At the outset, I would
like to commend Under-Secretary-General Valerie
Amos for her prominent leadership in the coordinating
emergency humanitarian assistance of humanitarian
agencies and for the dedication she has shown by
visiting wherever the United Nations’s humanitarian
assistance was required. I would also like to express the
appreciation of my Government for the tireless efforts
of all United Nations staff engaged in emergency
humanitarian assistance.
My Government would particularly like to express
its appreciation for Ms. Amos’s two separate visits to
the Philippines in the wake of the devastation caused
by Typhoon Haiyan last month, as well as the dedicated
efforts of the United Nations humanitarian community
to support those affected by the typhoon.
Japan, for its part, extended various kinds of support
to the Philippines, which included the provision of
relief goods and funds totalling more than $56 million,
dispatching medical teams and self-defence force
units to transport humanitarian supplies and affected
people and to provide medical assistance. In addition,
two expert teams in the fields of rehabilitation and
oil-spill response are also working in the field. That
assistance is being implemented in close coordination
with the United Nations humanitarian community. My
Government would like to commend the great work
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) in their relief coordination, which is
the theme of today’s joint debate.
The United Nations humanitarian system is
woefully overstretched. In addition to the emergency in
the Philippines, the system already has to make every
effort to support those affected by the Syrian conflict.
Japan has already provided more than $155 million
for humanitarian needs resulting from the Syrian
conflict, including the $60 million promised by Prime
Minister Abe in his address to the General Assembly
in September (see A/68/PV.12). We remain committed
to helping people affected by the conflict. Japan looks
forward to seeing the revised humanitarian planning

13-618037/21

A/68/PV.67

and is ready to actively participate in the upcoming
pledging conference for Syria in Kuwait.
Nevertheless, the needs are so immense that
financial contributions from traditional donors alone
are simply not enough. That is why we have to discuss
not only how we finance humanitarian needs, but
also how better to address such needs. Therefore, the
importance of today’s debate and the draft resolutions
we will adopt can hardly be overestimated.
In that context, Japan strongly welcomes the
initiative of the Secretary-General to hold the World
Humanitarian Summit, aimed at sharing knowledge
and best practices in the humanitarian field in order to
improve the coordination, capacity and effectiveness of
humanitarian responses. We welcome the readiness of
Turkey to host the Summit in 2016, and we are ready
to host regional consultation processes for North and
East Asia next year in Japan. We will also actively
participate in thematic discussions in the process of
preparing for the Summit. We are especially happy to
share any best practices learned from the Great East
Japan Earthquake of March 2011.
There are two closely interrelated processes towards
the World Humanitarian Summit in 2016, namely, the
post-2015 development agenda process and the process
towards the Third World Conference on Disaster Risk
Reduction to be held in Sendai, Japan, in March 2015.
As we are all aware, the current challenges that the
United Nations humanitarian system now faces cannot
be resolved by the humanitarian community alone. We
have to make sure that the disaster risk reduction is
explicitly incorporated into the framework of the post2015 development agenda. We also have to ensure the
synergy of those three processes. Japan, as the host of
the United Nations Third World Conference on Disaster
Risk Reduction, will actively participate in all relevant
discussions towards that end.
In view of those concerns, my Government strongly
welcomes the draft resolutions that we will consider
today. Japan actively participated in negotiations of
those drafts, and we express our appreciation to the
facilitators of each.
This year, Japan made several inputs to the draft
resolutions regarding the importance of the gender
perspective in humanitarian response, as we believe,
on the basis of our experience of the Great East Japan
Earthquake, that such a perspective is key to ensuring
the effectiveness of that system and accountability to

8/21

13/12/2013

the affected people. In that connection, we are currently
considering once again submitting a draft resolution on
natural disaster and gender at the upcoming fifty-eighth
session of the Commission on the Status of Women.
We look forward to the positive participation of all
representatives and much constructive discussion.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Japan’s commitment
to enhancing the United Nations humanitarian system.
Japan will continue to be a major supporter in the future
as well.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Today,
States Members of the United Nations have gathered
once again to reiterate that humanitarian issues
constitute one of the core areas of the Organization.
In that context, Chile has co-sponsored the draft
resolutions entitled “Strengthening of the coordination
of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United
Nations” (A/68/L.25), “Safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and protection of United
Nations personnel” (A/68/L.24) and “Strengthening of
international cooperation and coordination of efforts to
study, mitigate and minimize the consequences of the
Chernobyl disaster” (A/68/L.21).
In particular, my delegation values the fact that,
through draft resolution A/68/L.25, we continue
to strengthen the language on the protection of
humanitarian personnel, particularly medical personnel
and medical assistance installations, in line with
international humanitarian law and, most importantly,
in any emergency response. At the same time, we
welcome the General Assembly’s reiterated recognition
in draft resolution A/68/L.24 of the need to appropriately
address the elements aimed at ensuring the security and
protection of United Nations humanitarian personnel.
Furthermore, we believe it to be critical that draft
resolution A/68/L.25 underscores the importance of
bearing in mind the specific humanitarian needs of
different sectors of the affected population, including
girls, boys, women, the elderly and persons with
disabilities. We also appreciate the reference to the
transformative agenda — a process that seeks to
improve the efficacy of humanitarian response through
greater predictability, accountability, responsibility
and cooperation.
Similarly, in the context of the need to face the new
challenges to the humanitarian system, it is essential in
our view that continued emphasis be given to the need
to incorporate innovation into the various phases of

13-61803

13/12/2013

humanitarian assistance by the different stakeholders,
including the private sector. Furthermore, in addressing
the issue of financing at a time when humanitarian
challenges are increasing and resources dwindling,
we reiterate the call for major donors to continue their
current commitments to humanitarian programmes
without having a negative impact on the resources
available to international cooperation for development.
We also deem it essential that the need to adequately
address neglected and underfunded humanitarian
emergencies be highlighted. The foregoing should be
in line with the need for long-term conditions for the
transition from relief to development.
In the various forums of the multilateral system,
Chile has stressed the importance of having a
coordinated response from the international community,
represented by the United Nations system, in support
of States and populations affected by humanitarian
emergencies. In that context, the leadership of UnderSecretary-General and Emergency Relief Coordinator
Valerie Amos has been key, as has been her team in the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
for whose efforts we are grateful.
We take this opportunity to reiterate our
commitment to the various regional and subregional
organizations that play an important role in
humanitarian emergencies; their goal should be to act
in a coordinated and cooperative manner, avoiding
duplication and achieving full recovery. In that
regard, we note the recent Sixth Regional Meeting on
International Humanitarian Assistance Mechanisms in
Latin America and the Caribbean, held in Kingston,
Jamaica.
My delegation believes that humanitarian assistance
should give priority to human rights, human security,
and the promotion of and respect for the principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence.
It should also ensure the rapid and unimpeded access
of humanitarian personnel and assistance to affected
populations. Recognizing the humanitarian challenges
we face today, we welcome the holding of the 2016
World Humanitarian Summit in Turkey, and agree
with the reference in paragraph 45 of draft resolution
A/68/L.25 to the need for the event to allow for
“sharing knowledge and best practices in the
humanitarian field to improve the coordination,
capacity and effectiveness of humanitarian
response”.

A/68/PV.67

We hope that the preparations for the meeting will be
undertaken in an inclusive, consultative and transparent
manner.
Mr. Bagabo (Rwanda): At the outset, Rwanda
wishes to thank the Secretariat for organizing today’s
timely joint debate on assistance to survivors of the
1994 genocide in Rwanda, particularly orphans, widows
and victims of sexual violence. We would also take this
opportunity to commend the Secretary-General for his
detailed and comprehensive report (A/68/497) submitted
to the General Assembly pursuant to resolution 66/228,
which provides a status report on and an analysis of
the current challenges to the delivery of relief and
rehabilitation assistance by the United Nations and its
partners to survivors of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda,
in addition to recommendations for appropriate ways to
meet those survivors’ remaining needs.
Next year, in April, the international community
will join the Rwandan people in commemorating the
tragic events that took place 20 years ago — the 1994
genocide committed against the Tutsi — which led to
the death of over 1 million innocent Rwandans in just
three months, while the entire world stood by helplessly
and indecisively watching. Nearly 20 years since the
genocide took place, Rwandans, and particularly the
survivors, are continuing to make tremendous strides
in restoring the social fabric that was torn as a result of
the genocide. However, the post-traumatic effects of the
genocide on Rwandans involves a continuing healing
process.
The adoption of resolution 58/234 on 23 December
2003, upon the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the
1994 genocide in Rwanda, and its subsequent decision
to designate 7 April 2004 as the International Day of
Reflection on the Genocide in Rwanda, was perceived
by the people of Rwanda, especially survivors of the
genocide, as a gesture of solidarity and recognition
of the shared failure of the international community.
The report of the Secretary-General gives hope to
the international community that with commitment,
determination and resilience, there is no adversity that
cannot be overcome, which is what Rwandans, having
opted for life instead of despair and hopelessness,
have proved to the rest of the world. Furthermore, the
selection of Rwanda as one of the eight Delivering as
One countries in 2007 was a clear acknowledgement of
the remarkable achievements that the Government of
Rwanda has managed to achieve in that regard.

13-618039/21

A/68/PV.67

In that context, the Government of Rwanda
welcomes the report of the Secretary-General and
substantive recommendations with respect to future
assistance to genocide survivors in Rwanda, particularly
those addressing their remaining basic needs, despite
the fact that the Government of Rwanda continues
to allocate part of its ordinary budget to the pressing
needs of genocide survivors through the Government
Assistance Fund for Survivors. To give the Assembly
a picture, since the establishment of the Fund in 1998
up to 2012, the Government of Rwanda spent about
$39 million from its ordinary budget.
However, the Government still faces major critical
challenges linked to the daunting task of rebuilding the
lives of survivors of the genocide in Rwanda. Those
challenges include finding a way to incorporate the
support previously provided by the Government of
Rwanda to genocide survivors into the national social
protection strategy in which survivors receive priority
alongside a number of other vulnerable groups for
support in, inter alia, housing, health care, education
and welfare support.
The second challenge is that raising funds to support
the survivors becomes ever more difficult as the events
of the genocide recede into the past, especially with
the expectation that the population will have overcome
the immediate consequences of the events that they
endured.
The third challenge is that the extreme difficulty
that young survivors of the genocide, many of whom
are orphans, have in securing sustainable employment,
so that they can provide for themselves and, frequently,
the households for which they are responsible.
The last challenge is meeting the increasing needs of
genocide survivors, especially the disabled and elderly,
despite the Government’s limited resources. In that
context, while Rwanda endorses all recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General, we
particularly encourage future focus on vulnerable
groups such as orphans, widows and those who have
experienced physical injuries resulting in mental
and physical disabilities, as well as ageing genocide
survivors. We encourage the approach supporting
those groups through sustainable enterprises and
other income-generating activities through capacitybuilding, microcredit and access to markets in order to
promote self-sufficiency and self-reliance.

10/21

13/12/2013

In conclusion, let me take this opportunity to call on
Member States and the entire international community
to recommit to the promise of “never again” in the
prevention of and the fight against genocide throughout
the world.
Mr. Pedersen (Norway): Natural disasters are
becoming increasingly disastrous, claiming thousands
of lives and affecting millions of people. A few weeks
ago, the largest typhoon ever hit the Philippines, killing
several thousand people and causing enormous damage
to infrastructure and the livelihoods of millions of
people. Emergency Relief Coordinator Valerie Amos
took a firm leadership role, along with the Government
of the Philippines. The declaration of a level 3 crisis
quickly triggered the delivery of personnel, plans and
support. We look forward to the evaluation of and
lessons learned from the international humanitarian
response.
The disaster in the Philippines also reminded us
of the importance of local disaster risk reduction and
emergency preparedness plans. The consequences
of the typhoon could have been even worse if around
700,000 people had not been evacuated. The message
that disaster risk reduction and preparedness save
lives and are cost effective has been repeated in many
forums and for many years. We may not be able to avoid
disasters, but the consequences for a well-prepared
community could be less disastrous. Despite that,
disaster risk reduction measures continue to be poorly
financed and are not systematically integrated into
existing strategic and fundraising tools.
We welcome the declaration of a level 3 crisis in the
Central African Republic. We hope that it will continue
to raise awareness and lead to greater commitment on
the part of the international community. The people
of the Central African Republic have suffered for a
long time and are in critical need of assistance and
protection.
Despite the fact that millions of people find
themselves in desperate need of humanitarian
assistance, and despite the fact that humanitarian actors
stand ready to respond, Governments continue to deny
civilian access to life-saving assistance. A particularly
grave example is the besieged areas in Syria, where
hundreds of thousands of girls, boys, women and men
continue to suffer under dire circumstances.
We are particularly concerned about health
workers’ ability to provide humanitarian aid, save

13-61803

13/12/2013

lives and alleviate suffering. Large numbers of people
in Syria, Mali, Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Sudan and Somalia are not receiving
treatment due to a lack of access to health care.
In armed-conflict situations, medical personnel,
facilities and transportation are increasingly under
attack. The lack of understanding and disregard of
international humanitarian law challenges basic
humanitarian principles and values, as well as the
right of populations to access health care. Medical
personnel and those in need of medical assistance must
be respected and protected in all circumstances.
Norway is determined to strengthen our own
humanitarian policy in this field and to work with
partners to enhance the protection of health facilities
and health-care workers, as well as to ensure that
affected populations have access to health care. We
need to reiterate the obligations of parties to conflict to
the Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols.
We need to bring countries together across regional and
political divides to forward that agenda and to reduce
the suffering of innocent civilians.
While the United Nations has a leading role to
play in the coordination and delivery of international
humanitarian assistance, the primary responsibility
for the protection of people in need remains, of course,
with Governments. However, enormous protection
needs, in a number of crises, continue to be ignored
by Governments. In order to meet their responsibilities,
Governments must live up to their obligations under
international law and invest in preparedness and
resilience. This is ultimately a question of political
priority — to invest for the better of all, including the
poor and vulnerable.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): The Government of Brazil
is extremely appreciative of the work carried out by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) and the Emergency Relief Coordinator, and
is honoured to co-sponsor the draft resolution on
strengthening the coordination of the United Nations
humanitarian system (A/68/L.25).
The coordination between the Central Emergency
Response Fund and other specialized United Nations
agencies, such as the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations and the World Food Programme,
has permitted the implementation of effective responses
in addressing some of the most severe humanitarian
situations over the past year, such as the humanitarian

A/68/PV.67

crisis in Syria and the tsunami in the Philippines, as
well as the food security crises in the Sahel region in
2012 and the Horn of Africa in 2011.
The delegation of Brazil is pleased that this year’s
draft resolution incorporates language that recognizes
that economic growth and sustainable development are
essential to the prevention of and preparedness against
natural disasters and other emergencies. In line with the
guiding principles on humanitarian assistance contained
in resolution 46/182, which point out that emergency
assistance should be provided in ways that will be
supportive of recovery and long-term development, we
are also pleased to note that this year’s draft resolution
encourages Member States, the United Nations and
humanitarian organizations to do just that. In particular,
the draft resolution explicitly mentions, among the
policies that strengthen resilience, programmes such
as cash transfers, the local precurement of food and
services, and social safety nets.
As stated in OCHA’s humanitarian symposium
yesterday, as well as by the Secretary-General in his report,
a strong body of evidence has emerged, indicating that
providing people with cash transfers works because it
provides the means for rebuilding livelihoods. What
is more, cash transfers generate a virtuous circle by
stimulating local economies and making emergency
response faster and more cost-effective.
The relief responses of national Governments to the
Indian Ocean tsunami and the South Asia earthquake
included substantial cash-based assistance. In response
to Hurricanes Katrina and Rita in the United States, the
United States Government itself provided over $4 billion
in cash grants to affected households. Currently, cash
transfers are also being used to provide humanitarian
assistance in Syria and in the Philippines.
The procurement of local food and services
is another instrument that can be used to achieve
humanitarian development goals. As noted in the
Secretary-General’s report (A/68/84), the use of local
production has minimal logistical and infrastructure
implications. Local procurement can provide stimulus
to local economies and in some contexts may be more
cost-effective by reducing extremely high shipment
expenditures. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees has started with
local procurement for refugee camps in the Sudan,
Zimbabwe, Kenya, Namibia and Pakistan as part of
durable solutions.

13-6180311/21

A/68/PV.67

With the Purchase for Progress initiative, the World
Food Programme is using purchasing power and its
expertise in logistics and food quality to build resilience
among smallholder farmers. By raising farmers’
incomes, the Purchase for Progress programme turns
the World Food Programme’s local procurement into a
vital tool to address hunger on a structural basis.
Brazil also believes in the long-term social benefits
of safety nets, which reduce the need for external
humanitarian assistance in countries facing chronic or
recurrent humanitarian crises. Ethiopia’s productive
safety-net programme for example, provides households
with enough income to bridge their food gap, thereby
protecting assets from depletion and enabling recipients
to be lifted out of long-term food insecurity.
Areas not covered by the social safety-net programme
have relied on traditional humanitarian actors, including
United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations, to meet emergency food needs at much
greater costs. The emergency humanitarian assistance
provided in response to the 2011 food crisis assisted
people at an estimated cost per beneficiary of $169,
while Ethiopia’s safety-net programme’s response to
the crisis totalled an estimated $33 per beneficiary.
The implementation of cash transfers and social safety
nets in Brazil throughout the past decade has proved
to be extremely effective in reducing and eradicating
poverty and lifting a population of over 40 million into
the middle class.

13/12/2013

gives us the necessary authority to address with firm
and serious conviction the issues reflected in draft
resolution A/68/L.25, which is before the Assembly
today.
Undoubtedly, consensus is a fundamental element
of the required legitimacy of a draft resolution of this
kind, which touches the very core of the raison d’être
of States — the human beings to whom they owe their
existence. Colombia’s position is characterized by
the belief that international humanitarian assistance
should be provided and managed on the basis of the
humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality and
impartiality, and with respect for the primary role of
the affected State in initiating, organizing, coordinating
and implementating humanitarian assistance within its
territory. We hope that in future that can be reflected
explicitly in the text.
Humanitarian assistance provided by United
Nations agencies, countries and other stakeholders must
be delivered with the consent of and, in principle, on the
basis of a request from the affected State. In that regard,
it is important that international cooperation efforts
not only recognize the local and national institutions
with which each State has to cope in situations of
disaster or conflict, but also support the strengthening
of coordination local and national mechanisms for the
provision of humanitarian assistance.

In concluding, let me reiterate Brazil’s firm
commitment to humanitarian cooperation policies
which reduce inequality and exposure to risks and
promote resilience by achieving assistance and
development goals in a mutually supportive manner,
and which strive to eliminate the risks of dependency
by focusing on policies and programmes geared towards
self-reliance.

That coordination, as well as the engagement of the
knowledge and experience of local and national actors
in the strategies and activities of the international
humanitarian response, contribute to strengthening
the capacities of affected States, identifying good
practices and lessons learned, and building trust and
complementarity between international humanitarian
actors and Government institutions. Such actions result
in improved response, attention and coverage efficiently
and without duplication of efforts.

Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Colombia
recognizes the value of humanitarian assistance in
cases of emergency and the broad spectrum of relevant
activities. Few countries of the world have faced the
challenges that Colombia has faced during more than
40 years of conflict and natural disasters. The many
lessons we have learned, despite the harsh and complex
circumstances in which we obtained them, have allowed
us to look forward optimistically to building our society
in environment of peace and security. Those challenges
have also bequeathed us a heritage of experience that

Faced with issues of humanitarian access, it is
necessary to reiterate that access of humanitarian
personnel and the delivery of aid is subject to the
request of the affected State, as provided for in
resolution 46/182 of 1991. Unrestricted access does not
ensure the effective delivery of humanitarian aid, much
less if it is not coordinated with the concerned State,
which is responsible for prioritizing and determining
the criteria for care within its territory, in accordance
with the geographical, cultural, social and demographic
specificities, among others.

12/21

13-61803

13/12/2013

Colombia wishes to reiterate that State coordination
mechanisms should be considered not a last resort,
but rather as a first choice. My country therefore
recognizes that, in the context of reform of the United
Nations system and efforts to strengthen its coherence,
it is important that the system establish inter-agency
coordinating mechanisms in order to activate the
technical, human and financial capabilities that each
agency can make available to respond to disasters.
However, it is critical that the process be consistent and
articulated with the planned programmes and strategies
of national prevention and humanitarian mechanisms.
Colombia also believes that humanitarian
assistance should be provided through the adoption of a
holistic perspective. We understand that such assistance
should contribute to the design and implementation of
a process that serves to rebuild the social and economic
fabric of affected populations, while contributing to the
development of sustainable structures in the aftermath
of emergencies.
Finally, it is important that the transition from
emergency response to development take into account
the processes of rehabilitation and, in particular,
reconstruction, which are crucial steps towards avoiding
further dependence and assistance by providing new
skills and livelihoods. A basic aspect of the provision
of humanitarian assistance must be the integration
and strengthening of an approach based on rights and
differentiated aid.
The Acting President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 49/2, of 19 October 1994, I now
call on the observer of the International Federation of
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
Mr. Jilani (International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies): During the debate on this
agenda item last year (see A/67/PV.55), I opened my
statement with reflections on the devastating impact
of Typhoon Bopha, which hit the Philippines last
December, and how it affected the lives of more than
5 million people. This year, we once again open our
debate on emergency humanitarian assistance as the
Philippines continues to deal with the aftermath of one
of the most powerful typhoons to ever make landfall.
Typhoon Haiyan has impacted the lives of almost
15 million people, displaced more than 4 million people
and destroyed millions of livelihoods. The resilience of
the people of the Philippines is well recognized. We
express our solidarity to the Philippine Government

A/68/PV.67

and people and our commitment to continue working
with them in the recovery.
The International Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement (IFRC) has responded to Typhoon Haiyan
with an appeal for 87 million Swiss francs to support
the relief and recovery efforts in the Philippines. Within
that Movement’s overall appeal, the IFRC is seeking
72 million Swiss francs to provide 100,000 families
with food, shelter and other essential relief, as well as
early recovery assistance, over the next 18 months.
The pressure on humanitarian budgets and
humanitarian organizations to meet the increasing
needs of today’s humanitarian emergencies is evident,
from Asia and the Pacific to Africa, the Middle East,
Europe and the Americas. While media attention
shifts from one disaster to the most recent, the
humanitarian community today needs to continue to
provide humanitarian assistance to millions of people
affected by emergencies, both chronic and new, ranging
from conflicts to typhoons, floods, droughts, tropical
cyclones and food insecurity, to mention just a few.
The majority of those disasters are climate related.
Their impact can be mitigated and their costs, both
human and material, reduced through better investment
in disaster preparedness and risk reduction. The recently
published World Bank report Building Resilience:
integrating climate and disaster risk into development
highlights the fact that, from 1980 to 2012, disasterrelated losses amounted to $3,800 billion worldwide.
Some 87 per cent of those reported disasters and 74 per
cent of losses, as well as 61 per cent of lives lost, were
caused by weather extremes. The World Bank report
also notes the particularly high disaster impacts on
poor countries and in rapidly growing middle-income
countries due to growing asset values in at-risk areas.
According to the report, the largest coastal cities,
for example, could experience combined losses of
S1 trillion by mid-century.
Unless measures are taken to reduce risks, climate
change is likely to undermine poverty goals and to
exacerbate inequality for decades to come. The general
assembly of the IFRC, which brought together our 189
member national societies, has just held its nineteenth
session in Sydney, Australia. It adopted the Declaration
on the post-2015 humanitarian agenda, which calls on
Governments to take action to protect the environment
for future generations, to address the negative impacts

13-6180313/21

A/68/PV.67

of climate change and to strengthen the resilience of
vulnerable people.
The IFRC works in partnership with the Red Cross
and Red Crescent national societies and supports them in
their role as auxiliaries to their public authorities in the
humanitarian field. The IFRC works with the national
societies to reduce disaster risk by strengthening the
preparedness and capacities of communities to better
respond to and recover from disasters, to promote
actions that mitigate the adverse effects of hazards
and to protect development gains from the impact of
disasters.
We believe that the national authorities should
invest adequately in building resilience and promote
programmes that strengthen resilience at all levels.
We also believe that Governments have a duty to
request international assistance when the scale of the
disaster and the needs of the people affected exceed the
capacities of their national authorities.
In that context, the General Assembly has for many
years welcomed the work of the IFRC in developing the
Guidelines for the domestic facilitation and regulation
of international relief and early recovery assistance,
as well as other tools, such as the Model Act for the
facilitation and regulation of international disaster
relief and initial recovery assistance. Those disaster
law programmes and the expertise and experience
gained through the past 15 years of working with
national authorities have proved to be critically needed
and quite beneficial when implemented.
A case in point is the response to Typhoon Haiyan.
For several years, the Philippine Red Cross and the
IFRC have been working with authorities to develop
streamlined rules and procedures for humanitarian
relief, drawing on recommendations from international
guidelines developed by the IFRC, as well as associated
model legislation.
Consistent with those recommendations, the
Philippines Government instituted one-stop shop
teams in areas affected by the typhoon. Those teams
consist of representatives from different national and
local Government departments and agencies with
oversight authority for the entry of humanitarian goods,
equipment and transport in order to speed up the entry
of relief. That approach has proved effective after
disasters in other countries, including Indonesia and
Guatemala, with a significant reduction in bureaucratic
delays. Without setting up mechanisms such as those

14/21

13/12/2013

mentioned above, vital relief can be delayed by the legal
requirements imposed on international relief goods and
personnel, including customs, tax and immigration
procedures.
Richard Gordon, Chairman of the Philippine Red
Cross and co-author of the National Disaster Risk
Reduction and Management Act, reflecting on the
implementation of those regulations, said: “There is
an outpouring of support to people in the Philippines
after this enormous disaster” and that “[i]t is our goal
to be an effective link between the available aid and all
the people in need, and these regulations are critical to
making that happen”.
The Acting President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 45/6, of 16 October 1990, I now
call on the observer of the International Committee of
the Red Cross.
Mr. Bonamy (International Committee of the
Red Cross) (spoke in French): This year marks the
150th anniversary of the founding of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). Next year, we will
celebrate the 150th anniversary of the adoption of the
Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the
Wounded in Armies in the Field. Those anniversaries
testify to the enduring commitment of States to respect
neutral and impartial humanitarian action in wartime.
Today, all States have ratified the four Geneva
Conventions of 1949. Other key instruments are making
steady progress also towards such universal acceptance.
Moreover, there are 189 national societies throughout
the world that, together with the International Federation
of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies and the ICRC,
continue to work for the alleviation and prevention of
human suffering.
Those anniversaries, however, should not lead us
to be complacent. Millions of lives are still affected by
armed conflicts that often last years, even decades, and
are characterized by extreme violence, disregard for
civilian lives and widespread contempt for humanitarian
law.
The ICRC is mandated to protect and assist victims
of armed conflict, which requires access to the people
in need. In a number of contexts, reaching the people
affected is becoming increasingly difficult, even
impossible in some cases. Parties to armed conflicts
sometimes explicitly deny access to certain areas,
including places of detention. They may also implicitly
deny access by imposing unacceptable restrictions or
13-61803

13/12/2013

putting various administrative obstacles in our way. In
other cases, the ICRC is prevented from doing its work
or can do it only with great difficulty due to the lack of
minimal conditions of security.
Finally, certain approaches that combine
humanitarian responses, political measures and military
action may give rise to doubts about humanitarian
actors’ genuine aims and complicate their efforts to
gain access to populations in need. The ICRC believes
that in contexts that are extremely polarized and
politicized, the need for truly neutral and independent
humanitarian action is even more crucial to reaching all
the people affected.
The ICRC is acutely aware of the political
controversies surrounding the question of humanitarian
access. As a strictly neutral humanitarian organization,
it has no intention of taking part in those controversies.
It does, however, regularly raise the issue in its bilateral
dialogue with authorities to learn their views on the
matter and to find a political consensus on genuinely
apolitical humanitarian action.
The destruction of infrastructure, the flight of
skilled personnel and the disruption of economic
activities essential to the survival of populations are
often among the main consequences of armed conflict.
When, in such circumstances, access to vulnerable
people in need is denied, it causes widespread suffering
that can easily result in the loss of life, due primarily
to a lack of essential supplies and basic services such
as potable water, food, shelter or medical care. If the
ICRC is unable to establish a confidential dialogue with
military forces, armed groups or civil authorities, it will
not be able to act when people are threatened, harassed
or put in harm’s way because of the hostilities. Because
of the ICRC’s inability to act, detainees may also be at
increased risk of ill-treatment or forced disappearance.
Humanitarian law contains numerous provisions
regulating the provision of relief to vulnerable civilians.
One element those provisions have in common is
that relief activities require the consent of the parties
concerned. A State may refuse access to relief, but only
for valid reasons, such as imperative considerations
of military necessity or if the relief being offered is
not considered to be humanitarian or impartial, is not
needed or is already being provided by others.
The ICRC is constantly negotiating with all parties
and seeks to establish a confidential dialogue with
each. It does so solely in order to secure acceptance

A/68/PV.67

for its presence and to establish a relationship of trust
with all concerned parties in order to persuade them
to respect humanitarian law. Our experience has
shown that strict adherence to the International Red
Cross and Red Crescent Movement’s fundamental
principles — humanity, impartiality, neutrality and
independence — is the best way to discharge our
mandate and serve the interests of the people affected.
This is no less true for the other entities of
the Movement, which also carry out their work in
accordance with the same fundamental principles. Our
primary partners on the ground are the national Red
Cross and Red Crescent societies, which, because of
their intimate knowledge of local conditions and the
dedication of their volunteers, often have access where
others do not. Such access is invaluable and has to
be safeguarded. That is why it is crucial to preserve
the neutrality and independence of national societies
working in such environments.
For Governments, that means enabling national
societies to work with the necessary degree of autonomy.
National societies must be free to decide how best to
respond to prevailing humanitarian needs. For other
organizations active in the field, it also means adapting
coordination mechanisms and cooperation agreements
in such a way that national societies are not perceived
as operating under their control or as serving political
or military ends.
Humanitarian action alone cannot prevent or
solve humanitarian problems. It is the parties to
armed conflicts — States and non-State armed
groups — that bear the legal obligation to respect
international humanitarian law and to spare civilians
unnecessary suffering. We call on all Governments and
armed groups to grant and facilitate unhindered access
to people in need so that the ICRC and other impartial
humanitarian organizations may deliver assistance and
protection in a manner that is neutral and independent.
The ICRC is also greatly troubled by the blatant
disregard for medical personnel and facilities that it has
witnessed all too often. In 2012, the ICRC, with other
components of the Movement, began the Health Care in
Danger project. Non-exhaustive data from 23 countries
revealed that from January 2012 to May 2013, there were
more than 1,200 incidents that affected the delivery of
and access to health care; 112 medical personnel lost
their lives; and approximately 250 of those incidents
involved attacks on or denial of access to ambulances
delivering emergency, and often life-saving, aid. In

13-6180315/21

A/68/PV.67

most of those cases, it was local medical workers who
were affected.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
Medical personnel and wounded or sick people may
avoid medical facilities for fear of arrest, intimidation,
harassment, assault or even death. The consequences
for the entire population are severe and long-lasting,
in particular when they result in the destruction of
infrastructure, the flight of skilled personnel and
disrupted health systems. This significantly increases
the number of indirect victims of armed conflict. We
call on Governments to help improve the situation and
to take the necessary measures to put an end to those
violations of humanitarian law.
In conclusion, we reaffirm that the responsibility for
respecting humanitarian law rests primarily with States
and other parties to armed conflicts. The ICRC calls
on them to show the political will to initiate or actively
support efforts to address the urgent humanitarian
concerns I have raised and, wherever possible, convince
others to do the same.
We hope in that respect that the forthcoming
World Humanitarian Summit will lead to tangible
improvements in the lives of the many millions enduring
the consequences of armed conflicts throughout the
world. Building on the emergency assistance system
established by the General Assembly more than 20 years
ago in resolution 46/182, the Summit should provide
impetus for a close analysis of current developments
in the globalization of humanitarian action and thereby
help to determine fruitful approaches to resolving the
problems identified. Our common goal should remain
to enhance respect for humanitarian law and effective
protection for all victims of armed conflict.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 47/4, of 16 October 1992, I now call on
the observer of the International Organization for
Migration.
Mrs. Klein Solomon (International Organization
for Migration): The International Organization for
Migration (IOM) is very pleased to take the floor today
with reference to the reports of the Secretary-General
and the debate on the coordination of humanitarian and
disaster relief assistance of the United Nations.
Recent and protracted crises have forced millions
to flee their homes, either within or outside the borders

16/21

13/12/2013

of their countries, which calls for the international
community to respond collectively. IOM, as the global
lead agency on migration, continues to provide essential
life-saving assistance to refugees, internally displaced
persons and other migrants affected by crises around
the world. Based on the comprehensive reports of the
Secretary-General, I would like to take up three points
for reflection.
First, when we provide humanitarian assistance
during crises, our response must take into account the
specific needs of migrants, whether they are refugees,
internally displaced persons or economic migrants.
Recent emergencies have demonstrated the vulnerable
situations of people crossing borders and of those who
are stranded or unable to leave. Particularly vulnerable
among these are women, boys and girls, the disabled and
indigenous peoples, who may merit special attention
and assistance. Such humanitarian emergencies can
often be regarded as migration crises, causing complex
and often large-scale migration flows and mobility
patterns. They show the need for a rapid and inclusive
response that provides immediate life-saving assistance
and longer-term life planning and preparedness.
IOM’s migration crisis operational framework allows
for the improvement and systematization of such a
multidimensional response.
Secondly, the multifaceted character of migration
requires strong partnership and coordination with
Governments, with partner organizations in the
international arena with a range of areas of expertise,
and with many actors in civil society, from academia
to direct-assistance service providers. Working
with partners and leveraging expertise to meet the
protection, assistance and recovery needs of the affected
populations is critical to IOM’s operational work.
We are grateful to see Member States recognize,
in draft resolution A/68/L.25, on the strengthening of
the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance
of the United Nations, the benefits of engagement and
coordination with relevant humanitarian actors to
improve the effectiveness of humanitarian response.
IOM is committed to strengthening partnerships at
the global, regional, national and local levels with all
relevant actors. IOM highly values the leadership role
of national Governments and continues to provide its
support to them. Strong and consistent partnerships
enable us to build long-term solutions.
Thirdly, as the Secretary-General states in his report
on strengthening humanitarian assistance (A/68/84),
13-61803

13/12/2013

A/68/PV.67

given the changing and interconnected drivers of
crises, Governments, humanitarian and development
actors need to work in ways that reduce and manage the
risks of crises, rather than to simply respond to their
impact. Long-term development, including through
disaster risk reduction initiatives, is crucial to limiting
the need for emergency relief in future. For IOM, it is
therefore of the utmost importance that humanitarian
and development action be linked in order to build
national and local preparedness and response capacity
and to increase the resilience of affected populations.
We therefore support the reference in draft resolution
A/68/L.27, on humanitarian assistance in the field of
natural disasters, to the importance of strengthening
international cooperation in the timely provision
of humanitarian assistance, through all phases of a
disaster, from relief to development.

announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/68/L.21, in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors: Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Chile, Egypt, Iceland, Latvia,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Norway, Portugal, the Republic of
Moldova, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.

The multilayered and often long-lasting challenges
confronting migrants cannot simply be divided into
two stages. People on the move may find themselves in
need of both humanitarian and development assistance;
one does not preclude the other. Furthermore, to ensure
sustainability, we must be aware that the transition is
a gradual process that requires both flexibility and
inclusiveness. Actors involved in both fields must work
together to ensure a smooth transition from relief to
development.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.22, entitled
“Assistance to the Palestinian people”.

In conclusion, let me reiterate IOM’s commitment
to those who are most vulnerable. To that end, IOM
would like to express its full commitment to the 2016
World Humanitarian Summit and its preparatory
process. We maintain our commitment to strengthening
partnerships and coordination and are convinced that,
as providers of emergency humanitarian assistance,
we can and must continue to contribute to long-term
development solutions.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 70 and its
sub-items (a) to (d) and agenda item 71.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/68/L.21, entitled “Strengthening of international
cooperation and coordination of efforts to study,
mitigate and minimize the consequences of the
Chernobyl disaster”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/68/L.21?
Draft resolution A/68/L.21 was adopted (resolution
68/99).

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/68/L.22,
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors:
Andorra, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia, Iceland,
Japan, Latvia, Lichtenstein, Monaco, Montenegro,
Norway, Peru, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of
Moldova, the Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia
and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/68/L.22?
Draft resolution A/68/L.22 was adopted (resolution
68/100).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.24, entitled
“Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and
protection of United Nations personnel”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/68/L.24, in addition to those delegations listed in

13-6180317/21

A/68/PV.67

the document, the following countries have become
sponsors: Argentina, Armenia, Brazil, Costa Rica,
Georgia, Guatemala, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, the
Republic of Moldova, San Marino, Serbia and Tunisia.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/68/L.24?
Draft resolution A/68/L.24 was adopted (resolution
68/101).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.25, entitled
“Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/68/L.25, in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors: Andorra, Armenia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Georgia, Guatemala, Israel,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Portugal,
the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, San
Marino, Serbia, Switzerland and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/68/L.25?
Draft resolution A/68/L.25 was adopted (resolution
68/102).
The Acting President: The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.27,
entitled “International cooperation on humanitarian
assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief
to development”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/68/L.27 or previously mentioned during
the introduction of the draft resolution, the following
countries have also become sponsors: Australia, Iceland
and New Zealand.

18/21

13/12/2013

The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution
A/68/L.27?
Draft resolution A/68/L.27 was adopted (resolution
68/103).
The Acting President: I now call on those
representatives who have asked to speak in exercise
of the right of reply. May I remind delegations that
statements in exercise of the right of reply are limited to
10 minutes for the first intervention and to five minutes
for the second intervention, and should be made by
delegations from their seat.
I now give the floor to the observer of the Observer
State of Palestine.
Mr. AlHantouli (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic):
I am speaking in reply to the statement made by the
representative of the occupying Power, Israel, yesterday
(see A/68/PV.66).
What we heard yesterday, including accounts
of Israel’s humanitarian activities, changes nothing
about the current reality that Israel is the last military
occupying authority of our era. It has the longest list
of violations of human rights and humanitarian law,
including crimes perpetrated against civilians that can
be deemed war crimes. It would therefore be difficult
for Israel’s cosmetic activities to alter the reality of
the colonialist occupation of Palestinian lands and the
Palestinian people.
The sole option remaining to convince the
international community that Israel is a normal
member of the international community is for it to
end its occupation of Palestinian land, including East
Jerusalem, and to respect and implement the relevant
United Nations resolutions towards the achievement of
a just, durable and comprehensive peace. However, it
is clear that Israel is unconcerned and that it is not in
that country’s interest to adopt such an option. Israel
is pursuing and increasing its practices and policies in
violation of international law on a daily basis.
The Palestinian people and their leaders adopted
a historic decision in 1988 by accepting the two-State
solution and the creation of the State of Palestine in an
area comprising 22 per cent of the historic territory of
Palestine. It would be a State existing side by side with
the State of Israel. Ever since, we have been committed
to respecting the political process and the negotiations
conducted within the framework of the peace process.

13-61803

13/12/2013

However, more than 25 years later it has become
clear that Israel is not concerned with the peace process.
It wishes only to safeguard the process itself. It has
blocked any serious initiative to achieve peace. When
the late Israeli Prime Minister Itzhak Rabin worked
in earnest to establish peace, they killed him. When
former Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert was close
to concluding a peace agreement, he was dismissed and
banished from political life. That is the reality of Israel.
That reality is not going to change if the international
community does not take effective measures, as it did
to put an end to the apartheid regime in South Africa.
In conclusion, I wish to inform the representative
of Israel, the occupying Power, that when we spoke
yesterday of the limitations being imposed on the
delivery of assistance to the Palestinian people, that
reality is reflected in all of the declarations and decisions
adopted by the relevant bodies, in particular the United
Nations. Regarding the capacity and aspirations of the
Palestinian people, we wish to reaffirm the fact that
Israel’s brutal occupation must end so that we can live in
peace and security. Let us live in peace and in security.
Then the bounds of our capacities and aspirations will
be unlimited.
Mr. Nitzan (Israel): I am compelled to respond
to the Palestinian statement that we have just heard.
I must say that I was shocked to hear the Palestinian
statement, which conveyed a great deal of hypocrisy
and cynicism. The statement was full of lies, aggression
and accusations against my Government immediately
after Israel joined the consensus adoption of resolution
68/100, on assistance to the Palestinian people.
Did we hear even one word from the Palestinians
about Israel joining the consensus every year on this
resolution? Did we hear a word yesterday about that
in their statement (see A/68/PV.66) or today in their
reply? We hear not one word. Their statements are
determined to exploit a professional and focused
debate on humanitarian affairs in order to further their
political agenda at the expense of the United Nations
membership, and are totally contradictory to the spirit
of negotiations and dialogue that we expect to see from
our partners.
It is a good question if, in the light of what we
have heard right now, we can call them partners to
negotiations. It does not reflect the spirit of dialogue
and is condemned. The statement given earlier by the
Palestinian representative could have been pulled from

A/68/PV.67

the pages of a Palestinian propaganda pamphlet and not
a substantive United Nations debate.
While the Palestinians are busy condemning Israel
at the United Nations, Israel is busy supporting the
Palestinian economy and developing its infrastructure.
Israel is right now, at this moment, assisting the
Palestinians in Gaza. We heard the Palestinians speak
of Gaza yesterday and today. There was not a word on
the rule of Hamas in Gaza and Hamas’ responsibility
for the situation in that area. Of course, that is the
language they commonly use in order to attack Israel
each and every time, so cynically. Nonetheless, they
keep on accusing Israel and exploiting that arena.
Speaking of Gaza, there was not a word about
Israel’s process of approving the Gaza Marine gas field
that will actually contribute to the Palestinian economy.
Why is that so? There is such hypocrisy and such
cynicism. Before spreading false accusations, I hope
that in future the Palestinian delegation will be mindful
of the fact that time is also a precious natural resource
and we are engaged in negotiations. Let them keep it
positive and constructive. Both parties, I believe, aim
at achieving peace. Let the Palestinians not exploit the
United Nations arena so cynically for the inalienable
right own political propaganda.
Mr. Khan (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to reply to the false claims and
accusations made by the representative of Syria that
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia supports terrorism and
is undermining its humanitarian role in supporting its
brotherly Syrian people.
First, we have provided $50 million in support
of Syrian internally displaced persons and, through
our national campaign of support to our brothers in
Syria, we have provided $552 million in the form of
food, medical supplies, tents and supplies for winter,
including blankets and other such items. Moreover, the
Government has donated $10 million to Syrian refugees
in Jordan. In addition, we have provided $100 million
to support the Syrian people through the conference
of the Group of Friends of the Syrian People; at the
donors conference that was held in Kuwait, we pledged
$300 million.
Secondly, with regard to Syrian citizens and their
access to our territories, we have provided more than
20,000 visas to Syrian citizens.
Thirdly, with regard to the accusation of the Syrian
delegation that we are destroying their territories, we

13-6180319/21

A/68/PV.67

would like the delegation to reconsider that accusation,
to see the reality in which Syrians are living, and
acknowledge who is really torturing, killing and
displacing their people.
This is just a brief statement for clarification.
However, we assert that the lies and accusations
presented by the Syrian representative are designed to
preoccupy the General Assembly and divert its attention
from what is happening on the ground. Our delegation
sees no point in continuing to reply to such allegations,
which only prolong the Assembly’s preoccupation with
that matter.
Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to apologize for requesting the
floor in response to the statement in right of reply just
made by the representative of the Saudi regime.
Before I begin my right of reply, I would like to
put a question to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Is he confident that the funds he has cited have been
provided by his Government to support humanitarian
efforts for the Syrian people, or were they just to finance
the purchase of weapons and military equipment for the
terrorists, who have used them to kill Syrians?
The flagrant, barbarian Saudi intervention in Syrian
affairs has become quite evident, especially since the
Saudi Minister for Foreign Affairs openly stated that
his country is providing assistance to the terrorists so
that they can kill Syrians and literally eat their livers.
The Saudi intelligence apparatus is recruiting terrorist
extremists, especially those of different nationalities
who were incarcerated in Saudi prisons. They are
criminals and members of Al-Qaida, and were released
from jail with the objective of sending them to kill
Syrians.
All of this has come to light in statements issued
by the Saudi regime, yet now the representative of
that regime tells us that his Government is providing
millions of dollars in assistance to the Syrian people.
Given the silence of the international community, what
sheer ignorance it is, and what a violation of the rules
of international law and the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations, when a Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Saudi Arabia tells the world that it is quite evident
that the Saudi regime is providing the Syrian opposition
with weapons.
Mr. Özkaya (Turkey): This platform has been
abused once again for utter misrepresentations that
have already been categorically rejected by Turkey. We
20/21

13/12/2013

reject once again the baseless accusations expressed by
one delegation.
Turkey’s position and contribution to the efforts
of the international community in extending a helping
hand to the Syrian people is well known. We will
continue to stand by the Syrian nation during this dire
period.
Mr. AlHantouli (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to say that I do not find the reaction of Israel,
the occupying State, to be strange. It is the reaction of
any criminal who is exposed and scandalized before the
world and the international community.
I just want to conclude by reading some verses of
poetry by the deceased poet Mahmoud Darwish, in
which he speaks of the Israeli occupation.
(spoke in English)
“It is time for you to be gone...
For we have work to do on our land
We have a past here
We have the first cry of life
We have the present, the present and a future
We have the world here and the hereafter
So leave our country
Our land, our sea
Our wheat, our salt, our wounds
Everything, and leave
The memories of memory”.
Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I apologize for requesting the floor again,
but I wish to reply to the statement just made by the
representative of Turkey.
It is quite shameful that the representative of
Turkey should express such apparent sympathy for the
suffering of the Syrian people given the aggressive,
terroristic policies of his country towards Syria.
Turkish and international newspapers report on what
the Turkish Government has done to its own people
and neighbouring countries. Turkey is now a base for
Al-Qaida and for many terrorist organizations. I would
refer to one report that hundreds of Turkish citizens
have joined the fight alongside Al-Qaida and other
terrorist groups working in Syria, with the knowledge
of the Turkish Government at various levels. Turkish
support for terrorism is not limited to Syria but
extends to Libya, Tunisia and Egypt. There are reports
indicating that the Turkish authorities have supervised
the smuggling of weapons to terrorist groups in Sinai,

13-61803

13/12/2013

in the sisterly Arab Republic of Egypt. These are but a
few of the examples I could cite.
I hope that the Turkish representative will represent
the interests of the brotherly people of Turkey, who
are deeply opposed to the regional policies of his
Government, and to advise his Government to work
to establish peace and security in the region, instead
of spreading chaos and terrorism. I would also remind
him that Syria is the main reason for his Government’s
increased role in the region, but it has exploited that role
to stab friends in the back and conspire against Syria.
Turkey’s conspiracy against Syria is the main reason
why the role of the Government has become scandalous,
to the detriment of good-neighbourly relations and to
the interests of the people of Turkey.
Mr. Nitzan (Israel): I apologize that I have to
take the floor again to reply to the second statement
by the Palestinian representative. I wish we had heard
something new from the Palestinian representative in
his second statement other than empty political words.
Telling lies over and over again does not make them true.

A/68/PV.67

All aspects should and will be addressed and negotiated
in the context of direct bilateral negotiations between
Israel and the Palestinians. We are engaged in those
negotiations and we are committed to that dialogue.
Whatever lies are spread here will not change the truth.
Israel is engaged and committed to the engagement and
to direct dialogue between Israel and the Palestinians.
Unfortunately, the Palestinian delegation took
the floor once again without actually addressing
my questions or mentioning, for example, that in the
surreal world of the General Assembly, Israel has
actually joined the consensus on a resolution to assist
the Palestinian people. Yet, we hear such cynical,
aggressive, violent language used by the Palestinian
delegation. That is something I cannot comprehend,
and I think that we should all condemn their words and
their tone in doing that.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
70 and its sub-items (a) to (d) and agenda item 71.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

13-6180321/21
