United Nations

S/PV.3811

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-second Year

3811th Meeting
Thursday, 14 August 1997, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir John Weston . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland)

Members:

Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Somavía
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Chen Weixiong
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Berrocal Soto
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Awaad
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Thiebaud
Guinea-Bissau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Da Rosa
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Owada
Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mahugu
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Wlosowicz
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Soares
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Park
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Gorelik
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dahlgren
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Burleigh

Agenda
The situation in Albania
Letter dated 12 August 1997 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1997/632)
Letter dated 5 August 1997 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/1997/614)
Letter dated 8 August 1997 from the Permanent Representative of Albania to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/1997/628)

97-85930 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
The meeting was called to order at 10.55 a.m.

3811th meeting
14 August 1997
the International Committee of the Red Cross to the
United Nations.

Adoption of the agenda
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Albania
Letter dated 12 August 1997 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1997/632)
Letter dated 5 August 1997 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Italy to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/1997/614)
Letter dated 8 August 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of Albania to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1997/628)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Albania, Denmark, Germany, Greece, Italy, Luxembourg,
Romania, Slovenia, Spain, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Turkey in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kulla (Albania)
took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Molde
(Denmark), Mr. Eitel (Germany), Mr. Zacharakis
(Greece), Mr. Fulci (Italy), Mr. Wolzfeld
(Luxembourg), Mrs. Sandru (Romania), Mr. Türk
(Slovenia), Mr. Laclaustra (Spain), Mr. Čalovski (the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia) and
Mr. Çelem (Turkey) took the seats reserved for them
at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council’s prior consultations, if I hear no
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mrs. Sylvie Junod, head of the delegation of

2

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council
is meeting in response to the request contained in a letter
dated 5 August 1997 from the Chargé d’affaires ad
interim of the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, document S/1997/614, and in a letter dated 8
August 1997 from the Permanent Representative of
Albania to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council, document S/1997/628.
Members of the Council have before them the letter
dated 12 August 1997 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
document S/1997/632, transmitting the text of a letter
dated 11 August 1997 from the Chargé d’affaires ad
interim of the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United
Nations.
The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Somavía (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
Today’s meeting has been convened to consider the
results of the activities of the multinational protection
force for Albania, the establishment of which was
authorized by the Security Council.
Responding to a request by the Governments of
Albania and Italy, the Council considered the situation
and determined that the crisis in that country constituted
a threat to the peace and security of the region, and
decided very swiftly to establish a multinational
protection force.
By means of resolution 1101 (1997), adopted on 28
March, the Council authorized a number of Member
States to establish a multinational protection force of a
temporary and limited nature to facilitate the safe and
prompt delivery of humanitarian assistance and to help
create a secure environment for the missions of
international organizations in Albania, including those
providing humanitarian assistance.
From the outset of consultations in the Council,
Chile supported the adoption of measures appropriate to
the serious crisis in Albania, aware of the need to avoid

Security Council
Fifty-second year
a deterioration of the situation and the spread of its effects
to neighbouring countries. As resolution 1101 (1997) makes
clear, the purpose of the multinational protection force was
strictly humanitarian. In considering the question and
adopting a resolution on it, the Council was simply
shouldering its responsibilities in the humanitarian sphere.
The protection force was deployed efficiently, focusing
on the most sensitive areas and responding to the challenge
of making possible the delivery of humanitarian assistance
in a safe and timely manner. The consolidation of the
presence of the force took place within the time period and
modalities that were envisioned. Without doubt, its presence
produced a very positive effect on the overall security
situation. In spite of certain isolated incidents, the everyday
activities of the Albanian population began to develop in a
normal manner from that time.
In this context, we appreciate the fact that the force
provided a secure framework for civilian and humanitarian
convoys, as well as protection measures for the World
Health Organization, the United Nations Children’s Fund
and various missions from non-governmental organizations
active in Albania. As is well known, this range of measures
led to a qualitative improvement in the conditions for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance for the Albanian
population.
My delegation considers particularly valuable the fact
that the force provided protection to the non-governmental
organizations that requested it. We believe that providing
those entities with the protection they needed was one of
the basic objectives laid down in resolution 1101 (1997).
Furthermore, in providing that protection we met the
assumption that humanitarian workers, whether or not they
are part of the United Nations system, have a right to
expect the Security Council to be effective in protecting
their lives and property.
With regard to procedural aspects, we note with
satisfaction the fact that coordination of the protection force
with the Albanian authorities developed in a flexible way,
extending to the local and police authorities. For its part,
the United Nations, through the Department of
Humanitarian Affairs, maintained an appropriate presence
as observer in the meetings of the Steering Committee of
the force.
Our assessment of the work of the multinational force
is clearly positive and leads us to the conclusion that the
objectives of resolution 1101 (1997) were fully met.

3811th meeting
14 August 1997
My delegation expresses its sincere appreciation to
the 11 countries that participated in the establishment of
the multinational protection force, selflessly contributing
to the solution of the Albanian crisis.
We are especially grateful to the Government of
Italy for the active steps it took to obtain the Council’s
decision and for its leadership in the conduct of the force.
Successful operations always have many authors. That is
why it is fair at this time to underscore this great
contribution by Italy to the cause of peace. It had the
foresight to initiate and encourage a prompt decision. It
had the logistical capacity to coordinate the operational
dimensions of the force and the sense of political
timeliness to enable it to both act and withdraw in a
timely manner. We are grateful for that, and pleased that
Ambassador Fulci is present with us; he has every reason
to feel proud of his country.
Through resolution 1114 (1997), adopted on 19 June,
the Council, recognizing the decisive importance of the
elections planned for the end of that month, decided to
extend the mandate of the protection force so that it might
continue to maintain an atmosphere of security during the
final stage of the electoral process. In so doing, the
Council was explicitly recognizing the neutral and
impartial manner in which the force was implementing its
mandate. In spite of a few isolated incidents, the two
rounds of these crucial elections took place successfully,
in an environment free of violence and under normal
conditions.
My delegation is aware of the importance of this
electoral event for the future of Albania and its
institutions, and for this reason we appreciate the role
played by the protection force, which was the key for
ensuring tranquillity in the country, especially at polling
stations, and for protecting the international observers of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
The formation of a new Government before the
withdrawal of the force is the clearest expression of the
success of the electoral process.
It is therefore clear that the decision by the Security
Council to extend the mandate of the multinational
protection force was a wise one. The nature of the
mission of the force is also an important precedent to be
considered in the event of similar situations that might be
brought to the Council’s attention.
As we congratulate ourselves for the success of this
operation, we must not forget the long-suffering people of

3

Security Council
Fifty-second year
Albania. If developments turned out well it is because, in
general, the people themselves contributed to the
stabilization of their homeland. The protection force created
the conditions that the Albanian people needed to establish
their own democratic course. We must, therefore,
congratulate them too for not having missed an opportunity,
which so often happens in other cases that are considered
by the Council. The Albanian people also have a great role
to play in the manner in which we evaluate this success.
Finally, the undeniable success of this operation must
not conceal the magnitude of the tasks that face the
Albanian people as they start again on the course of social
peace and economic recovery.
The profound causes of the Albanian crisis, as we
know, have not been completely overcome. There is a need
to build a broad consensus within Albanian society so that
it can recover its faith in its institutions and in the rule of
law.
The international community cannot be dissociated
from this undertaking, which affects a country in a region
where peace and stability are not always assured. The
United Nations, through its agencies and relevant organs,
must give assistance to the Albanian people. And the
Security Council, in particular, must continue to follow
closely the evolution of the situation in Albania.
Mr. Owada (Japan): At the outset, I wish to state that
the delegation of Japan is pleased to see the successful
completion of the mandate of the multinational protection
force in Albania. Taking advantage of this felicitous
occasion, I wish to offer some comments on behalf of the
Government of Japan.
First of all, I wish to commend all those involved in
the multinational protection force during the past four and
half months. In the view of the Government of Japan, the
multinational protection force has done an excellent job in
facilitating the delivery of humanitarian assistance and in
creating a secure environment for the activities of
international organizations in Albania. It is gratifying that
the task of the force has been smoothly accomplished in
close cooperation with the Albanian authorities and the
international organizations concerned.
During the Security Council’s initial deliberation on
the authorization of the force in March of this year, Japan
stressed that it was important that the Security Council, in
authorizing peacekeeping activities by forces not under the
direct command and control of the United Nations, proceed

4

3811th meeting
14 August 1997
with utmost care and prudence so as to ensure that their
operations were conducted in accordance with the letter
and the spirit of the Charter and strictly within the
mandate authorized by the Security Council. I am happy
to state that the current operations of the multinational
protection force have been carried out in full accord with
this basic position stated by my Government. I wish to
note that this operation also constitutes an important
precedent of a militarily and politically coordinated
multinational action under Chapter VII of the Charter,
providing a comprehensive framework to deal with a
humanitarian crisis in one country, thus preventing the
spillover of the crisis which might affect peace and
security in the broader region.
Thanks to these efforts by the multinational
protection force and by other international organizations,
as well as to the constructive activities of nongovernmental organizations, the humanitarian situation in
Albania has improved significantly. Particularly
noteworthy is the parliamentary election held in June,
which was followed by the establishment of the new
political leadership. Although a limited number of
unfortunate incidents were observed during the electoral
process, my Government is of the view that the election
may be deemed as acceptable, given the prevailing
circumstances. It represents a very important step forward
towards restoring the political, economic and social order
of Albania. The Government of Japan welcomes the
formation of the new Government of Albania and hopes
that the new Government, in cooperation with all the
parties involved, will succeed in normalizing the situation
in the country.
At this juncture, the most urgent task of the new
Government, in my view, is the restoration of law and
order throughout the country. The security situation in the
country is as yet less than satisfactory: vast stockpiles of
weapons still remain in the hands of the local population
and violence by armed gangs is rampant. I should like to
emphasize in this context that the restoration of law and
order is also a prerequisite for attracting reconstruction
assistance from the international community.
It is also incumbent upon the Government of
Albania to draw up its own blueprint containing concrete
economic measures for the reconstruction of the country
as expeditiously as possible. The presentation of such a
blueprint will, I believe, go a long way towards
redeeming Albania’s credibility in the eyes of the
international community. My Government urges the
Government of Albania to embark on this task without

Security Council
Fifty-second year
delay, basing it on the advice of the relevant international
bodies such as the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund. I should particularly like to stress in this
regard the importance of the reform of the financial system,
in view of the recent experience in which the disturbances
in Albania were ignited by the collapse of pyramid
investment schemes.
Japan has been assisting the economic development of
Albania since before the recent disturbances. It has also
made a financial contribution to the electoral process. My
Government is committed to continuing to offer appropriate
assistance to Albania. It does so in the hope that the
Albanian people themselves have learned from the latest
unfortunate events a valuable lesson in democracy and in
the market economic system. After all, it goes without
saying that the primary responsibility for the normalization
process in Albania lies with the Albanian people
themselves. It is the conviction of Japan that they will make
their best efforts to achieve durable stability and
development.
I should like to conclude my statement by conveying
the profound gratitude of the Government of Japan to those
parties that have contributed to the success of the
multinational protection force. In particular, the appreciation
of my Government goes to Italy, which played the leading
role in this operation, and to the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and its Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights, as well as to the other
international organizations. It is now incumbent upon all of
us in the international community to offer our cooperation
to the Government and the people of Albania in their
endeavour to restore stability, foster democracy and
promote development in their own country, Albania.
Mr. Awaad (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): At
the outset I would like to express the appreciation of the
delegation of Egypt for the efforts that have been made by
the countries participating in the multinational protection
force, which is playing a significant interim role in
restoring security and stability in Albania. Appreciation is
particularly due to the Italy for its leadership of the force,
as well as to the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe. We would also like to express our appreciation
for the valuable periodic briefings provided by the
delegation of France to the Security Council during the
previous period.
When the situation began to unravel and crisis erupted
in Albania, the Security Council adopted resolution 1101
(1997), which welcomed the offer of a number of countries

3811th meeting
14 August 1997
to establish the multinational protection force to facilitate
the prompt delivery of humanitarian assistance to those in
need and to create a secure, appropriate environment for
the work of the international organizations in Albania,
including those providing humanitarian assistance.
We would also like to express our appreciation for
the periodic reports that were presented by the
multinational protection force during the past months.
They contributed to briefing the Council on the evolution
of the situation in Albania, as well as on the operations to
contain the crisis which erupted at the beginning of this
year. These reports have also highlighted that the
multinational protection force performed the tasks
assigned in accordance with Council resolutions 1101
(1997) and 1114 (1997).
The multinational protection force is an example of
regional cooperation making an undoubted contribution to
the enhancement of international peace and security. Over
the past four months, the force has been able to restore
stability and security in Albania, and it succeeded in
creating a properly secure environment for the holding of
elections last June — which promoted increased voter
participation and made it possible to achieve results
qualified as acceptable by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
But successful operations such as that of the
multinational protection force can be no substitute for a
United Nations role in containing crises throughout the
world, particularly in Africa.
At the end of the force’s mission in Albania, the
international community — and especially the donor
community — along with international funds and United
Nations development agencies must play a greater role in
enhancing long-term stability through serious, genuine and
effective help in solving the economic and development
problems facing the Albanian people.
Mr. Thiebaud (France) (interpretation from
French): France has a dual interest in today’s assessment
of the work of the multinational protection force in
Albania: as a member of the Security Council and as a
State participant in the force.
We should recall the circumstances in which the
force was established: Albania was in the grip of grave
internal disorder and widespread violence, which
threatened to plunge the country into chaos and which
seriously affected the security of the population and the

5

Security Council
Fifty-second year
provision of supplies. The Albanian Government requested
United Nations help in overcoming the crisis and restoring
normal conditions for the functioning of the State and for
the life of the population.
We can be gratified today at the prompt reaction of
the United Nations and of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to that urgent appeal, and
we may draw encouraging lessons from it.
Eleven countries, under the leadership of Italy,
declared their readiness to send a total of up to 7,200 troops
to form a multinational protection force with the mission of
facilitating the prompt and safe delivery of humanitarian
assistance and of helping create the secure environment
needed for the missions of international organizations in
Albania, to provide humanitarian assistance and to help in
monitoring elections. By their actions, those European
countries demonstrated their solidarity with a country that
had appealed for assistance. On the ground they
encountered conditions that, by definition, were not easy,
and they thus agreed to take risks.
We believe that this operation is an example of crisis
management in Europe and of a prompt and effective
response — and European countries did indeed respond
promptly and effectively here. We wish also to commend
the force for having carried out its mandate with neutrality
and impartiality, as it cooperated with the Albanian
authorities — for that was certainly the spirit in which
States participants in the force conceived their mission. The
French delegation wishes finally to pay heartfelt tribute to
the way in which Italy assumed the leadership of the force,
enabling it completely to fulfil the task entrusted to it.
The Security Council too shouldered its responsibilities
by authorizing States participating in the multinational
protection force to conduct the necessary operations. It thus
demonstrated once more that it wishes to respond
favourably to States that voluntarily seek to contribute to
the settlement of a crisis — and to do so in a transparent
manner vis-à-vis the organ bearing responsibility for
international peace and security in accordance with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. This is not
the first or the last time the Council will have acted thus,
by placing initiatives taken by a group of States to help
overcome and resolve a crisis in the framework of respect
for the competence and principles of the United Nations.
Other international organizations too made a
substantial contribution in responding to Albania’s request
for assistance, notably the OSCE, whose presence on the

6

3811th meeting
14 August 1997
ground made it possible to hold elections under
acceptable conditions. My delegation pays tribute to that
organization.
The international community’s action in Albania
over the past four months was a successful example of
cooperation among States and regional and international
organizations in acting promptly and in an appropriate
manner to prevent a fresh crisis from worsening to the
point of threatening the stability, peace and security of a
whole region. Yet if all the benefits of the emergency
action that has just been completed are to be realized, the
stabilization of the country must be consolidated and a
contribution must be made to economic and social
recovery. That is the task now facing all States and
relevant international organizations.
Mr. Gorelik (Russian Federation) (interpretation
from Russian): Four months ago, in response to a request
from the Albanian Government and to an initiative by
Italy, the Security Council authorized the dispatch of a
multinational protection force to Albania. The force
became the central element of the international
community’s response to the crisis in that country.
Today, we are pleased to note that the mandate of
the multinational protection force has been fulfilled. The
force deserves high commendation. It facilitated the
normalization of the situation in Albania, ensured the safe
delivery and distribution of humanitarian assistance,
provided security for representatives of international
organizations in Albania, and enabled the Albanian
authorities, in cooperation with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), to prepare
and conduct special parliamentary elections in a very
short time-frame.
We pay tribute to the countries that participated in
the force and, first and foremost, to Italy, the leader of
the operation.
From the very outset, Russia advocated the operation
of the force in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, the principles of the OSCE, and the decisions of
the Security Council. An important element facilitating
the success of the work of the force was that the mandate
had been clearly written. The Security Council set up
appropriate monitoring of the force’s activities, inter alia
through regular reports. Effective interaction was also
established between the force and the relevant structures
of the OSCE. We believe that to a significant extent this
formula helped ensure the neutral and successful conduct

Security Council
Fifty-second year
of the operation. We think it is very important that in future
too the Security Council should be kept regularly informed
about developments in Albania.
The process of achieving a settlement in Albania
provides another example of valuable interaction between
the United Nations and regional organizations such as the
OSCE on the basis of a comprehensive approach and a
rational division of labour. The Albanian operation applied
the principle by which regional peacekeeping forces would
be answerable to the Security Council, which bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security. The experience of the force will certainly be
useful in further improving cooperation between the United
Nations and its regional partners.
What has to be done in Albania today is to consolidate
the gradual move of the country towards democracy, the
rule of law and economic reform. We believe that a
solution to these crucially important issues within the
context of the process of national reconciliation will
become a priority for the new leadership in Albania. In our
view, the post-election statements provide prerequisites for
further gradual normalization of the situation, which would
be carried out primarily, of course, by the Albanians
themselves.
In conclusion, the Russian Federation, within the
context of the common efforts of the international
community and with a leading role for the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), will continue
to be prepared to provide assistance in the restoration of
peace and stability to Albania.
Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): We welcome today’s debate.
This is the second time in a few days that the Security
Council, at a formal meeting, has reflected on regional
involvement in situations which pose a threat to
international peace and security. Last week we discussed
the regional efforts aimed at the maintenance of peace and
security in the Central African Republic. Today we are
marking the end of the United Nations authorization of the
multinational protection force operating in Albania. As we
stated in our intervention last week, the theme of the
regional initiative is becoming more and more popular; this
is a very welcome phenomenon. Today’s debate makes us
believe even more that we, the members of the international
community gathered at the United Nations, should spare no
effort to make regional leadership function promptly and
effectively. In our view, the mechanism which has been
used in relation to Albania is a positive development, and
we should benefit from it.

3811th meeting
14 August 1997
The speed with which that country has been assisted
is indeed impressive. Our delegation has a particularly
clear recollection of the day Security Council resolution
1101 (1997) was adopted. At that time, Poland was
presiding over the Council’s work. We recall the various
arguments reviewed by the members of the Council. But
most of all we remember the determination with which
the case was brought before the Council and with which
it was pursued.
Here I wish to express my Government’s gratitude
to those Governments which actively contributed to
setting up the operation, and in particular to the
Government of Italy for the leadership it undertook. It is
evident that without the willingness of States of the
region, the whole operation would not have been possible.
Of course, there was much at stake. And after all, there
was considerable risk involved. But would we have not
risked more had we not decided to act promptly? The
answer to this question does not seem to be so difficult.
Unlike many others, this operation did not last long.
Yet it achieved a lot. We believe that, as was stated in the
final report to the Security Council on the operation,
“The presence of the multinational protection force
effectively blocked the risk of Albania sliding
towards anarchy or even internal political conflict”
(S/1997/632, appendix, para. 13)
and that it was very much due to its presence that
adequate and acceptable elections were possible.
We are satisfied with the information the Security
Council has received throughout the course of the
operation. Thorough, objective and regular reports are of
great importance in cases such as the one we are dealing
with today. It must not be forgotten that the Security
Council has to constantly follow the development of an
authorized or approved operation to be able to react
adequately at any stage.
Now, as the multinational protection force comes to
an end, Albania and its people face another challenge:
developing national prospects. This is a lengthy, complex
and demanding task which, we trust, Albania will tackle
with the utmost energy.
The withdrawal of the operation does not mean the
end of external assistance to Albania. Indeed, economic
and political cooperation should be intensified. We have
had many examples of such cooperation so far, including,

7

Security Council
Fifty-second year
for instance, the activities of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the European Union
and the Western European Union. It is hard to overestimate
their value, and more cooperation will certainly be
forthcoming if the Albanian people themselves prove that
all international contributions are properly utilized.
In conclusion, may I again stress the importance of the
role and the capacity of a “coalition of the willing”: a
coalition of those who well understand how important it is
not to be indifferent to developments on our globe,
especially when they threaten peace and security —
needless to say, no matter where.
Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): On behalf
of my Government, I would like to join other members of
the Council, the United Nations and the international
community in expressing appreciation for the role of the
multinational protection force, and in particular the
leadership of Italy, in Albania during the past several
months.
The mission of the multinational protection force to
facilitate the safe and prompt delivery of humanitarian
assistance, protect international relief workers and help
create a secure environment in which elections could be
held has been by all accounts a success. In the wake of the
tragic violence and loss of life in this recent period, we
hope that Albania is at last on the road to stability,
democracy, and an economy based on free-market
principles.
I also wish to take this opportunity to emphasize the
remarkable work of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), especially the role of the
personal representative for Albania of the OSCE Chairmanin-Office, Mr. Franz Vranitzky, and his team. Their work
was instrumental in helping to organize the holding of
elections acceptable under the prevailing conditions, against
tremendous odds. This was a crucial first step in creating
viable institutions of democratic government in Albania. In
the critical period ahead, the OSCE will remain the central
coordinating body for international initiatives to assist the
newly elected Government.
We also welcome the results of the second
international meeting on Albania, held at Rome on 31 July,
which reaffirmed the commitment of the United States and
our partners in the international community to aid Albania,
but which also outlined the necessary fiscal and economic
steps which must be taken to put Albanian on a sound
economy footing.

8

3811th meeting
14 August 1997
One of the most urgent tasks which Albania must
address is the restoration of civil order and the creation of
a viable security structure consistent with a democratic
society. This task includes reconstruction of the Albanian
armed forces and the training of a non-partisan
professional police force. We applaud the decisions of
countries to remain involved in assisting the Albanian
military and police with bilateral training assistance
following the departure of the multinational protection
force. We welcome the decision of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), under its Partnership for
Peace programme, to send an assessment team to Albania
within the week. The recommendations of the team will
be incorporated into long-term plans to rebuild Albania’s
security infrastructure within a democratic society.
The crisis of recent months has precipitated a period
of change in Albania. Much remains to be done, however.
Difficult and painful reform lies ahead if Albania is to
succeed in fostering political and social reconciliation,
economic development, consolidation of a fully
functioning and independent judiciary and electronic
media, and the creation of active civil-society institutions.
Finally, there must be a complete end to the pyramid
schemes that have ravaged the country and deprived
millions of their life savings. There must be an end to
banditry, factionalism and the rampant proliferation of
arms and disorder in the country. While the responsibility
ultimately lies with the Albanian people themselves, the
international community stands ready to provide
assistance and support in the days ahead.
Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): My delegation is happy to
participate in this debate, which marks the successful
completion of the international effort to create secure
conditions for the delivery of humanitarian assistance in
Albania, as outlined in resolutions 1101 (1997) of 28
March 1997 and 1114 (1997) of 19 June 1997.
At the outset, my delegation would like to thank the
Member States that contributed to the multinational
protection force in Albania. In addition, our appreciation
goes to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), the European Union and other
international organizations providing humanitarian
assistance to the people of Albania. In this connection,
my delegation would like to pay special tribute to the
Government and people of Italy for the pivotal role that
country played during the operation.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
The importance of the force in creating a secure
environment for the delivery of much-needed humanitarian
assistance cannot be overemphasized. In addition to that
important role, the force was instrumental in facilitating the
holding of reasonably free and fair elections in Albania.
Without the force’s timely presence, Albania might have
engaged in civil strife of untold magnitude. In this regard,
my delegation welcomes the commitment by the OSCE to
maintain a presence in Albania.
While appreciating the positive role that the force has
played in bringing about a secure environment, my
delegation would like to stress that it is only the Albanian
people themselves who can bring about a lasting peace in
their country. In this regard, my delegation calls upon the
Albanian people, and in particular the leaders, to build on
the progress made so far in order to bring about peace and
prosperity in Albania. This will require a high degree of
commitment and political will, and we wish them well in
this endeavour. Having said that, my delegation would like
to underscore the need for international assistance in the
reconstruction phase as Albania strives to rebuild its
economic, political and social institutions.
The deployment of the multinational protection force
in Albania was done in a spirit of cooperation and
singleness of purpose. It is an example of a successful
regional effort, an approach that has recently gained
acceptance in conflict resolution in Africa. As mentioned in
the final report, the Steering Committee operated by
consensus. The report states:
“This mechanism proved to be a political asset, since
all countries shared responsibility for the Committee’s
decisions, reinforcing cohesion and solidarity.”
(S/1997/632, para. 17)
The Security Council had earlier demonstrated the
same degree of cooperation and consensus, considering the
speed with which it authorized the mandate — not to
mention the non-controversial manner in which that was
done.
Unfortunately, authorization of such operations in
other parts of the world, particularly in Africa, has not
enjoyed the kind of speed and cooperation that we observed
in the case of Albania. While we accept that all situations
are different, it is our sincere hope that the degree of
understanding that was evident in the Albanian case will be
a guiding principle for such operations and will not remain
a unique experience.

3811th meeting
14 August 1997
Mr. Lopes da Rosa (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation
from French): On 13 March 1997, the Security Council
received a letter from the Government of Albania
expressing its deep concern over its inability to ensure
law and order because of the climate of violence and
anarchy into which the country had been plunged, and
requesting emergency consideration of the matter given
the continuing deterioration in the situation.
The Security Council, aware of its responsibilities,
recognized the importance of stability in the region. The
Council considered this uncontrollable violence to be not
only a threat to the peace in Albania but also an attack on
regional stability as a whole. Accordingly, it adopted a
presidential statement calling on the parties to halt the
hostilities and the violence and urging them to cooperate
in efforts at political dialogue with a view to easing
tension and facilitating the return of peace to the country
as a whole.
We welcomed this speedy reaction on the part of the
Security Council. It demonstrated a desire to act quickly
and jointly in order to provide solutions in a timely
manner, thereby avoiding any further deterioration in
hotbeds of tension or in conflict situations. It is our hope
that this trend and this spirit of harmony will continue in
all similar situations.
Given the continuing violence and concerned over
the deterioration in the humanitarian situation, two weeks
following the receipt of the letter from the Government of
Albania, on 28 March 1997, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1101 (1997) authorizing the establishment of a
multinational protection force to facilitate prompt delivery
of humanitarian assistance and to help create a secure
environment for missions of international organizations in
Albania. Guinea-Bissau welcomes the speed with which
the decision was taken and voted in favour of the
resolution, for we believe that the United Nations, and the
Security Council in particular, should become increasingly
and more speedily involved at the first sign of conflict.
We would venture to hope that our Council will
make good use of the clear example set by the operation
in Albania, enabling it to take measures speedily where
necessary in other circumstances in order to preserve
international peace and security.
Guinea-Bissau would like once again to emphasize
the importance of preventive diplomacy in the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Here we would like to reiterate our
thanks to all those who made efforts to find a negotiated

9

Security Council
Fifty-second year
solution to this crisis. We thank also the Member States
that provided contingents to the force. We would like to
pay a well-deserved tribute to Italy and to France, which
kept the Council regularly informed of the force’s activities
through clear and accurate periodic reports.
Today, four months following the adoption of
resolution 1101 (1997), the Security Council is assessing
the force’s achievements. We think that the balance sheet
is a very positive one and that the force has fulfilled its
mandate satisfactorily. This represents yet another success
story for the United Nations. Relative calm has been
restored, humanitarian assistance has reached the people it
was intended for, elections were held and a democratic
Government has been constituted. My delegation finds all
this very encouraging.
However, much remains to be done before Albania
can truly restore peace and set forth on the path towards
reconciliation and economic and social rehabilitation.
Primary responsibility lies, of course, with the Albanian
people themselves, but undeniably the international
community continues to have an essential part to play in
this process so as to help the country face the serious
problems confronting it. We stand convinced that the
Albanians will be able to take up this new challenge with
a view to ensuring rehabilitation of their country.
Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): My delegation
welcomes the convening of this open debate to assess the
operation of the multinational protection force in Albania.
The Republic of Korea commends and congratulates
the troop- contributing countries, led by Italy, for the
successful conclusion of their mandate. We also commend
the various international organizations operating in Albania
for the timely and effective delivery of desperately needed
humanitarian assistance to the Albanian people in their time
of national crisis. Our appreciation also goes to the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe for its
indispensable assistance to the electoral process in Albania.
The achievements of the multinational protection force
go beyond the provision of a security framework for
humanitarian operations. The presence of the force provided
a clear symbol of the commitment of the international
community to a peaceful resolution of the crisis, and thus
inspired the Albanian people with the courage and the hope
to rise up from chaos and rebuild their nation. The climate
of security that its presence created proved conducive to the
holding of fair and free elections. Beyond Albania, the
multinational protection force has also contributed to the

10

3811th meeting
14 August 1997
maintenance of stability in the wider Balkan region by
containing a possible spillover of instability into
neighbouring countries. The fact that massive,
destabilizing refugee outflows did not pour into
neighbouring countries may well be due to the timely
deployment and the efficient operations of the force and
to the confidence it restored among the Albanian people
in their future.
The multinational operation in Albania highlights
how a timely intervention by the international community
can contain and stabilize a situation, and prevent it from
deteriorating into a massive humanitarian disaster. The
excellent coordination between the multinational
protection force, the Albanian Government and the
various international organizations operating on the
ground was crucial to the success of this complex
operation.
The operation in Albania was a unique multinational
intervention in the sense that the situation in the country,
as grave as it was, was one of internal unrest sparked by
financial crisis, not the usual kind of armed conflict
between opposing sides which the Security Council most
often deals with. We believe that the Albanian operation
has set a significant precedent for potential future
interventions by the international community in cases
where a State is gripped by a complex crisis with serious
humanitarian implications and political repercussions for
its neighbours.
For the long-term stability and reconstruction of the
country, it is important to address the underlying causes
of the instability. Rebuilding the country’s democratic
institutions on the basis of the recent parliamentary
elections is a vital first step in that direction. This hardwon stability will become irreversible if it can be backed
by economic rehabilitation and development.
Now that the multinational protection force has
successfully completed its mission, it must be emphasized
that the future of Albania lies in the hands of the
Government and the people of Albania themselves. The
international community can meaningfully help only when
the Albanian Government and people are willing to help
themselves. We take some encouragement from Prime
Minister Nano’s recent statement that
“the best times for every Albanian, and for the
nation, lie in the future, not in the past.”

Security Council
Fifty-second year
Korea offers its best wishes to the Albanian people
and Government as they embark upon the vital task of
rebuilding national unity and democratic institutions and
reinvigorating social and economic development.
Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): The representative of
Luxembourg will speak later on behalf of the European
Union. Sweden fully associates itself with that statement.
In the last six months, Albania and its people have
indeed experienced a difficult and uncertain time. The
international community played an important supporting
role in overcoming chaos and the risk of civil war, but the
key to resolving the situation always remained with Albania
itself. For the future, it is equally true that the responsibility
for achieving constructive development and reform remains
firmly with the people, the Government and all the political
forces of Albania.
The case of Albania emphasizes the need for the
international community to be vigilant about early warning
signals of potential conflict and unrest. Decreasing faith in
political institutions, in combination with economic and
social hardship, provides fertile ground for civil unrest. The
multinational protection force constituted a last-minute
response to a grave situation.
When assisting Albania to create a stable society and
to prevent similar crises in the future, the original causes
for the unrest should be borne in mind. If international
support is to yield lasting results, Albania needs
reconciliation not only in the political arena, but also in the
building of democratic institutions. Popular confidence in
the impartiality of the public administration is a prerequisite
for the return to normalcy. This development will require
international contributions of know-how and experience.
The successful holding of elections in the most
challenging of circumstances should be credited not least to
the efforts of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and its Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights. We welcome the crucial
role played by the multinational protection force in
providing a secure environment, as well as logistical
support, in that election process. Of equal importance was
that the force created the conditions necessary for
international organizations to provide humanitarian
assistance in Albania. For this we extend our appreciation
to the troop-contributing countries, in particular Italy, which
took the lead in this important mission. Sweden also
welcomes Mr. Vranitzky’s efforts so far and his stated
willingness to head an OSCE mission designed to

3811th meeting
14 August 1997
coordinate the efforts in the stabilization
reconstruction phase of Albania’s recovery.

and

Although working conditions have not been ideal,
the Western European Union, through its Multinational
Advisory Police Element, is making a significant
contribution, helping Albania to build a democraticallycontrolled and capable police force, which will be needed
to guarantee internal security in the future.
The security situation in Albania still gives rise to
concern. The positive results achieved so far cannot be
allowed to be reversed. As the protection force has been
scaled down there have been numerous reports on the
dangers of a possible security vacuum. Common criminals
as well as more organized gangs have increased their
activities anew. There is certainly a need to continue to
monitor this development closely.
Further efforts by the international community will
be needed following the withdrawal of the multinational
force. If a security-related presence is deemed necessary,
the form of such a venture should of course be considered
carefully. The current North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) plan to study the prospects for the reconstruction
of the national army in the framework of Partnership for
Peace cooperation is welcome.
Considering the difficult situation in Albania a few
months ago, achievements have been remarkable. The
international community is ready to support Albania in
consolidating stability, democracy and prosperity. What is
asked of Albania is that, in cooperation with the
international community, it use the resources made
available to achieve positive and sustainable results in the
fields of security, democratic consolidation and economic
reconstruction.
Mr. Soares (Portugal): At the outset I would like to
state that we associate ourselves fully with the statement
that will be delivered in a few moments on behalf of the
European Union by the representative of Luxembourg.
Portugal, from the very beginning, actively supported
the efforts of the international community to provide
assistance to Albania after its descent into chaos and
turmoil. In this regard, we would like to join others in
praising the special efforts of Italy as the driving force
behind the establishment of the multinational protection
force in Albania, to which Portugal has contributed
logistical support in the form of air transportation. The
presence of the force permitted the delivery of

11

Security Council
Fifty-second year
international humanitarian assistance to the Albanians and
stabilized the political situation in the country, allowing the
holding of elections. In fact, the deployment of the
multinational protection force almost certainly averted a
full-scale civil war, the consequences of which would have
been disastrous, not only for the Albanians themselves but
for the already volatile situation in that region of Europe.
The combined efforts in Albania of the United
Nations, the European Union, the Western European Union,
the Council of Europe, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization and international economic institutions and
relief agencies, all under the effective coordination of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), are a good example of a regional response to a
crisis by the international community. The United Nations
Charter refers specifically to the utilization of regional
arrangements under the authority of the Security Council,
and the response to the crisis in Albania was carried out in
strict accordance with these terms.
Now, as the multinational protection force has
withdrawn from Albania, it is time to move forward.
Naturally, the international community will continue to
assist the Albanian people, but it is the Albanian
Government that is principally responsible for the
reestablishment of law and order and for pursuing national
reconciliation and economic reconstruction in Albania, as
well as for continuing the process of democratization and
the protection of human rights. We urge the Albanian
authorities to respond positively to the efforts of the
international community and to cooperate fully with it in
the fulfilment of these important objectives.
Mr. Berrocal Soto (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): My delegation, with those of other members of
the Security Council, is very pleased to welcome the
successful conclusion of the work of the multinational
protection force in Albania. The presence of that force,
which was aimed at providing the necessary security
measures for the delivery of humanitarian aid in close
cooperation with the agencies of the United Nations and
non-governmental organizations, was of great importance
for the settlement of the crisis in Albania.
In particular, my delegation wishes to congratulate the
Government of the Republic of Italy, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
European Union for their generous and prompt assistance
to the people of Albania. We also wish to emphasize the
great degree of cooperation and coordination of the
Republic of Italy, the OSCE and the European Union with

12

3811th meeting
14 August 1997
the Security Council, which acted, upon their request, in
accordance with the circumstances.
My delegation wishes to express its satisfaction at
the presidential statement to be made today. The case of
Albania is a very clear example of the new theoretical
and practical vision of the concept of international peace
and security that the Security Council has been applying.
In Albania, the multinational protection force not only
helped to check the armed attacks and the anarchy, but
helped to restore the basic social fabric, and it is now
putting the future of Albania back into the hands of the
Albanians themselves, as should be the case. The
presidential statement wisely points out that from now on
it will be up to the Albanians to restore normal conditions
to their country, with the assistance and cooperation of
the international community.
The successful conclusion of the work of the force
in Albania also shows how positive responsible
international intervention can be when it is conducted
under the auspices of the United Nations. It is important
to stress that this intervention, which did no more than
was necessary, was conducted with strict respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Albania, with a
purpose primarily humanitarian in nature.
In this context, for example, we were very pleased
that, thanks to the technical support provided by the force
to humanitarian operations, it was possible to vaccinate
350,000 children against polio, chlorinate water and
distribute teaching materials. The force made it possible,
in a relatively short period of time, to re-open schools,
relaunch commercial activity and give direction to social
and political life in general.
We want to emphasize especially that, thanks to the
work of the multinational protection force, it was possible
to guarantee a secure environment during the electoral
period. In this respect, we commend the force for its
timely intervention in certain serious incidents, thereby
allowing greater impartiality in the electoral process,
facilitating broad participation by the voters and avoiding
the violation by political forces of the electoral will of the
Albanian people. In this context it is worth mentioning in
particular that the work of the force facilitated the
presence and safety of observers at all stages of the
electoral process.
My delegation is therefore pleased to note that the
parliamentary representatives of the European Union were
able to conclude that the elections were satisfactory and

Security Council
Fifty-second year
can serve as the basis for a pluralist and free democratic
system. In this respect, we are delighted at reports that the
new Government has begun its constitutional activities.
It is now up to the Albanian people and their
institutions to continue to build their future. It is
particularly essential that the new Government, in an
atmosphere of freedom and respect for human rights, make
special efforts to ensure the security of the entire country
and achieve full reconciliation among its inhabitants. A
great deal remains to be done. The path of democratic
institutionality is complex and difficult. The international
community cannot stand aside; it must maintain its support
and its cooperation for the full reconstruction of Albania.
We are sure that this will be the case.
In reiterating our appreciation to the Governments that
contributed troops, and in particular to the Italian authorities
who promoted and coordinated this important effort by the
international community in Albania, my delegation is
pleased to express its firm support for the presidential
statement that you, Mr. President, will be making today on
behalf of the Security Council.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.
The fact that the immediate crisis in Albania has now
ended is largely due to the key roles played by the
multinational protection force and by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Prompt and
effective action by the multinational protection force under
the leadership of the Italian Government helped ensure that
humanitarian aid could be delivered and that other
international organizations could operate in conditions of
safety. The OSCE’s involvement was crucial not only in
ensuring that elections could be held, but also in
coordinating international assistance to Albania in general.
I would like to join others here in paying a warm tribute to
all those who contributed to such action, and in particular
to the Italian Government for its effective leadership of the
multinational protection force.
Elections may have been held, but Albania still faces
some tough challenges. The primary responsibility for
meeting those challenges rests with the Albanian people and
their Government. We welcome the commitment that the
new Government has made to promote reconciliation,
restore law and order and carry out economic reform. We
look to all sections of Albanian society to put aside their
past differences and to work together for that purpose. The
United Kingdom, together with other members of the

3811th meeting
14 August 1997
international community, is ready to provide much-needed
support and assistance. But international assistance will
crucially depend upon the willingness of the Albanian
Government itself to tackle the country’s problems, to
ensure respect for the rule of law and for human rights
and to promote the conditions necessary to allow
economic recovery.
I resume my function as President of the Council.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the representative
of Albania, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Kulla (Albania): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, for the way in which you
are conducting the work of the Security Council and to
thank you for including in the agenda of the Council this
open debate on the occasion of the termination of the
mandate of the multinational protection force in Albania.
As is already known, during the first months of this
year Albania was caught in the middle of a general crisis
which had economic, political and institutional
dimensions. As a consequence of this crisis my country
went through a period in which there was a total lack of
law and order, which brought with it the looting of
military armouries and the dispersal of the weapons to the
population. More than 1,500 people lost their lives in this
chaotic situation, while many private and public properties
were completely destroyed.
The Security Council, through a presidential
statement on 13 March 1997, expressed its concern for
the eruption of the crisis in Albania, and two weeks later,
through resolution 1101 (1997), authorized the
deployment of a multinational protection force in Albania
in order to ensure the distribution of humanitarian
assistance and the establishment of a safe environment for
the activity of international organizations, initially for a
period of three months. Through resolution 1114 (1997)
the mandate of the multinational protection force was
extended for another 45 days.
The Albanian Government expresses its deepest
gratitude to the Security Council for the swift reaction
and for the special attention it attached to the crisis in
Albania. The authorization for an immediate deployment
of the force in Albania prevented a further aggravation of
the situation and increased people’s confidence. This was
an excellent example in the history of the operations
authorized by the Security Council to protect international
peace and security.

13

Security Council
Fifty-second year
The Albanian Government expresses its special
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his personal
involvement and his continuous attention to this issue and
for the regular briefings to the Security Council.
From 28 March to 14 August 1997, the Security
Council, led by the ambassadors of Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation and the United
Kingdom, discussed 11 periodical reports on the activity of
the multinational protection force in Albania. In this context
I thank them all, and I would like to commend also
Ambassador Dejammet of France for his excellent work
and his competent and skilful introductions to the reports to
the Security Council. And outside of the Council, my
appreciation goes at the same time to Ambassador Fulci of
Italy, for his great support and successful work on this
important matter.
The operation of the multinational protection force in
Albania, known as Operation Alba, successfully completed
its mission. This force came to Albania on 15 April. It was
composed of personnel from 11 Member States and had a
total of 7,215 troops. In close cooperation with the
Albanian Government, the force fulfilled its mission in a
neutral and impartial way by fully respecting its mandate,
defined in the above-mentioned resolutions of the Security
Council.
This force had to overcome many difficulties in an
unknown terrain, with weapons spread out everywhere, and
at a time when a Government of National Reconciliation
had just been formed as a result of the compromise that
was achieved among the Albanian political parties in March
this year.
The Albanian people and the Albanian Government
express their profound thanks to the countries members of
the force. Our thanks go to Italy for its excellent direction
of the force, and to Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France,
Greece, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia, Spain and Turkey, as
well as to every single commander and soldier deployed in
Albania. These troops were courageously determined to
create the safe zones for the distribution of humanitarian
aid and for the activity of the international organizations,
governmental or non-governmental, and to increase the
confidence necessary for the activity of the Albanian police
and army, thus easing the work of the Government of
National Reconciliation. The force created a positive
atmosphere of confidence and safety for Albanians and
observer missions of international organizations during the
Albanian parliamentary elections of 29 June 1997.

14

3811th meeting
14 August 1997
The Albanian people have correctly understood the
role and importance of this force. They supported it and
showed their hospitality. At a time when there have been
many Albanian casualties, no soldier of this force has
been attacked or has perished during the force’s time in
Albania. This fact does not mean that the operation was
not dangerous or difficult. It proves that this endeavour
was successful and effective. At the same time it shows
the appreciation and solidarity of Albanians as regards
this force.
The Albanian Government hails, and express its
gratitude to, the regional international organizations —
such as Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), European Union (EU), the Council of
Europe (CE) and the Western European Union (WEU) —
for their readiness and assistance during the emergency
stage of the Albanian crisis, and to other humanitarian
organizations, governmental and non-governmental, that
guaranteed the delivery of the humanitarian aid to
Albania. This testifies to how successful the United
Nations could be in dealing with the humanitarian crisis.
On 29 June of this year, parliamentary elections
were held in Albania, resulting in the forming of a new
coalition Government, on a broader basis of political
representation. The main priorities of this Government are
the quick re-establishment of public order and the
economic recovery of the country.
We believe that public order and security will be
assured within a short time, and Albania will enter the
path of normal and solid development. At the same time,
we are fully confident that the support of the international
community and the efforts of our country for
reconstruction will continue.
We hope that the donors conference, expected to be
held soon in Italy, following the meeting in Rome of 31
July this year, will reach concrete results regarding rapid
progress and development in Albania.
The President: I thank the representative of Albania
for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Italy. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Fulci (Italy): First of all let me say that Italy
fully endorses the statement that will be made by the
distinguished Permanent Representative of Luxembourg,

Security Council
Fifty-second year
Ambassador Jean-Louis Wolzfeld, on behalf of the
European Union and associated countries.
On 11 August, the commander of the multinational
protection force, General Forlani, left Albanian soil,
completing the withdrawal of the contingents of the 11
countries which participated in Operation Alba. A total of
7,215 men were deployed, more than half of them Italian.
They carried out 1,698 missions. Under the force's
protection, 5,168 tons of food and 339 tons of medicine
were distributed.
The multinational protection force — authorized
by Security Council resolutions 1101 (1997) and 1114
(1997) — closely cooperated with the Albanian authorities,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and other major international organizations, including the
United Nations and its related agencies, to find a peaceful
solution to the crisis. The force facilitated the safe and
prompt delivery of humanitarian assistance and helped
create a secure environment for the missions of
international organizations.
Moreover, the multinational protection force provided
the security framework needed for the Albanian elections;
this was made possible through the relentless shuttle
diplomacy of President Vranitzky, the special envoy of the
Danish Chairman-in-Office of the OSCE. This deserves
mention because I think it was a major element in the
success. The process was monitored by the OSCE, and
culminated in the election of a new Parliament and the
formation of a new Government. The elections were a
crucial step on the road to the stability and national
reconciliation of the country; they strengthened
democratization and gave confidence back to Albanians.
In retrospect, this positive outcome stemmed from two
key elements: the determination of a group of countries —
the “coalition of the willing” — to act swiftly to restore a
situation of normalcy in Albania, even at the risk of the
lives of their troops; and the equally swift deliberations of
the Security Council, in the presence of Secretary-General
Kofi Annan — who, representatives may remember, went
twice to Albania to instill urgency and who gave the Italian
authorities invaluable advice on the conduct of the
operation during his visit to Rome.
We cannot forget that when the decision was made to
start the operation, the Government was losing control over
the territory, with the country sliding towards anarchy. The
economic situation had plummeted with the collapse of the
so-called pyramid schemes, which devastated the savings of

3811th meeting
14 August 1997
thousands of families. A humanitarian emergency was
encroaching by the day. Arms depots were looted, and the
civilian population came to be heavily armed. Common
crime was rampant, and more so after the collapse of the
prison system. There was imminent risk of a spillover of
the crisis to neighbouring countries.
Thanks to the decisiveness and rapidity of the
international community’s action, the situation was
contained and has been reversed, and 3.5 million
Albanians are now back on the road towards normality,
internal security and, hopefully, economic and social
rehabilitation. I dare say that if the international
community had acted with the same speed and
determination in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the Great
Lakes region, thousands of lives would probably have
been spared and immense suffering and destruction
prevented.
In our opinion, several factors contributed to the
positive outcome of the Albanian operation. Some of
them were innovative and could prove useful in the
planning and conduct of similar activities in the future.
First was the unity of intent shown by a group of
countries to get involved immediately in a risky but
necessary operation.
Secondly, there was decisive action by the Security
Council, which on 28 March 1997 approved the mandate
for the force in one day, within 12 hours of the Albanian
authorities’ request. I believe that that is a record for this
body.
The third factor was the rapid planning and
deployment of the multinational protection force. I am
proud to say that it took the Italian general staff only four
days from the adoption of the resolution to submit the
operational guidelines to other participating countries,
while at the same time an advance mission landed in
Albania. Two weeks later the first contingents of the
multinational protection force were deployed in the field.
Fourthly, there was intense and in-depth political
consultation and coordination among the participating
countries, giving the force the necessary guidance from
the outset. A steering committee was established, and it
met weekly in Rome under the chairmanship of
Ambassador Amedeo de Franchis. It consisted of the
political directors of the 11 troop-contributing countries
and the commander of the force. Representatives of the
United Nations and its related agencies, the Organization

15

Security Council
Fifty-second year
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the European
Union, the Council of Europe, the Western European Union
and the International Committee of the Red Cross all
attended as observers. Thus, all the contributing countries
and the international organizations involved could interact
and make common decisions in real time, always based on
consensus — and I underline this point, which I think is
very important. The steering committee also prepared the
11 bi-weekly reports mandated by the Security Council,
thus providing prompt and thorough information concerning
the activities of the force.
Fifthly, definite limits were placed on the time-frame
of the operation from the outset, with a sunset clause that
was fully respected.
The sixth factor was the comprehensive and ongoing
integration of the political, military and humanitarian
aspects of the entire operation.
Last but not least was the total, absolute respect by the
force for its mandate regarding complete neutrality and
impartiality towards the Albanian political forces, and
regarding refraining from any kind of police activities, no
matter how difficult this proved at times.
In short, on this occasion there was strict compliance
with the three golden rules of the updated peacekeeping
doctrine: request and consent of the legitimate Government;
absolute impartiality of the peacekeepers; and no recourse
to weapons by peacekeepers except in self-defence.
Consequently, as our colleague from Guinea-Bissau has
already noted, Albania can be considered another United
Nations success story, like Mozambique, Cambodia,
El Salvador and Haiti.
From this point forward, Albania is entering a second,
no less difficult, phase: it must address long-term national
reconciliation, the rehabilitation of State institutions,
economic reform, and reconstruction. Nobody can deny that
the primary responsibility for Albania’s future lies with the
Albanian people and the Albanian authorities. But their
efforts will be to no avail if the international community
falls short in offering badly-needed assistance during this
new phase. We seem to be off to a good start. The major
multilateral and bilateral donors are working together
effectively to help the Albanians stabilize the economy,
creating the conditions for sound, sustainable growth.
But economic growth alone will not bring about
stability and progress: the country’s administration and
democratic institutions must also be strengthened, as we

16

3811th meeting
14 August 1997
have learned from recent events. Special consideration
should also be given to the most vulnerable segments of
the Albanian population, in particular the children, who
are the future of the country — who are the future of all
our countries — and for whom appropriate assistance
programmes must be urgently adopted.
Italy pledges to continue to extend a helping hand to
support the rehabilitation of its Adriatic neighbour. On the
multilateral level, we will act within the framework of the
international organizations already involved, the
international financial institutions, and the many nongovernmental organizations which have already begun to
help Albania meet its challenges: let us not forget the
non-governmental organizations, which always play such
an important role in such situations. On the bilateral level,
the Italian Government has established an ad hoc
committee, composed of the relevant administrations
involved in assistance to Albania and chaired by
Commissioner Angioni, to coordinate all bilateral
initiatives aimed at the social and economic recovery of
the country, giving priority to public education, the health
and judicial systems, the promotion of trade, and the
fostering of small to medium-size businesses.
To that end, as has been recalled in previous
statements, in May and July we convened two preparatory
conferences in Rome, chaired personally by our Foreign
Minister, Mr. Dini, in which international financial
institutions, the main donors, and all the other
international organizations involved took part. These
conferences will be followed by a ministerial meeting in
Rome this coming fall, and later by a donors’ conference
in Brussels. We are confident that, with the support of the
international community, Albania will show the necessary
determination to be fully reintegrated into the European
family, to which it belongs by geography, history and
culture.
I wish to reiterate my country’s sincere gratitude to
the 10 other States and Governments that cooperated so
effectively for the positive outcome of this operation, and
express our profound, sincere appreciation to the Council
Presidents, who fully grasped the urgency of the situation
at critical moments: Ambassador Wlosowicz of Poland;
Ambassador Monteiro of Portugal; Ambassador Park of
the Republic of Korea; Ambassador Lavrov of the
Russian Federation; Ambassador Osvald of Sweden; and
of course you, Mr. President.
My thanks also go to all the other members of the
Security Council for their earnest commitment in

Security Council
Fifty-second year
authorizing and monitoring the operation, particularly
Ambassador Dejammet of France, whose country was one
of the major contributors to the force and whose delegation
played such an essential role in the Council’s deliberations
and in keeping the Council informed. And, of course, my
sincere congratulations go to our colleague Ambassador
Kulla of Albania, who, throughout these trying times for his
country, always followed the process here in New York
with calm, expertise and diplomatic skill.
However, our work here would produce few or no
results were it not for the bravery and dedication of the
officers and soldiers who risk their lives daily in the field
of peacekeeping activities. Through them, these officers and
soldiers, the ideals of peace and solidarity of the Charter
become a reality for millions of people throughout the
world. We owe them all a lasting debt of gratitude.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Turkey. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Çelem (Turkey): Albania and its friendly people
have passed through very difficult times. These difficulties
were, to a great extent, the result of a painful process of
adaptation to a new political, social and economic order.
Peace, security and stability on the Balkan peninsula, of
which Turkey is a part, has become all the more critical in
view of the long ordeal of the breakup of Yugoslavia. We
viewed the crisis in Albania against that background. We
were convinced that ensuring internal peace and stability in
Albania was a prerequisite for the preservation of peace and
stability in the region. As a matter of fact, our contingent
in the multinational protection force was only a reflection
of Turkey’s continuing interest in and commitment to
regional stability and international peacekeeping efforts.

3811th meeting
14 August 1997
both of those resolutions. Those resolutions provided the
framework for an operation limited in purpose and
duration, but capable of meeting the requirements of the
mission. The operation itself acquired an ad hoc character
of its own. It was not a United Nations peacekeeping
effort in its classic meaning.
It is possible that, in the future, such a method could
be contemplated and employed with respect to other
contingencies. As a matter of fact, the arrangement
foreseen in resolution 1125 (1997) for the Central African
Republic could be considered another example of a new
form of peacekeeping operation. The peacekeeping effort
in Bosnia has also turned into a North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) peacekeeping operation with
similar features. We believe that the advantages and
disadvantages of such undertakings are worth closer
examination.
In any case, the operation in Albania was successful.
It enjoyed the full cooperation of the Albanian authorities
and particularly of the Albanian people. The Turkish
contingent fulfilled its task in a friendly and cooperative
atmosphere. Planning and coordination among the troopcontributing States secured a smooth operation. It was
thus possible for the Albanian people to hold the
parliamentary elections that paved the way for the
resolution of the crisis. My Government welcomed the
elections as a first step in providing the basis for the
lasting solution of Albania’s problems through democratic
means.

As will be recalled, the initiative for finding an
effective solution to the problem emanated from the
political will of the Albanian leadership. It was the
Albanian Government which asked for the assistance of the
international community, and Member States and friends
and neighbours of Albania felt duty-bound to provide that
country with the necessary and firm support that enabled it
to move forward rapidly on the road to peace and stability.

The multinational protection force was only one part
of a large scale international effort to help bring about
peace and stability to Albania and to assist it in resuming
its progress on the road to full political, economic and
social recovery. The contributions of other international
organizations should also be mentioned, especially the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) which, by providing the coordinating framework
for international assistance to Albania, has been
instrumental in the joint efforts for the containment and
elimination of the crisis. But the real work begins now.
Continued international support is necessary for lasting
stability and development in Albania.

This support was given through the multinational
protection force, within the legal framework drawn up in
resolutions 1101 (1997) and 1114 (1997). In this respect,
Italy deserves the appreciation of the world community for
the leadership role it has undertaken in this act of
international solidarity. Turkey was among the sponsors of

The operation has effectively contributed to the
fulfilment of one of the main purposes enshrined in the
Charter of this Organization, the maintenance of peace
and security; it has also contributed to the stability of one
Member country, Albania. Now is the time for the
fulfilment of another main purpose: to achieve

17

Security Council
Fifty-second year

3811th meeting
14 August 1997

international cooperation in solving Albania’s economic,
social, cultural and humanitarian problems.

the ground and in the international organizations to ensure
that elections could be held under acceptable conditions.

My Government will, as always, continue to support
Albania, with which we share close historical and cultural
bonds, both through bilateral arrangements, and by
assuming its part of the responsibilities in collective efforts
in international forums.

The various international organizations, among them
the Western European Union and the Council of Europe,
which worked together within the framework coordinated
by the OSCE, have done a remarkable job, avoiding
pointless duplication and delivering effective assistance to
the Albanian people in the most trying of times.

The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of Luxembourg. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Wolzfeld (Luxembourg) (interpretation from
French): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia and Cyprus have aligned themselves with this
statement. Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway also associate
themselves with this statement.
The multinational protection force in Albania has just
come to the end of its mandate. This past March, the
Albanian Government asked the international community
for assistance in support of its efforts to overcome the
chaos and anarchy into which the country had been
plunged. The international community reacted speedily, and
on 28 March the Security Council adopted resolution 1101
(1997) authorizing a multinational protection force to
facilitate the safe and prompt delivery of humanitarian
assistance in Albania and to help create a secure
environment for the missions of the international
organizations.
On 19 June the Security Council extended the force’s
mandate to ensure, by means of an international presence,
inter alia, the stability required to enable the electoral
process to take place in a calm and secure environment.
The European Union wishes to express its appreciation
to the troop-contributing countries, among which were eight
contingents from the European Union member States, and
in particular to the Italian Government, which played a key
role in setting up and steering the multinational force.
The international community’s action in Albania
would not have been possible without the action of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). The European Union extends its warmest thanks
to Mr. Vranitzky, the personal representative of the
President-in-office of the OSCE, for his tireless work on

18

Between 1991 and 1996, the European Union has
given considerable assistance to Albania, amounting to
450 million ECU, especially in the field of humanitarian
assistance and technical cooperation. Since the start of the
crisis, the European Union has played to the full the role
incumbent on it in restoring political stability and security
in Albania. Working alongside the other organizations
cooperating within the OSCE framework, it has played an
active part in efforts to establish democracy and protect
human rights, including the rights of people belonging to
minority groups, as well as in preparing and monitoring
the elections.
The European Union has stated on several occasions
its determination to help Albania regain political stability
and restore security. However, it emphasizes that it is first
and foremost for the Albanian authorities to determine
appropriate responses to the challenges of restoring
stability and security and bringing about national
reconciliation, as well as promoting democratic
institutions and ensuring the country’s economic recovery.
In this context, the European Union welcomes the recent
success of the Albanian security forces in Vlore in
collecting illegally held weapons and confronting armed
gangs.
Above all, law and order must be restored; human
rights, including the rights of people belonging to
minority groups, must be respected; and democratic rules
must be applied. The setting up of Parliament and the
rapid formation of a Government based on the election
results were a fundamental stage in this process.
The European Union considers that with the
withdrawal of the multinational protection force the
emergency has come to an end, and that it is now time to
embark on the process of stabilization and return to
normal conditions. The international community will
support the efforts of the Albanian Government in
rehabilitating State institutions, consolidating democratic
life in Albania and rebuilding its economic and financial
system.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
For the period 1996-1999, the European Union has
already budgeted assistance totalling up to 212 million
ECU. Once the new governmental and administrative
structures are established, this aid will be reviewed in the
light of the situation on the ground.
At the Conference of Senior Officials on Albania, held
in Rome on 31 July 1997 under the chairmanship of Italy’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs, the participants called for the
establishment of constructive working relations between the
new Government and the opposition in a true spirit of
national reconciliation. The European Union will closely
watch the commitments given by the Albanian Government
on this matter. The international community, and the
European Union in particular, announced that international
aid would be tied to political and economic conditions,
which would determine the operational measures to be
carried out within the reform process.
The European Union has prepared a draft international
agenda for Albania, which will be presented in its final
form at a ministerial meeting on Albania, to take place in
Rome in the autumn. The aim of the meeting will be to lay
the foundations for future institutional and economic
assistance. In addition, a donors’ conference will be
convened in Brussels by the European Commission in
cooperation with the World Bank, once the Albanian
Government and the International Monetary Fund have
agreed on a programme of economic reform.
Finally, the European Union welcomes the decision by
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to examine the
possibility of setting up a programme to rebuild the
Albanian army in the framework of the Partnership for
Peace.
The Albanian people have lived through a painful and
particularly difficult time over the last few months. The
European Union and the international community have lent
their political, humanitarian and economic support to
overcome the crisis. The multinational protection force has
played a major role in this undertaking. The European
Union wishes to express its gratitude to all the men and
women who took part in this endeavour. It is now for the
Albanian people and their newly elected Government to
initiate comprehensive political and economic reforms
within the framework of human rights and the principles of
democracy. In taking up this challenge, Albania can count
on the European Union’s continued support.

3811th meeting
14 August 1997
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Slovenia. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Türk (Slovenia): We sincerely appreciate the
scheduling of this open discussion, which enables the
Security Council to evaluate the achievements of the
important multinational operation in Albania and to focus
on the tasks that remain after its completion.
Slovenia fully endorses the statement just made by
the representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union, with which it aligned itself. We would
like to add the following points.
In recent months, Albania has gone through an
extremely difficult period. The events leading to the
collapse of State institutions and public order are well
known. The resulting phenomenon of social disintegration
had the potential seriously and negatively to affect the
already precarious security situation in the immediate
neighbourhood. The gravity of these circumstances
demanded quick and meaningful action.
The States of the region and others proved their
capability effectively to cooperate in dealing with this
situation. Soon after the appeal by the Albanian
authorities for assistance, the multinational protection
force was assembled under the leadership of Italy and
deployed in the country. It has been very encouraging to
see that a rapid and effective response is possible. We
pay tribute to Italy for the initiative and for the effective
leadership of the operation, and to the Government of
Albania for its cooperation, which substantially
contributed to fulfilment of the mandate. Moreover, this
operation represents an example of successful cooperation
between the United Nations and the relevant regional
arrangements, as well as an example of timely and
adequate preventive action.
The role of the multinational protection force in
Albania was indispensable. The force was instrumental in
creating the conditions for the restoration of stability and
the return to normalcy. In addition to its primary task of
protecting humanitarian assistance, the multinational
protection force provided a secure environment for
holding the elections. The conduct of elections and their
results were certified as acceptable by the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and by
the Council of Europe. As such, these elections
represented a crucial step towards the rebuilding of a
democratic order in Albania.

19

Security Council
Fifty-second year
The successful election process, however, is just the
beginning. The challenges facing the new Albanian
Government are enormous. Political reconciliation, the
consolidation of democracy, and institutional and economic
reforms will all require a secure and stable environment.
The restoration of public order throughout the country is a
daunting task in the light of continuing lawlessness and the
presence of armed gangs in some quarters. It is necessary
to be aware that the situation continues to be fraught with
dangers that could jeopardize the progress achieved so far.
Therefore, the international community has to continue to
be engaged in Albania and to assist in its progress.
Slovenia participated in the multinational protection
force and stands ready to provide further assistance, through
appropriate multilateral mechanisms or bilaterally.
Development and humanitarian assistance will be of special
importance in the coming phase of the reconstruction of
Albania. Slovenia has recently dispatched humanitarian
assistance to Albania, including medicines. We are also
willing to contribute to the efforts to train and develop
security forces, especially personnel designated to deal with
organized crime.
We welcome the consideration of the possible role that
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) could play
in the process of stabilization. Through its membership in
the Partnership for Peace, Slovenia is ready to support such
a role.
Finally, Slovenia welcomes the readiness of the World
Bank to assist in the implementation of a quick-impact
programme for economic recovery and the preparedness of
donor countries to convene a conference on assistance to
Albania as soon as an agreement has been reached between
the Albanian Government and the International Monetary
Fund on an economic reform programme.
Stability and security in the region of southeastern
Europe remains a preoccupation of the international
community. The involvement of appropriate international
institutions in Albania continues to be of great importance.
Slovenia is willing to contribute its share. In this context,
we welcome in particular the scheduling of the ministerial
conference on Albania to be held this autumn in Rome.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of Denmark. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Molde (Denmark): On behalf of the Chairman-inOffice of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in

20

3811th meeting
14 August 1997
Europe (OSCE), I would like to express my satisfaction
that the Security Council has decided to convene this
formal meeting on the situation in Albania. It provides a
timely opportunity to sum up the main points of the
OSCE’s involvement in resolving the crisis in Albania
and to consider the parameters for future international
assistance to Albania.
With the acceptable and adequate parliamentary
elections held on 29 June and 6 July this year,
respectively, and with the subsequent formation of a new
Government in Albania, the OSCE has achieved the main
objectives of its mandate in Albania, these being to offer
its good offices in order to reestablish contacts between
political parties in Albania, particularly with regard to the
adoption of an election law acceptable to all parties; and
to pave the way for acceptable elections under difficult
conditions at the end of June, thus reopening the door for
the international community to assist Albania in
rebuilding the country. The results were made possible by
the quick response of the international community,
including the Security Council.
With the new Government in place, a new beginning
for Albania has started. The responsibility for shaping the
future lies primarily in the hands of the Albanians
themselves. The international community must, however,
be ready to continue to assist Albania in this process. An
agreement on the conditions for international assistance
must be found.
The OSCE will be prepared to continue to support
Albania. Based on the OSCE’s decisions in March and
the recent experiences with the international efforts in
Albania, and building on the conclusions of the
conference held in Rome on 31 July this year, the OSCE
is prepared to take up this challenge in two ways: first of
all, to continue to provide the coordinating framework for
international efforts in Albania, within which international
organizations can play their full part in their respective
areas; and secondly, to provide, in cooperation with other
international organizations, advice and assistance within
the OSCE’s field of experience.
The focus of the OSCE’s own efforts is now on
post-election assistance as it relates to the consolidation
and development of democracy and democratic values and
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. The
OSCE’s Office for Democratic Institutions and Human
Rights is to this end actively engaged in the development
of concrete programmes directed towards this essential
post-election assistance.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
Close coordination with other international
organizations active in this field is paramount in order not
to duplicate efforts and to ensure complementarity. The
OSCE will work closely with the Council of Europe, the
European Union, non-governmental organizations and
others. The experience thus far has been positive.
The working group on Albania chaired by
Mr. Vranitzky will continue to convene in order to secure
a comprehensive international approach towards Albania.
The economic aid package coordinated among the
International Monetary Fund, the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, the World Bank and the
Commission of the European Union, as well as bilateral
agreements, must be accompanied by political reform and
progress in the process of national reconciliation.
The presence of the multinational protection force
made international efforts possible. Without this force the
parliamentary elections would not have been conducted as
well as they were. In this connection, the Chairman-inOffice would like to express his gratitude to the Security
Council for the quick adoption of resolution 1101 (1997),
which mandated the deployment of the multinational
protection force, and for the ensuing prolongation of the
mandate on 19 June.
The multinational protection force left Albania earlier
this week. Continued international presence is contingent on
a satisfactory security situation. The Chairman-in-Office
therefore welcomes the Albanian Government’s newlyadopted plan for the reinstallment of order in Albania and
encourages the Albanian Government to continue the
positive dialogue with the international community on
security questions.
To conclude, the lessons learned from the Albanian
crisis are twofold: first, an immediate and decisive reaction
by the international community can go far in preventing
further destabilization; secondly, a comprehensive approach
to the problem is needed.
The issues of economic recovery, political reform and
security are all interlinked. Therefore, the international
effort must combine these elements. These are lessons for
the international community when dealing with other crises.
The OSCE stands ready to continue to play its part and
encourages all the other international organizations and
countries involved in Albania to do the same.

3811th meeting
14 August 1997
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Greece. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Zacharakis (Greece): My delegation fully
subscribes to the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the European
Union. Greece attaches particular importance to its
relations with neighbouring Albania, with which it is
linked by strong ties of friendship and cooperation.
In the last few years, following the political changes
in that country, Greece has contributed significantly to the
efforts of the Albanian people to promote political,
economic and social progress. The Greek people extended
warm hospitality to hundreds of thousands of Albanians
coming to Greece to work to ensure a better future for
themselves and their families. At the same time the two
countries have set up a solid framework for the
development of their relations in all fields, based on the
principles of good neighbourliness.
Despite some occasional setbacks in the past, GreekAlbanian relations have managed to overcome longstanding difficulties and to establish a climate of mutual
confidence and understanding. In the period from 1991 to
1996, Greece offered considerable economic, technical
and humanitarian assistance to Albania. Since the last
crisis broke out in February, Greece again has spared no
effort to contribute, both bilaterally and multilaterally, to
its peaceful settlement.
Greece participated by contributing a regiment to the
multinational protection force. It contributed several
officials and experts to the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) presence in Albania and
provided significant humanitarian assistance, while
accepting into Greek hospitals large numbers of Albanian
citizens in need of treatment. The Greek Government
undertook various initiatives at both the bilateral and the
international levels so as to help in bringing together the
parties in Albania, to achieve a negotiated solution of the
existing problems and to create the conditions for holding
free and fair elections.
In this context, I would like to remind members of
the successful visit of the then Prime Minister Fino to
Athens on 2 and 3 April, and of the talks he had there
with Foreign Minister Pangalos, Mr. Van Mierlo, then
President of the Council of the Ministers of the European
Union, and Mr. Vranitzky, the special representative of
the OSCE Chairman-in-Office. These talks helped in

21

Security Council
Fifty-second year
reaching an understanding among all the parties concerned
on the structure of the international presence in Albania.
Greece, in close cooperation with the Albanian
Government, intends to further develop and enhance its
relationship with and assistance to Albania by initiating
specific economic and technical programmes. The visit of
the Greek Foreign Minister to Tirana last week, heading a
large delegation of cabinet ministers and parliamentarians,
paved the way for renewed joint efforts by the two
Governments to promote various projects for economic,
military and police cooperation.
The Greek Government has also announced the
granting of financial assistance of $80 million for the
financing of specific development projects in Albania.
Greece is committed to continuing to participate in all the
efforts of the international community to assist Albania in
the transition period it is going through. In this context,
Greece is participating in the Partnership for Peace
programme for Albania, in the OSCE presence there, in the
Western European Union mission to reorganize the
Albanian police force and in various European Union
programmes.
The latest crisis in Albania illustrates better the need
for consistent, comprehensive and effective international
assistance to and cooperation with that country. Preventive
action to that effect would help to avert future crises and to
secure a better environment for swift and steady progress
towards democracy and a free-market economy, along with
full respect for human rights and the rights of persons
belonging to minorities. As in the past, Greece pledges not
to fail to do its part in meeting the formidable challenges
that lie ahead.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of Germany. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Eitel (Germany): Let me begin by saying that
Germany fully associates itself with the statement made by
the distinguished Permanent Representative of Luxembourg
on behalf of the European Union.
On the basis of Council resolutions 1101 (1997) and
1114 (1997), the multinational protection force played a
decisive role in protecting the delivery of humanitarian aid
and guaranteeing the safety of international experts during
the election process in Albania. In my capacity as
representative of the State holding the presidency of the
Western European Union (WEU) for the second half of

22

3811th meeting
14 August 1997
1997, I would like to congratulate Italy, in the person of
its Permanent Representative, Ambassador Fulci, as well
as the other nations participating in the multinational
protection force, for successfully concluding this mission.
The Western European Union has been engaged in
the joint management of the crisis in Albania from its
start with a Multinational Advisory Police Element
(MAPE). On 22 July, the WEU Council decided on an
extension of the MAPE mandate until mid-October 1997.
This will give the time necessary to complete the WEU’s
short-term advisory programme and gain experience. The
mandate of MAPE includes the following elements. First,
giving the Albanian police authorities information and
advice on appropriate aspects of policing and restoring
order; secondly, giving advice, for the purpose of training
instructors, by defining the needs and proposing training
modules in the following areas: organization, public order,
border control, logistics and communications; thirdly,
supporting the police academy by drawing up a teaching
programme. In the framework of the MAPE mission, a
number of WEU nations have provided equipment for the
Albanian police.
In addition to this short-term programme, the WEU
Council will also take up consideration of a longer-term
programme. The WEU sees its mission in Albania within
the framework of a variety of activities by a number of
international organizations, among them the OSCE, the
European Union and the Council of Europe, and also by
individual States. From the very beginning of the MAPE
mission, the WEU has been striving for close cooperation
with the organizations involved in Albania under the
overall coordination of the OSCE, as well as with the
Albanian authorities. We consider it to be of the utmost
importance to further continue and intensify this
coordination of activities. The future of the country will
have to be shaped by the Albanian people. The
international community is continuing, and will continue,
to support the process of stabilization. I would like to
underline that within this context, the WEU is playing and
will continue to play an active role.
Mr. Čalovski (the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia): The Republic of Macedonia has been closely
following the situation in Albania with concern and with
hope that the crisis will be overcame speedily, without
violence, by the Albanians themselves, with the assistance
of their neighbours and of the international community,
including the Security Council, which quickly discharged
its duty, in line with its obligation to act preventively.

Security Council
Fifty-second year

3811th meeting
14 August 1997

It is of paramount importance for Albania and for our
region that Albania held democratic parliamentary elections,
that the negative developments have been halted and that
the process of settling the difficulties has started. In our
view, Albania has managed to turn a difficult page of its
history and to enter the period of non-violent transition,
stabilization, and economic and democratic development.
For the Republic of Macedonia, as a neighbouring country,
it is of huge importance that this process continues
successfully. The support of the international community
will be as important in the future as it has been up to now.
Within the framework of its capabilities, my country will
do its best to assist the new positive orientation of Albania.

At this point, I would like on behalf of my
Government to express high appreciation to the
Government of Italy for its leadership and readiness to
help and act. All these positive developments have been
greeted in my country with anticipation that the crisis in
Albania will be over soon and that the new situation will
make an important positive contribution to the
development of the region as well. In this respect, of
particular importance is the stated readiness of the
Albanian Government to develop friendly and good
neighbourly relations with all its neighbours and the
realization of the provisions contained in the international
agenda for Albania.

When the crisis erupted and endangered the stability
of Albania and of the whole region, the Republic of
Macedonia promptly started to send humanitarian aid.
Within days the Government decided to offer its corridors
for the delivery of international humanitarian assistance.
And what was more important, at that particular moment
when the Albanian population faced the most difficult crisis
of food shortages, we started effectively delivering and
distributing food to the regions bordering my country,
which was very much welcome and appreciated by the
Albanian citizens. We should recall that at that time there
was no military, police or any other law-and-order force on
the Albanian side and the contacts between the two
countries were held on the level of local border
communities and through bodies of the Red Cross.

The future of Albania, like that of the other Balkan
States, lies in its full integration in Europe. How soon this
goal will be achieved depends on Albania itself and also
on the position of the international community.

The Republic of Macedonia did not take part in the
multinational protection force, in accordance with its
principle of not participating in peacekeeping forces in
neighbouring States. However, as co-sponsors of Security
Council resolutions 1101 (1997) and 1104 (1997), we have
supported the force’s establishment from the beginning.
And we would like to commend all States and
organizations, and in particular the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), for their
participation. We are pleased to note that the new President
of Albania, Mr. Rexhep Mejdani and the newly elected
Government, headed by the Prime Minster Fatos Nano,
have started the democratization process and the
stabilization and development of Albania, and that the
multinational protection force under Italian leadership has
fulfilled its mandate successfully.
We would also like to note the importance of the
results of the first international conference held on 31 July
in Rome and the adoption of the draft international agenda
for Albania. We hope that the next conference, to be held
in Brussels in September of this year, will also be fruitful.

The Republic of Macedonia would like to be a part
of the international efforts that will enable neighbouring
Albania to end the crisis and to enter a period of stability
and development.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Romania. I invite her to take a seat at
the Council table and to make her statement.
Mrs. Sandru (Romania): My delegation appreciates
as very useful the convening of this public debate on the
assessment of the situation in Albania, on the occasion of
the withdrawal of the multinational protection force. Since
my country has subscribed to the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union, I will briefly focus on
some specific points of particular importance for my
Government.
Romania wishes to express its satisfaction at the
successful fulfilment of the mandate of the multinational
protection force authorized by the Security Council. Set
up at a moment critical for the destiny of the Albanian
people and, at the same time, of high risk for regional
security, Operation Alba helped block the deterioration of
the situation in the country and provide a secure
environment for the deployment of the international
community's assistance for Albania, including during the
electoral process.
My delegation would like to seize this opportunity
to commend the remarkable role played by Italy in setting
up and steering the multinational protection force. Our
profound appreciation is also extended to all the

23

Security Council
Fifty-second year

3811th meeting
14 August 1997

international organizations that, within the framework
provided by the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE), contributed to the restoration of stability
and security in Albania and to avoiding the spillover of the
crisis to neighbouring areas.

which will focus on economic and institutional
reconstruction. While the Albanian authorities bear the
primary responsibility for the democratic normalization of
the country, the support of the international community
will continue to be indispensable to that process.

As a country located in proximity to the Balkans and
as a traditional friend of the Albanian people, Romania was
deeply concerned by the crisis in Albania since its inception
and viewed it as a serious threat to the peace and security
of the region and of the continent at large. Therefore, my
country fully committed itself to contribute, commensurate
with its capacity, to the international effort intended to
settle this crisis by peaceful means.

Romania is following with interest the proposals
pertaining to this issue, and is ready to contribute in an
appropriate manner to future international efforts to
provide institutional and economic assistance to Albania.

In this context, as we have previously informed the
Security Council, a special envoy of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Romania was sent to Tirana in March to
assess the situation on the ground and facilitate the national
dialogue.
Later, Romania joined the multinational protection
force for Albania, together with other European countries.
It participated with a mixed infantry battalion of 400 troops,
which was deployed in the southern area of Albania, an
area considered in the midst of the crisis to have been very
perilous and difficult. The Romanian military carried out a
variety of activities within the mandate assigned by the
Security Council, ranging from providing security for
humanitarian-assistance or electoral-monitoring missions to
ensuring a safe environment for the local population. Its
activities enjoyed the appreciation of both the force
command and the civilian population.
We wish to lay particular emphasis on the excellent
guidance provided by the steering committee of the
multinational protection force and the good cooperation
among all contributing countries, which ensured cohesion
and solidarity in conducting this extremely complex
operation. Likewise, it is worth mentioning the good
collaboration with Albanian representatives and the efficient
collaboration and coordination on the ground with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and other international organizations.
Romania welcomes the latest positive developments in
Albania and encourages the Albanian people in its
endeavours to achieve the goal of stabilization and respect
for human rights and democratic standards. Moreover, my
delegation shares the view that the conclusion of the
electoral process in Albania and the withdrawal of the
multinational protection force are ushering in a new stage

24

The President: The next speaker is Mrs. Sylvie
Junod, Head of the Delegation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to the United Nations, to
whom the Council has extended an invitation under rule
39 of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite her to
take a seat at the Council table and to make her
statement.
Mrs. Junod (International Committee of the Red
Cross): The International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) appreciates being able to take part in this debate
on the situation in Albania. We would like to thank you,
Sir, and the other members of the Security Council for
giving us this opportunity.
At the beginning of this year, the collapse of a series
of pyramid savings schemes brought ruin to thousands of
Albanians, especially in the South of the country. The
ensuing popular discontent culminated in violent rioting
in several southern towns at the end of February. This led
to the breakdown of law and order almost everywhere in
Albania. Military arsenals were ransacked, and the
population took up arms. Public buildings, warehouses
and property were systematically looted, and a state of
emergency was declared.
As a consequence of those few weeks of unrest,
State structures disintegrated, giving way to anarchy,
chaos and a lack of security. The economy ground to a
halt. Systems for the provision, circulation and
distribution of supplies throughout the country were
affected by the situation, and the price of staple foods
rose sharply.
The collapse of all national institutions had
humanitarian implications which had to be addressed.
That is what the ICRC has been trying to do, but its
efforts cannot be considered as sufficient in the medium
and long term. Nevertheless, there was no major
humanitarian disaster in Albania. The ICRC made that
clear to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and to the Security Council when taking

Security Council
Fifty-second year

3811th meeting
14 August 1997

note of their intention to take action in the country at the
request of the Albanian coalition Government.

members know, the multinational protection force
withdrew on 11 August.

The ICRC has been urging the international
community to respond to the crisis, notably by restoring
law and order and by contributing to the reestablishment of
national administrative services and State and commercial
supply channels.

Albanian State institutions must therefore receive
support in their task of restoring public order and bringing
State and commercial supply systems back into operation.
Subsequently, once stability has been established, mediumand long-term development programmes can and must be
set up.

The dispatch of the multinational protection force
made it possible to stabilize the situation and to hold
legislative elections. However, Albania still faces law and
order problems and is still in the process of rebuilding a
functioning State administration. These tasks call for longterm assistance which goes far beyond the capacity of any
humanitarian organization.
The ICRC has been working in Albania since the start
of the crisis. Together with the Albanian Red Cross, it
immediately carried out an assessment of the situation and
noted that most affected by the Albanian crisis were
medical and social welfare facilities, and the most destitute
families. Accordingly, the ICRC and the Albanian Red
Cross have set up specific assistance programmes to bring
aid to these two categories, which had hitherto received
State support.

Despite the endeavours of the authorities and of the
international community, in our view little or no
significant improvement in the situation can be expected
within the next few weeks. Under the current
circumstances the needs remain the same. The ICRC
therefore considers it relevant to continue its programmes,
corresponding to its appeal of 17 March.
The President: There are no further speakers on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

On 17 March 1997, the ICRC launched an appeal for
15 million Swiss francs, or some $10 million. Within its
assistance programme, it distributed the following: 122
tonnes of food and 39 tonnes of medicine for medical and
social welfare facilities which receive no funds or
assistance from the State; over 70,000 family parcels to
especially needy families; and 70 tonnes of chlorine,
supplied to Albanian water authorities.
Moreover the ICRC launched, with the Albanian Red
Cross, a weapons-awareness programme to inform the
population in general, and young people in particular, about
the dangers involved in handling weapons of all kinds,
which are circulating in large numbers throughout Albania.
The International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies has also been taking part in this
operation, its task being to reorganize and strengthen
national society.
What is the situation at present? Today, more than a
month after the elections, Albania’s main problem remains
the absence of law and order and the consequences of that
state of affairs. The newly elected authorities have stated
that restoring public order is their top priority. Despite all
its efforts, the Government is far from being in control of
the entire territory. Banditry of all types is rife, and a lack
of security prevails in most of the country — while, as

25
