United Nations

S/PV.6287

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6287th meeting
Thursday, 18 March 2010, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Issoze-Ngondet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Salam
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Mugoya
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2010/127)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-27766 (E)

*1027766*

S/PV.6287

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2010/127)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Australia, Canada,
Germany, India, Italy, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Pakistan and Poland, in which they request to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tanin
(Afghanistan), took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary General for Peacekeeping Operations.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Le Roy to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Peter Schwaiger, Chargé d’affaires of the
delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.
It is so decided.

2

I invite Mr. Schwaiger to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/127, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan
and its implications for international peace and
security.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Alain Le Roy. I now give the floor to
Mr. Le Roy.
Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): Since the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) a year ago,
consensus has been reached on the need to transform
the relationship between Afghanistan and its
international partners to one that sees greater transition
to Afghan responsibility and an increasingly supporting
role for the international community. The consensus on
this process emerged clearly at the London Conference
on Afghanistan of 28 January.
Now, the tangible shift in that relationship must
start. Concrete steps must be taken by the international
community to allow Afghans to be in charge of and
lead the fate of their country while providing the
capacity-building and support required for Afghan
institutions to take on this role, including in civilian
areas. At the same time, the Afghan Government must
concretely demonstrate that it can deliver on the
accountability required for a real transition process to
be sustainable. In that regard, we learned with
satisfaction this very morning that President Karzai has
signed a decree giving additional power to the High
Office for Oversight and Anti-corruption. Clearly, this
is a very positive development.
As also noted in the Secretary-General’s report
now before the Council(S/2010/127), in the midst of
heightened military operations, we face a crowded
political calendar, including in light of the planned
National Assembly elections in September, the Peace
Jirga announced by President Karzai in just over a
month, and, of course, the Kabul Conference after that.
There is a risk that the concept of transition, on which
we have collectively agreed to pin our political and

10-27766

S/PV.6287

security strategy in Afghanistan, will be overtaken by
such events.

institutions and the Afghan Government towards that
end.

Our focus must remain firmly on ensuring that
Afghanization actually becomes more than the slogan
it has been thus far, and that the political calendar
before us is premised upon it, with the Kabul
Conference formally marking the concrete and
systemic beginning of that process, most importantly in
the civilian and political spheres. The United Nations,
and UNAMA in particular, are supporting Afghan
counterparts — who must be in the lead in developing
the event’s agenda — in the preparations for the
Conference. We would encourage the early formal
appointment of a lead ministry in these preparations,
which would provide a single counterpart for all those
involved. The London Conference has set a strategic
path that is clear in reaffirming the international
community’s long-term commitment to supporting
Afghanistan and equally clear in reiterating
determination to move towards greater Afghan
leadership. We must follow this path with
determination now that we are possibly at the height of
international engagement in Afghanistan with a
Government that is legitimately eager to be in charge
of its future. Clearly, not to do so could lead to a
failure in our common efforts and strategies. That
cannot be an option.

In that respect and with reference to the
announcement on 15 March by President Karzai that
two internationals will be part of the Electoral
Complaints Commission, President Karzai informed
Special Representative De Mistura during their first
meeting that he would like the United Nations to
nominate such international members. That is, of
course, a positive development, too.

(spoke in English)
On 6 March, President Karzai formally requested
the Secretary-General to provide technical and
logistical support and to help mobilize donor funding
for the National Assembly elections, scheduled for
September this year. In conformity with that request
and if we are mandated to do so, the United Nations
and UNAMA stand ready to play a role, alongside the
Afghan electoral institutions and other international
partners, in supporting the electoral process by
providing technical assistance, coordinating other
international actors supporting the process, and
channelling donor funds. If the transition to Afghan
responsibility is to be reflected in that electoral
process, it should be clear that the Independent
Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission are responsible for ensuring its
transparency and integrity and should perform their
mandates effectively, impartially and with the
confidence of all Afghan stakeholders. We stand ready
to work, along with others, with the Afghan electoral

10-27766

The upcoming National Assembly elections can
be another milestone in highlighting the primacy of the
constitutional imperative in leading Afghanistan’s
future, as well as our agreed common strategy of
transitioning to increased Afghan ownership and
leadership. On the basis of the commitment on
electoral reform agreed with the Afghan Government at
the London Conference, we need to collectively
support the Government in progressing on that reform
agenda for those and future elections. Our focus must
not be narrowly on those elections, but rather on
longer-term reform.
At the same time, we must be wary of sidelining
all other items on the political agenda and of allowing
the elections to absorb all or most of the energy and
resources of international and Afghan actors alike. On
the development side, for example, we must not lose
sight of the continuous need to ensure that our common
efforts are coordinated and in support of the
priorities — the Afghan priorities — that we have long
agreed with. Some progress has been made and has
been cited before, but sizable parts of Afghan territory
and large segments of the population are still
underserved; projects are still carried out that are
unsustainable or that duplicate what is already being
done by others; and, most worryingly, others are still
doing what Afghans could be doing. We greatly
welcome the appointment of the new NATO Senior
Civilian Representative and the new European Union
High Representative in Afghanistan. As lead
coordinator of international civilian efforts in
Afghanistan, Mr. De Mistura will rely on their support
and cooperation in furthering UNAMA’s role.
At the same time, as we move towards increased
Afghan leadership, our collective efforts need to veer
towards strengthening Afghanistan’s own capacity to
coordinate the assistance and aid that it receives, to
formulate and spell out its own development priorities

3

S/PV.6287

and what is required to address them, and to receive
and disburse funding where it identifies the greatest
needs.
Politically, we must not underestimate, on the one
hand, the importance and, on the other hand, the
complexity of initiating a political process of
reconciliation and reintegration. With over 70 countries
and organizations attending the London Conference,
there was an overwhelming consensus on the need for
such a process. The Government of Afghanistan
committed to developing a peace and reintegration
programme and the international community to
establishing a peace and reintegration trust fund.
UNAMA, with its repository of knowledge and
outreach, could play an important role and bring added
value to the programme and management of the fund.
Clearly, talk about talks has become more than
mere talk, and the rhetoric that peace cannot be
achieved by military means alone is being
complemented by concrete proposals and a clearer
policy. President Karzai’s active engagement with
neighbours and regional players and convening of the
Peace Jirga in April are significant steps in that respect.
We should not, however, be under the illusion that the
process that has started will lead to immediate results.
It will need to be followed and coupled by multiple
confidence-building measures on both sides and to be
anchored on the common embracing of the progress
achieved since 2002. While it is desirable that Afghan
and international counterparts maintain a coordinated
stance on those initiatives, it is a process that should
continue to be Afghan-led.
(spoke in French)
As the Security Council will debate the renewal
of UNAMA’s mandate in the coming days, it should
keep in mind that, while 2009 was a difficult year for
the United Nations in Afghanistan, the Mission — its
staff and its leaders — continued to implement
UNAMA’s mandate with courage and determination.
Following the tragic attack on the Bakhtar guest house
in October, some staff had to be relocated owing to the
lack of accommodation and office space that met
security standards. Despite that, as members know,
UNAMA opened two additional field offices in 2009
and, thanks to the Mission’s assiduous efforts in
constructing new accommodation and strengthening
existing premises, all staff initially relocated were

4

ultimately redeployed to Afghanistan by mid-March at
the latest.
Thanks to Headquarters support, and through a
combination of delegating authority and taking
exceptional temporary measures, UNAMA should be
able to reduce the post vacancy rate, which increased
following the announcement of new posts expected in
the budget and the changes in human resources
management and the recruitment procedures, to under
30 per cent this summer. A further decrease of the post
vacancy rate is expected from now to year’s end.
To keep on course at such a critical time for the
country and the Mission, Special Representative
De Mistura promptly redeployed to Kabul on
13 March, which explains his absence today. He felt it
to be important that he reach Kabul as soon as possible.
He immediately started a series of fruitful discussions
with President Karzai and members of his Government,
as well as with other Afghan and international officials,
while setting out the Organization’s strategy and
priorities in the short and medium terms, in accordance
with the mandate entrusted to it.
We anticipate that the Special Representative will
receive the Council’s strong support in exercising his
duties as coordinator, with the help of his Deputy, the
Resident and Humanitarian Coordinators, and the
activities of the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes in Afghanistan. As members know, a new
Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs has also been appointed.
That is Mr. Kobler, who will deploy to UNAMA in
early April.
Headquarters and UNAMA’s leaders and staff
will continue to work jointly to ensure the mandate’s
effective implementation for a stronger UNAMA. At
the same time, and I stress this, even as we pursue and
strengthen our efforts and implement the mandate in
the most cost-effective way wherever we are present,
without overstretching the available staff and
resources, the security requirements of all staff in
Afghanistan require a careful assessment of the critical
nature of the United Nations operations in Afghanistan,
including those of UNAMA. UNAMA’s work as an
integrated Mission and that of all United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes must be continued,
sustained and strengthened when necessary, but that
must be done by ensuring that the programmes and the
staff fulfil duties of the highest priority.

10-27766

S/PV.6287

We thank the International Civil Service
Commission (ICSC) for having approved a threemonth extension of the special hazard pay for
Afghanistan. We will continue to seek the support of
the Council, as well as that of relevant budgetary
bodies and the ICSC, to ensure that staff posted to nonfamily duty stations, such as Afghanistan, are
compensated, commensurate with other United Nations
staff, for their living conditions and the situation on the
ground.
An unprecedented level of international attention
and resources is invested in Afghanistan, in support of
priorities that have been agreed with the Afghan
Government and of a strategy of transition to greater
responsibility entrusted to Afghans that was also
jointly endorsed at the London Conference. We must
resolutely work together to take advantage of that
occasion and that opportunity to make the difference
that that unity of efforts, strategies, priorities and
resources allow.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Le
Roy for his statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): As this is the first time
I take the floor in the Chamber this month, I should
like to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the Council presidency and to
thank you for having convened this meeting. I should
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2010/127) and Mr. Le Roy for his comprehensive
briefing.
Today marks an important step in the partnership
between Afghanistan and the international community.
For the first time since 2001, we are debating a
mandate that focuses on a transition to Afghan
ownership,
Afghan
leadership
and
Afghan
responsibility. This transition is not an end — not an
end game — but a new beginning. With dedication,
patience and realism, we have the opportunity to put an
end to the ongoing violence, to build a State capable of
protecting our citizens and meeting their needs, and to
strengthen the trust, unity and leadership of the Afghan
people.
The Afghan Government has taken up that
challenge. In the coming year, our priority will be
Afghanization. In every area, Afghans and Afghan

10-27766

priorities should take the lead. We face a busy calendar
that will test our strength and resolve, but, with the
support of the international community, it can also set
us firmly on the path towards success.
The first step is to reverse the Taliban’s
momentum and improve security across the country.
General McChrystal’s new strategy, which was recently
put to the test in Marjah, will begin to turn the tide. At
the same time, the Afghan National Army and Police,
with intensive training, equipping and resourcing, will
gradually replace the international community in
leading the defence of the country and ensuring the
security of its people. That handover will begin as soon
as possible, and, with the help of the international
community, Afghans will bear full responsibility in
five years.
The military efforts will be complemented by
political and economic efforts. We have the plan and
the initial resources for a reintegration programme, and
it is beginning to offer an alternative life for many of
those fighting against us.
The second step is reconciliation, which has
increasingly become the focus in our efforts to promote
peace and stability in Afghanistan. In Istanbul and in
London, our plans were widely supported by the
countries of the region and the international
community. Since then, we have engaged with regional
partners at a high level to explore ways in which the
region could help facilitate reconciliation and to build
confidence and trust in new stabilization initiatives.
The cooperation of the region and the unity of
international support will be essential, but this process
must be Afghan-led and guided by Afghan priorities. In
this regard, the next milestone will be the consultative
national peace jirga at the end of April, which will
bring together Afghan elders, community leaders,
Government officials and civil society groups. The
conference’s agenda will revolve around three goals:
first, to have consultations, understanding and
agreement among the Afghan people on the need for
sustainable peace; secondly, to reach an agreement on a
framework for understanding with the opposition; and
thirdly, to create a mechanism to pursue that
understanding.
However, the security dimension is only the first
part of this transition to Afghan ownership.
Afghanistan and the international community have
already laid out a plan to Afghanize security,

5

S/PV.6287

governance and development and to create a stronger
framework for regional cooperation. The next step will
be in the Kabul conference this summer, where we will
move beyond strategy to focus on a detailed plan of
implementation.
The Government of Afghanistan is concentrating
on building capacity, rooting out corruption,
encouraging participation, and promoting justice and
the rule of law. We are also working to ensure the longterm sustainability of those changes through
developing agriculture, infrastructure and natural
resources,
regional
initiatives
and
improved
coordination. In all of those areas, Afghans will
increasingly take the lead, with the support of our
partners and friends.
Finally, in September, Afghanistan will hold its
parliamentary elections. As in other areas, the elections
and the electoral bodies must be driven by Afghans and
Afghan priorities. Afghanistan is learning from past
experience to undertake short- and long-term electoral
reforms to ensure that these and future elections will be
transparent, credible and fair.
However, Afghanistan will need time to build the
capacity to run an election alone. Therefore President
Karzai has sent a letter to the Secretary-General
requesting the technical and logistical assistance of the
United Nations and has determined that two of the
seats on the Electoral Complaints Commission will be
occupied by foreign experts. Likewise, the
international community’s assistance will be necessary
in supporting the elections with resources and ensuring
they are held in a safe and peaceful environment.
The importance of the central United Nations role
in
supporting
Afghanistan
and
coordinating
international efforts cannot be overstated. Afghans still
view the United Nations as an impartial force working
for the benefit of the Afghan people and as a guarantor
of our stable, peaceful future as a democratic country.
Our common mission will require a great deal from all
of us: realism about our own abilities and the abilities
of our partners, understanding of our different
perspectives and the pressures on us, and recognition
that we have different timelines and different
expectations. Only the United Nations can balance this
relationship and ensure that the views of both Afghans
and the international community are heard and taken
into account.

6

The Afghan Government fully supports the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, and we welcome
the appointment as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General of Staffan de Mistura, who arrived
in Kabul last weekend to begin his work. We look
forward to working closely with him in the months and
years ahead.
Nine years ago, Afghanistan was a broken
country. The assistance and support of the international
community has been a crucial crutch as the country has
slowly begun to heal. Afghanistan is eager to stand
solidly on its own feet, but we must walk before we
can run. It will take time for the Government and
security forces to build the capacity to ensure peace
and good governance across the country. The
continuing commitment of the international community
will therefore remain vital in the years to come. But we
are on the right path. We have set a clear goal, and, in a
strong partnership with the international community,
we can succeed.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Afghanistan for his statement.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council. I wish to remind all speakers to limit
their statement to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, I should like
to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2010/127) and Under-Secretary-General Alain Le
Roy for his comprehensive briefing. We welcome the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and wish him success. I
welcome the Ambassador of Afghanistan to the
Council. We would like to commend the report, which
provides a detailed outlook. We agree with its contents
and observations.
The speed of developments unfolding regarding
Afghanistan did not change in the past months. I
therefore wish to emphasize four points: Afghan
leadership, the strengthening of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and its
mandate, regional cooperation, and a civilian approach.
First, the international community has started to
approach the current challenges with a new
perspective. This year is critical. The London
Conference was an important turning point. The key

10-27766

S/PV.6287

term will be “Afghan leadership” in the period ahead.
Afghan leadership should be supported by the
international community by all means possible. The
gap between Afghan and international perceptions
should be minimized. There should be a new
beginning. We should empower the Afghan
Administration. A political process is necessary. The
United Nations should have a central role. The
parliamentary elections in September 2010 will be part
of this process. The new Administration should
embrace the whole nation in the period leading up to
the elections. It should focus on national unity and
reconstruction efforts. It should reach out to all ethnic
groups through inclusive policies.
What Afghanistan needs now is the strengthening
of democratic values and efficient State mechanisms to
combat various problems, including misconduct. A
comprehensive approach is needed. It should include
security, governance, the rule of law, human rights and
social and economic development. It should not be
limited only to military means. Four areas need special
attention: comprehensive economic development; a
strong, well-trained and –equipped Afghan military and
police; inclusive national reconciliation; and modern
education and justice systems that can effectively
combat extremism.
Secondly, this comprehensive approach is directly
linked to a strong United Nations. The role of UNAMA
should be strengthened in order to better serve the
Afghan people. For that reason, we are trying to
incorporate the needs of the United Nations into the
current negotiations on UNAMA’s new mandate. As
the lead country in the Council, Turkey hopes to reach
consensus and finalize the discussions on the UNAMA
mandate renewal after this debate so that it can be
adopted next Monday. On the other hand, we all need
to help the United Nations address its security
requirements. The continuation of a strong United
Nations presence is of the utmost importance, not only
in the coming transition period but even beyond. We
should therefore all support the Secretary-General in
his efforts to that end.
Thirdly, regional cooperation and dialogue should
be enhanced. Turkey hosted the fourth TurkeyAfghanistan-Pakistan Trilateral Summit in January,
with a focus on education. We also hosted the Istanbul
Summit with the participation of Afghanistan’s
neighbours. The Istanbul Statement is the first
declaration of the region since the Kabul Declaration

10-27766

of 2002 to emphasize regional ownership. We believe it
provides a solid basis for enhancing regional
cooperation. Regional cooperation was also discussed
at the London Conference. On another note, Turkey
will also host the fourth Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan in Turkey this
year.
Fourthly, we would like to stress the importance
of strengthening civilian efforts in the period ahead.
The transfer of responsibilities to Afghan authorities
should not be understood as an exit strategy. On the
contrary, the international community should increase
its civilian presence. In that context, we would
especially like to draw attention to the relevant section
of the Secretary-General’s report on the situation in
areas where stability is fragile due to the inequitable
distribution of development aid. We will continue our
efforts to fill that gap.
I would like to inform the Council that at the
provincial reconstruction team (PRT) conference held
in Kabul two days ago, Turkey announced the
establishment of a new Turkish PRT in Sibirgan, the
provincial capital of Cevizcan, at the request of the
Afghan Government. Our new PRT will also cover
Saripul province. We have already completed our
domestic legislative requirements and appointed a
senior diplomat as PRT leader. A site survey was
conducted last week. We plan to reach operational
capability in May. The Turkish civilian—led PRT will
base itself on the successful experience of our first PRT
in Wardak province. It will assume responsibility for
health, education and development efforts in close
coordination with Afghan authorities. It will bring
additional civilian capacity to those two provinces and
complement the ongoing development efforts in the
region. It will also be ready to assist Afghan capacitybuilding efforts in the area of security by training the
Afghan National Police.
Finally, we would like to reiterate that, in
addition to our diplomatic efforts, Turkey will continue
its comprehensive contributions in Afghanistan in
cooperation with the United Nations.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I, too,
would like to thank Mr. Alain Le Roy, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
introduction of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2010/127). I should also like to thank Ambassador
Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,

7

S/PV.6287

for his statement today. I would also like to wish
Ambassador Staffan de Mistura every success in his
new responsibilities as the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative for Afghanistan.
This debate and the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in a few days’ time demonstrate the
commitment of the international community to
bringing about the reconstruction of that country and to
ensuring that the people of Afghanistan regain full
control of their destiny, as agreed at the International
Conference on Afghanistan held London on 28 January.
The support that we can provide in this new
transition phase emerging from the London Conference
is very important, as UNAMA continues to coordinate
international efforts aimed at ensuring that the Afghan
Government is adequately empowered to discharge
fully its responsibilities for security, development,
national reconciliation and regional cooperation. We
trust that during the next international conference,
which is to be held in the spring in Kabul, the
Government of Afghanistan will put forward specific
measures that will help strengthen the country’s
institutions and the rule of law, in particular by
combating corruption and impunity.
My delegation concurs with the report of the
Secretary-General to the effect that, during the new
stage that has emerged through renewed international
momentum, UNAMA must intensify its efforts to
implement its mandate while focusing on three main
areas. First, it must support the Government’s capacity
to coordinate with the international community.
Secondly, in the area of elections, is must provide
support politically and to institutions by means of the
Independent Electoral Commission, specifically to
strengthen national capacities. And, thirdly, it must
continue to exercise its good offices to support the
implementation of Afghan reconciliation programmes.
All that must be led by the Afghan Government itself
and be in line with its national priorities.
With regard to security, we regret the fact that,
once again, the Secretary-General’s report tells of an
increase in violent incidents over the figures for
previous years. The year 2009 marked the greatest
losses of civilian lives since 2001. There is no denying
that these statistics reveal that insecurity continues to
be the main factor hampering progress in Afghanistan.
In that regard, we believe that continued civilian

8

oversight of international forces must remain a crucial
condition to completing the efforts they have
undertaken.
We also reiterate our total repudiation of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. We
condemn any attack against civilians, humanitarian and
United Nations personnel and journalists. We trust that
communication and coordination between the
representative of the Secretary-General, Afghan forces
and the International Security Assistance Force will
lead to a reduction in civilian loss of life and an
improvement in the country’s security.
We also recognize that the peace and
reintegration programme that has been announced by
President Karzai to promote the reintegration into
society of anti-Government elements desiring to lay
down their weapons heralds a message of
reconciliation and dialogue, which is so necessary
given the country’s circumstances. However, that must
be carefully considered to ensure that all guarantees
necessary for the country’s development are
successfully fulfilled.
We commend the joint initiatives undertaken, in
particular, by the Governments of Afghanistan, Iran
and Pakistan to combat the production, trafficking and
consumption of drugs in the region. Through this focus
on shared responsibility, they will contribute to
generating mutual confidence and promoting joint
strategies to combat the scourge, and will certainly
have a direct impact on the security situation in the
region.
Given the promulgation of the law on public
amnesty and national stability to pardon the
perpetrators of serious crimes, including serious
violations of human rights, we emphasize that the fight
against impunity has a fundamental role in national
reconciliation, as does the observation of pertinent
international law. We also believe that it is of primary
importance to address the needs of the roughly 296,000
internally displaced persons and that they be given the
opportunity to return to their places of origin in an
atmosphere of reconciliation and full respect for their
fundamental human rights.
Lastly, with respect to elections, it is important to
endeavour to apply all the lessons learned during the
presidential elections of August 2009 in order to ensure
the credibility and transparency of the forthcoming
parliamentary elections. To this end, we would urge,

10-27766

S/PV.6287

first, the appointment of a new Electoral Complaints
Commission; secondly, the adoption of measures to
assert the independence of the Independent Election
Commission; thirdly, the launch of an investigation,
pursuant to Afghan electoral law, of alleged fraud in
the most recent elections; and fourthly, the guaranteed
participation of women and minorities.
We fully believe that the elections scheduled for
the second part of the year will provide a new
opportunity for the Government of Afghanistan, with
the support of the international community, to reinforce
its commitment to the priorities of the country and to
its people.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Alain Le Roy for his presentation
and Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his remarks. We wish
the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Staffan de Mistura, every success.
Since our latest debate on Afghanistan (see
S/PV.6255), important steps have been taken to review
and enhance the relationship between Afghanistan and
the international community. The Istanbul and London
conferences helped translate the word “Afghanization”
into clear commitments. The months ahead of us, with
the Peace Jirga, the Kabul conference and the
September parliamentary elections, will provide an
occasion for all stakeholders to implement such
commitments.
Today, I would like to address three aspects of the
situation concerning Afghanistan and the role of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA): the security situation, the political process,
including elections and reconciliation, and aid
coordination.
The fact that 2009 was the most violent year in
Afghanistan since 2001 is a matter of serious concern.
The current international military surge is taking place
in a very volatile environment, where clearing areas of
militants is not the hardest task when compared to the
daunting job of laying the foundations for long-term
stability.
Afghan civilians continue to bear the brunt of the
conflict. The vast majority of them are victims of
Al-Qaida, the Taliban and armed opposition groups.
We welcome the efforts of pro-Government forces in
2009 that led to a reduction in the number of civilian

10-27766

deaths caused by such forces. We are confident that
more will be done to further reduce such casualties.
As is widely recognized, the ultimate solution to
the Afghan conflict will not be found on the battlefield,
but through a political process. The London
communiqué showed strong international support for
the reconciliation and reintegration policy announced
by President Karzai in his inauguration address. Such a
process must surely be led by Afghanistan. UNAMA
can play a role, if and as requested by Kabul.
Progress in national reconciliation should go
hand in hand with progress in consolidating
democracy. To that end, it is necessary to create
conditions to ensure that the difficulties during last
year’s elections do not recur in the upcoming
parliamentary elections and beyond. It is natural and
desirable that the Afghan authorities progressively
should regain full leadership of the electoral and
democratic process. In so doing, they must ensure free,
fair and credible elections.
Stability also depends on the ability of the
Afghan Government, with the support of the
international community, to deliver socio-economic
development. The strategy to enhance governance and
provide development aid to liberated areas is therefore
wise. All efforts must be made to fully implement that
strategy.
The importance of coordinating international
assistance to Afghanistan and UNAMA’s role in such
coordination has been stressed time and again. Some
progress has been made in this area, but much more
remains to be done. A strong political will is needed in
donor countries to allow for their collective assistance
to be coordinated by the United Nations and the
Afghan Government. It may not be easy, but it is
indispensable, including to ensuring their effectiveness.
Just as importantly, UNAMA’s mandate as the
primary coordinator of international civilian efforts in
Afghanistan should be discharged in a way that builds
the capacity of Afghan institutions and promotes social
and economic development. It is worrying in this
regard that a significant portion of the international aid
to Afghanistan has not even been brought to the
attention of the Afghan Government, let alone aligned
with the Afghan National Development Strategy. It is
also troubling that the aid remains geographically
imbalanced. If this situation persists, it may undermine
the recent progress made by the Afghan authorities to

9

S/PV.6287

refocus the Afghan National Development Strategy and
to improve revenue collection and economic growth.
The second half of 2009 highlighted the
outstanding challenges to building a stable and
prosperous Afghanistan. At the end of last year and the
beginning of 2010, the focus was on reorienting
strategies and expressing commitments to address
those challenges. Let us hope that the months ahead
will bring such efforts to fruition.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Alain Le
Roy for his briefing on the situation in Afghanistan.
China expresses its readiness to fully support the work
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and of the newly appointed
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, who has already taken up his
duties in Afghanistan.
Last year, Afghanistan successfully held
presidential elections, representing a major step
forward towards governance by the Afghan people of
their country. Thanks to the joint efforts of the Afghan
Government and the international community, positive
results were achieved at the international conferences
on Afghanistan in Istanbul and London earlier this
year. Now that Afghanistan has entered a critical
transition phase, the international community should
remain focused on that country, increase support and
assistance, and lay the groundwork for full transition to
governance by the Afghan people through the
enhancement of Afghanistan’s sovereignty, autonomy
and capacity for development.
The turbulent security situation is a prominent
challenge to Afghanistan’s reconstruction. Integrated
approaches should be adopted to improve the security
situation there. While working to strengthen the
capacity of the Afghan army and police, the
international community must also further advance the
process of national reconciliation led by the Afghan
Government so as to consolidate and expand the
political basis for achieving peace and stability. The
transfer of security responsibilities to the Afghan
Government should be carried out in a progressive,
prudent and well-planned way under the precondition
of ensuring the security and stability of the country.

implementation of the Afghan National Development
Strategy has led to a recovery of its agriculture, an
increase in foreign investment, the rapid growth of its
economy and the steady rise of Government revenue.
The international community should further increase
support for the implementation of the National
Development Strategy so that more Afghans can
benefit from the development dividend. Donors and
relevant international agencies should respect the
autonomy of Afghanistan in economic reconstruction
and encourage the enthusiasm and initiative of the
Afghan Government and people.
We support the country by providing more
assistance to the Afghan Government in order to
enhance its capacity for self-development. We support
the United Nations continued leading and coordinating
role in the reconstruction of Afghanistan. We highly
appreciate the outstanding performance of UNAMA in
fulfilling its mission under extremely difficult
conditions, and support the extension of its mandate for
another year.
The parliamentary elections in Afghanistan are
scheduled to take place in September, and we hope that
they will be held successfully. We support UNAMA’s
provision of necessary electoral assistance in
accordance with its mandate.
As a friendly neighbour of Afghanistan, China
has actively supported, participated in and promoted
the peaceful reconstruction of Afghanistan. China has
already invited President Karzai to visit China from
21 to 25 March 2010. I believe that this visit will
achieve positive results.
In the future, China will continue to support
Afghanistan within the limits of its capabilities. We
believe that, with the energetic support of the
international community and through their own efforts,
the Afghan Government and people will eventually
reach the goal of peace and stability, independence and
self-reliance, development and progress, and friendship
and good relations with its neighbours.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for his briefing. Let
me also welcome the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Ambassador Zahir Tanin, to this table and
thank him for his important contribution.

The key to the long-term security and stability of
Afghanistan lies in the development of its economy
and the improvement of people’s lives. The further

10

10-27766

S/PV.6287

Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
made later in this debate by the representative of the
European Union.
The London Conference has initiated a new phase
of transition to greater Afghan leadership and
responsibility. It has also set the agenda for the Kabul
conference in June, which is expected to focus on a
reform-oriented nation-building agenda. We agree with
the Secretary-General’s view that, in this process of
transition, it is essential to take into account the
concerns of the Afghans. In this spirit, Austria and the
Liechtenstein Institute at Princeton University
organized the Afghanistan Implementation Colloquium
in Austria at the end of February, which brought
together a significant number of Afghans and
international experts. We believe that the results of
those discussions can prove useful in the preparation of
the Kabul conference, and we will share them with
partners.
As to the parliamentary elections to be held in
September, effective electoral reform, building on the
commitments made at the London Conference, will be
critical to ensuring that the elections can contribute to
the consolidation of democracy in Afghanistan. We
also hope that measures to facilitate the participation of
women and minorities, both as candidates and voters,
will be put in place.
We encourage the Government of Afghanistan to
accelerate the implementation of the National Action
Plan for the Women of Afghanistan and to foster the
process of integrating women into political, economic
and social life.
Following President Karzai’s inauguration speech
of November and the London Conference, the concepts
of reintegration and reconciliation have moved to the
forefront of attention. There is no purely military
solution to the conflict in Afghanistan. We believe that
both reintegration and reconciliation should be fully
Afghan-led and must respect the Constitution as well
as international commitments. Furthermore, broad
involvement by and consensus among all relevant
stakeholders of the Afghan political system will be
critical. Women’s participation in the reconciliation
process — in line with Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) — will be of particular importance for
achieving sustainable peace. We therefore hope that the
national Peace Jirga scheduled for the end of April will
be prepared in a transparent and inclusive manner,

10-27766

engaging all relevant segments of Afghan society. Any
genuine reconciliation process will have to be
complemented by accountability for serious crimes of
the past.
As the Secretary-General has pointed out, the
Security Council’s recent decision to remove five
former Taliban officials from the list established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1267 (1999)
was welcomed in Afghanistan as a confidence-building
measure and can help lay the foundations for an
eventual political process. We take note of the
Secretary-General’s evaluation that further confidencebuilding measures would be useful. In this context, as
Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), I look forward to cooperating
with the Afghan authorities and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in
ensuring the full implementation of resolutions 1267
(1999), 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009), including in the
framework of the ongoing efforts to update the
consolidated list and, more specifically, through the
current review process.
The negative impact of the security situation on
the protection of civilians remains a major challenge.
The fact that last year saw the highest number of
civilian casualties since 2001 is deeply worrying, with
the Taliban and other extremist groups being
responsible for, by far, the greatest number of civilian
deaths. At the same time, we wish to welcome the
progress made by the International Security Assistance
Force and other international forces in significantly
reducing the number of civilian casualties in the
context of their operations, and hope that these efforts
will be further pursued.
We believe that regional cooperation will be
crucial to the stability and prosperity of Afghanistan.
All of Afghanistan’s neighbours ought to be included
and take part in this process. We would like to
encourage
intensified
confidence-building
and
cooperation in economic and political terms, as well as
mutual assistance in the fight against drugs, terrorism
and criminality. We are pleased to see UNAMA
provide support to such regional cooperation in
accordance with its mandate.
Austria also appreciates the activities undertaken
by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to
facilitate regional cooperation, such as the Paris Pact
Initiative, the Rainbow Strategy, and the development

11

S/PV.6287

of regional programmes for Afghanistan and its
neighbours.
In view of the challenges ahead for Afghanistan
during the coming months, we are convinced that
UNAMA will continue to play a key role in support of
the Government. We therefore support the extension of
UNAMA’s mandate for another 12 months, with the
modifications suggested by the Secretary-General in
order to increase the effectiveness and impact of the
Mission’s work. Austria is looking forward to working
with the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and wishes him every success in his important
and challenging tasks.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): The
representative of the European Union will shortly make
a statement, with which France aligns itself. Allow me
to add a few complementary observations.
After a difficult 2009, the first few months of
2010 have given us some reason to hope for an
improvement in the situation. Afghanistan and the
international community agreed on a credible road map
at the London Conference, based on an accelerated
undertaking by Afghans of their sovereign
responsibilities. The commitments undertaken by
President Karzai and his Government on an ambitious
reform programme and the announcement of a
reconciliation and reintegration process provide a solid
foundation for that transition. In terms of military
issues, the new strategy developed by General
McChrystal is beginning to bear fruit and is
highlighting the weaknesses of the armed rebellion,
which does not enjoy the support of the people. Finally,
at the regional level, more positive dynamics between
Afghanistan and its neighbours have made the fight
against terrorism more effective.
However, these developments are still fragile. In
order to consolidate the prospects for recovery, it is
essential to quickly implement the reform plans that
President Karzai announced to enable Afghan
institutions to fully take on their new responsibilities.
The United Nations has the legitimacy,
impartiality and expertise that make it an essential
actor in this new phase. The United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has a key role to
play. We welcome the appointment of Mr. De Mistura
at the head of UNAMA. We have full confidence in his
ability to take on the role of representative of the entire
international community to the Afghan people in an

12

effective and dynamic manner. In so doing, he can rely
on the new special representative of the European
Union and the new NATO civilian representative. Their
strengthened competencies will help make the
international efforts in support of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General more coherent.
We expect the United Nations to actively support
the transition process undertaken in London. In this
respect, the mandate renewal provides us with an
opportunity to spell out the priorities of the mission.
We see three priorities.
First, political good offices are the cornerstone of
the mandate. The Special Representative must, in
particular, pursue continued dialogue with President
Karzai and the other political stakeholders regarding
the implementation of the mutual commitments
undertaken in London. In this respect, the initial
contacts
established
between
the
Special
Representative and President Karzai are encouraging.
UNAMA will also have an active role to play in
supporting the Government in its reconciliation and
reintegration programme. That programme will need to
be implemented within the framework of the
Constitution and in strict observance of democratic
values and norms.
Secondly, UNAMA will also have to commit
itself to supporting the electoral process. Lessons must
be learned from the problems that faced the
presidential elections. Reforms are needed before the
September parliamentary elections. The legitimacy of
the efforts by the Afghan Government and the
international community requires that these elections
be held under the best possible conditions. The Special
Representative will have an important role to play in
forging a consensus between the Government and the
major Afghan political stakeholders, including
opposition leaders, on all of these reforms.
Thirdly, UNAMA must pursue the efforts it has
undertaken since the International Conference in
Support of Afghanistan, held in Paris in June 2008, to
reinforce the efficiency and consistency of aid. As
highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2010/127), this role must more clearly support the
Afghan
authorities, who have
the primary
responsibility for coordinating aid.
France would like to thank Turkey for the draft
resolution presented to Security Council members,
which fully reflects its priorities.

10-27766

S/PV.6287

The crisis in Afghanistan cannot be addressed
independently from the crisis in the region, primarily
in Pakistan. The Pakistani Government is courageously
combating the scourge of terrorism. The international
community must support it and encourage it to
strengthen its efforts against all terrorist groups.
In addition, regional dialogue and cooperation
must receive increased attention. Important initiatives
have recently been taken in this regard. France
welcomes in particular the lead role played by Turkey.
To go further, we would like to see a mechanism
established dedicated to follow-up to and promotion of
regional dialogue. The United Nations, given its
impartiality, is well placed to bring together all the
regional actors to achieve the common objective of
stability in the region. We urge UNAMA to become
actively involved in that area.
In conclusion, I wish to recall an essential point.
The transition period under way in Afghanistan does
not mean a withdrawal of the international community,
much less an abandonment. In any case, as President
Sarkozy has several times reiterated, France will
remain committed as long as necessary and as long as
Afghans want us to be.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for his comprehensive
briefing and Ambassador Tanin for his important
remarks and his leadership here.
Allow me to start by underscoring the full
support of the United States for the critical role of the
United Nations in Afghanistan. We are deeply grateful
to the dedicated men and women of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and of
the many United Nations agencies, who have
demonstrated their deep commitment to helping the
Afghan people achieve stability and develop
democratic institutions in the face of enormous
challenges.
Two months ago in London, the international
community demonstrated its support for the Afghan
Government’s agenda, as outlined by President Karzai
in his inaugural address. Underlying our commitment
is the recognition that Afghanistan and the
international community are entering into a new phase
of partnership on the way to full Afghan ownership. To
ensure that the efforts of the international community
are effective, the United Nations will have to continue

10-27766

to play a key role in promoting coordination and unity
of effort.
The United States very much welcomes the
appointment of Special Representative Staffan de
Mistura and reiterates its strong support for him and
UNAMA as he takes up his important assignment. We
look forward to working closely with the new Special
Representative to achieve our shared goal of assisting
the people of Afghanistan to transform and strengthen
their own society and ensure their own security. Upon
his arrival, Special Representative De Mistura
committed UNAMA to work to
“assist both the stability and socioeconomic
improvement of the Afghan people, remembering
it should be Afghan-led and Afghan-owned, with
total respect for their own sovereignty and
independence”.
We agree with that commitment, and we look forward
to supporting UNAMA in its work.
We also look forward to seeing UNAMA take a
re-energized, central role in coordinating humanitarian
assistance among the United Nations agencies and in
coordinating assistance among the donor Governments
through improved mechanisms and increased staffing.
For our part, the United States will continue to work to
improve its coordination with the United Nations and
other donors, and we would welcome steps by others to
do the same. We believe that UNAMA will work
closely with the Government of Afghanistan to ensure
that this assistance supports the Government’s agenda
and priorities and builds government capacity at all
levels.
The international community is committed to
strengthening the Afghan Government’s capacity and
supporting its goal of taking responsibility for its own
development, governance and security priorities.
United States civilian officials are partnering with
Afghans to develop and implement governance,
economic development, rule of law and agricultural
initiatives. UNAMA has a continued critical role to
play in the process of transitioning towards greater
responsibility for the Afghan Government, including
helping to develop provincial benchmarks on
development, governance and the rule of law as the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and the
Afghan Government make provincial transition
decisions.

13

S/PV.6287

The Afghan Government has announced plans for
a transition to Afghan-led security responsibility. We
are already making progress together on that front.
Current ISAF operations in Helmand province,
conducted at the request of the Afghan Government
and the province’s governor, have been conducted with
an unprecedented degree of Afghan planning and
leadership. Key Afghan security and service-delivery
ministries in Kabul, and their subordinate departments
in Helmand, have worked to ensure that governance
and development efforts immediately follow security
operations. The Afghan Government installed a deputy
district governor for Marjah and his team on 23
February, just 10 days after security operations were
launched. Kabul continues to staff up critical positions
in service-delivery ministries to help roll out essential
services.
But the real test will be the Afghan Government’s
ability to meet the expectations of the local population.
We are determined to help the Afghan authorities
succeed. As security improves and the Afghan
Government assumes greater security responsibilities,
the United States stands ready to support Afghan-led
initiatives to stabilize local areas by providing a path
for insurgent commanders and fighters to leave the
battlefield. As President Obama has said, “We will
support efforts by the Afghan Government to open the
door to those Taliban who abandon violence and
respect the human rights of their fellow citizens”.
We urge the United Nations to continue to play a
strong role in ensuring the involvement of women in
every stage of that process and in working with the
Afghan Government to ensure that women’s rights and
human rights are preserved and promoted.
Finally, the Afghan Government’s announcement
of national legislative elections later this year presents
another opportunity to improve governance and
strengthen institutions. However, we remain concerned
about the electoral decree issued by the President in
February. It is vital that the Afghan people be able to
have faith in the credibility and legitimacy of the 2010
legislative elections. Thus, the independence and
credibility of Afghanistan’s electoral institutions are of
paramount importance. For example, the Electoral
Complaints Commission will be enhanced if its
members, both Afghan and foreign, are able to conduct
their activities in an impartial and independent manner.

14

We welcome the Afghan Government’s
commitments to ensuring the integrity of the 2010
parliamentary elections and to working closely with the
United Nations to build on the lessons learned from the
2009 elections in order to deliver improvements to the
electoral process in 2010 and beyond. Demonstrable
progress in establishing independent and effective
electoral institutions will be key to sustaining
confidence in the upcoming election and its results.
Our own ability to provide assistance through the
elections cycle will depend significantly on progress in
establishing more effective and honest governance.
The commitment we share with the Government
of Afghanistan, which was expressed most recently in
London, provides renewed direction for our efforts.
The Government’s plan to host an international
conference in Kabul later this year will enable us to
hear its detailed action plans and its targets for
implementing its agenda.
This will be a critical year for Afghanistan. We
look forward to strengthening our common efforts.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Let me
begin by expressing my gratitude to Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his briefing, as well as to Ambassador Tanin for his
remarks. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on the current situation in Afghanistan
(S/2010/127). We would like to take this opportunity to
welcome the appointment of Mr. Staffan de Mistura as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan. We wish him every success in his work.
Bosnia and Herzegovina also aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered later on behalf of the
European Union.
In the light of the latest key developments in
Afghanistan and the various important challenges that
the international community and Afghan authorities
will face in the near future, Bosnia and Herzegovina
commends the high level of intensity in recent
diplomatic activities aimed at helping Afghanistan and
its institutions. Our delegation therefore appreciates the
organization and outcomes of the Conference on
Afghanistan held in London on 28 January. Bearing in
mind the importance of regional cooperation for the
achievement of the long-term goal of a stable and
democratic Afghanistan, we also emphasize the
significance of the summit on the theme “Friendship
and Cooperation in the Heart of Asia”, which was held

10-27766

S/PV.6287

in Istanbul on 26 January. We also look forward to the
conference in Kabul scheduled for spring. That
conference is a very encouraging sign, as it will be the
first high-level meeting hosted by the Afghan
Government.
At the outset, Bosnia and Herzegovina would like
to emphasize its strong commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan, as well as its support for all of
Afghanistan’s efforts aimed at rebuilding the country
and achieving sustainable peace and constitutional
democracy. We expect that the United Nations will
continue to play a central and impartial coordinating
role in promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan,
jointly with the Government, in order to implement the
Afghanistan Compact.
However, we are deeply concerned about the
humanitarian and security situation in the country. We
condemn the increased attacks on civilians,
humanitarian workers and Afghan and international
forces.
Bosnia and Herzegovina believes that current
efforts to promote and establish the process of
democratic transformation in Afghanistan deserve
strong support from the international community. In
that regard, we are convinced that several issues are of
fundamental importance.
First, it is evident that the organization of
parliamentary elections in September will be a great
challenge, not only for Afghan institutions but also for
the international community. We strongly encourage
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) to provide overall political coordination of
the international support for the elections. The
elections should not lead us to forget the necessity of
future long-term electoral reform. We endorse the
efforts of the United Nations to continue to assist the
Afghan Government in that essential work. In order to
have an independent, impartial and credible electoral
process, it continues to be important to facilitate and
encourage the cooperation of the international
community and Afghan authorities to ensure a
conducive environment for the upcoming elections.
Bosnia and Herzegovina would also like to
underscore the crucial importance of the roles of the
Independent Election Commission and the Electoral
Complaints Commission. We are convinced that they
play fundamental roles in the electoral process in

10-27766

Afghanistan, and thus we stress the importance of
safeguarding their independence and transparency.
We consider the participation of all segments of
Afghan society in those elections to be of great
importance for the democratic transformation of the
country. We strongly support the measures aimed at
improving the participation of women and minorities.
We also welcome the efforts made to accelerate the
implementation of the national plan for women. Our
delegation encourages the Afghan Government’s
continuing efforts in that direction, as we believe that
women’s participation can only bolster the
Government’s capacity to find solutions to numerous
challenges that Afghan society will have to deal with in
the future.
Secondly, Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches great
importance to UNAMA’s role in providing good offices
to the Afghan Government, in particular in the area of
reconciliation. We believe that there is no alternative to
the dialogue between the Afghan Government and
opposition forces. In that regard, we support the
reintegration process and commend the proposal to
establish a donor-funded peace and reintegration trust
fund that would provide employment and financial
incentives for insurgents who wish to renounce
violence. We believe that such instruments are of
crucial importance to future social and political
cohesion within Afghan society.
Thirdly, our delegation recognizes the importance
and necessity of the leading role of UNAMA in
coordinating international humanitarian aid. At the
same time, we encourage UNAMA to include and
consult Afghans and to work through Afghan
institutions in the implementation of projects. We
would like to see the Afghan Government play a
greater coordinating role, as that is one of the
pragmatic and concrete ways to support the process of
transition to Afghan leadership.
Fourthly, Bosnia and Herzegovina firmly
supports the return of internally displaced persons in
Afghanistan. We would like to express our concern
about the estimated 296,000 such people, as indicated
in the latest report of the Secretary-General. Our own
experience in the post-war period allows us to insist
that these returns are essential to building a democratic
society and to re-establishing a climate of security and
confidence among citizens. We welcome all efforts
made in this direction.

15

S/PV.6287

We would also like to encourage the Government
of Afghanistan to continue with its positive
achievements in the implementation of the mine action
programme, with the support of the United Nation and
all relevant actors.
We believe that the aforementioned activities and
commitments constitute important steps towards the
new transition phase emphasized and announced in the
London communiqué and aimed at encouraging
Afghan-led leadership and ownership in different
areas.
Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina supports the
renewal of the UNAMA’s mandate for an additional
12 months.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
should like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2010/127) and Under-Secretary-General
Alain Le Roy for his comprehensive briefing this
morning. I should also like to welcome the positive
remarks made by Ambassador Tanin.
The report of the Secretary-General outlines
clearly the progress made towards Afghanistan’s
becoming a secure, stable and prosperous nation. We
remain firmly committed to this goal. But the report
also sets out the scale of the challenges that remain.
As this is the first time the Council has formally
discussed Afghanistan since his appointment, let me
like others welcome Staffan de Mistura as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. He has the
United Kingdom’s full support. We encourage him to
maximize his time on the ground in Afghanistan in
order to strengthen the United Nations leadership. We
welcome the progress already made in filling vacant
posts in the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), and stand ready to support
further recruitment efforts.
The United Kingdom also welcomes the
appointments of the NATO Senior Civilian
Representative and the European Union’s Special
Representative.
Working
with
the
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, they will help
to ensure that civilian delivery in Afghanistan amounts
to more than the sum of its individual parts.
The London Conference in January marked an
important step. The Afghan Government, the United
Nations and the international community agreed a
common set of principles reflecting the ambitions that

16

President Karzai outlined in his inauguration speech
last year. These priorities renewed the international
community’s commitment to Afghanistan and its
people, and recognized a new phase towards greater
Afghan leadership. These priorities will be reflected in
UNAMA’s renewed mandate next week.
The international community and President
Karzai’s Government now need to deliver on the
commitments we collectively made in London,
particularly in three priority areas. The first is security.
As the Secretary-General’s report sets out, the past
three months have presented major security challenges,
but the progress we have made is real. Operation
Moshtarak shows the increasing role that Afghanistan
is playing in strengthening its own security. We
welcome the considerable efforts made by the
International Security Assistance Force and Afghan
forces in minimizing civilian casualties — a fall of
some 28 per cent over the past year. We are working
towards the day when foreign troops are no longer
needed on the front line in Afghanistan, and when
Afghanistan can stand up by itself to the threat posed
by terrorism.
Second is the political process. Developing an
Afghan-led political settlement remains a critical task
for 2010. Both the forthcoming Peace Jirga and the
Kabul conference are central to that effort. We support
the Afghan Government in its endeavour to develop a
representative reconciliation process. As my Foreign
Minister said last week, the Afghans must own, lead
and drive such political engagement. It will be a slow,
gradual process. And to support that Afghan-led
political process, and at the request of the Government,
we envisage an important role for UNAMA and the
good offices of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
Third are elections. UNAMA will have an
important role in helping the Afghan Government to
prepare for the forthcoming legislative elections. We
hope that all efforts will be made by the Government to
ensure that they are transparent, credible and safe. We
reaffirm our support for the Government’s commitment
in the London communiqué to preventing any
irregularity and misconduct. It is important for the
credibility of the election that both the Afghan
Electoral Complaints Commission and the Independent
Election Commission be genuinely independent so that
they can provide the proper checks and balances
required by the Constitution. We therefore welcome

10-27766

S/PV.6287

President Karzai’s commitment to appointing two
internationals to the Electoral Complaints Commission,
and we look forward to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General making those appointments
shortly.
We agree with the analysis in the SecretaryGeneral’s report of the presidential elections last year.
A number of lessons need to be learned, and we
recognize the challenges in delivering credible
elections this coming September. We note the
commitment in the London communiqué that the
Afghan Government will work closely with the United
Nations to deliver improvements in all future electoral
processes, and we look forward to the Government
outlining and implementing electoral reforms without
delay.
Tackling corruption must remain a top priority for
the Afghan Government and for international partners.
As the Secretary-General’s report highlights,
corruption is currently an even greater priority for
Afghans than security. Corruption hampers socioeconomic development and undermines the legitimacy
of the Government and its ability to deliver services to
the Afghan people. At the London Conference,
President Karzai committed to tackling corruption and
to building independent institutions to drive and
monitor progress. We therefore welcome Mr. Le Roy’s
confirmation that President Karzai today enacted
legislation establishing the High Office for Oversight
and Anti-corruption. Improving anti-corruption efforts
will build the confidence of donors to channel an
increasing percentage of development funds directly
through Afghan ministries.
Finally, we look forward to the Kabul conference
later this year. That event will maintain momentum in
building a political strategy in Afghanistan and will
enable the Government of Afghanistan, with the
support of the United Nations and the international
community, to articulate how it will implement the
commitments made in January. Afghanistan and the
United Nations have the United Kingdom’s full
support.
Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): I would like to start by
thanking Mr. Le Roy for his comprehensive briefing
and Ambassador Tanin for his remarks.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/127)
highlights some important areas of progress in
international and Afghan efforts over the past three

10-27766

months, but it also recognizes that much more remains
to be achieved with the proper management of the
important events that will take place in the next few
months.
We strongly support the overall effort made
during the reporting period to improve governance, the
rule of law, the fight against corruption and impunity,
and respect for human rights in Afghanistan. Building
strong institutions remains critical to that effort, and it
is the responsibility of the new Afghan Government to
demonstrate leadership on these national priorities.
Significant reforms to the electoral system are
necessary if future elections are to be more transparent
and accountable. In this regard, the postponement of
the parliamentary elections to 18 September offers a
window of opportunity for electoral reform that will
further contribute to the consolidation of democracy in
Afghanistan.
The security situation in Afghanistan remains of
major concern to the international community. We note
with great concern that the situation worsened during
the reporting period as a result of a combination of
factors. We are encouraged, however, by the efforts to
reinforce security arrangements in the main cities, as
well as by ongoing security operations that have
resulted in a significant decrease in suicide attacks.
Of additional concern beyond the loss of life and
serious injuries is the mine contamination that has
hampered livelihood activities, including access to
agricultural land, water, health care and education.
While we note the achievements to date in the
implementation of the mine-action programme, we
encourage the Government, with the support of the
international community, to increase resources for
addressing the impact on the population of mines and
explosive remnants of war. We urge the early
completion of the development of the National
Security Strategy, followed by its immediate
implementation, in line with the objective of
transferring security responsibility to the Afghan
National Security Forces within five years.
We recognize that the primary responsibility for
the development of the country lies with the Afghan
Government and the people themselves, but we call on
the international community to continue to promote
and strengthen Afghan ownership by increasing efforts
to enhance the Afghans’ capacity to take the lead on
key priorities that are critical in moving the country

17

S/PV.6287

forward. We agree with the Secretary-General that that
requires a good balance between military and civilian
efforts. Increased efforts must be made to establish a
reinforced and dedicated civilian coordination structure
that ensures strong Afghan ownership and the
involvement of all major stakeholders in Afghanistan.
We welcome the continued commitment of the
international community to supporting the stability and
development of Afghanistan, in particular the London
Conference communiqué, which set a clear agenda and
good priorities for the way forward on Afghanistan.
The consensus generated on Afghan-led reconciliation
and reintegration is very significant and is also critical
to sustainable peace in Afghanistan and the entire
region.
Stability,
security
and
development
in
Afghanistan are closely linked to the overall situation
in the region. A coordinated approach at the regional
level and enhanced cooperation between Afghanistan
and its neighbours are essential in dealing with the
common challenges that cut across national borders,
while they also generate momentum for economic
growth.
The fight against insurgency, and the trade in
narcotics in particular, can be greatly boosted by joint
efforts at the regional level. We take note of the recent
progress in addressing opium production, but we
remain concerned at the serious harm that opium
cultivation, production and trafficking continue to
cause to the security, development and governance of
Afghanistan, as well as the region and internationally.
We call on the Afghan Government to accelerate, with
the assistance of the international community, the
implementation of the National Drug Control Strategy.
We note with appreciation the ongoing efforts by
the Secretary-General, his newly appointed Special
Representative for Afghanistan and, in particular, the
staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission to
Afghanistan (UNAMA), who are serving in very
difficult conditions to lead the efforts of the
international community. We therefore support the
Secretary-General’s call for the renewal of UNAMA’s
mandate for an additional period of 12 months.
As the Secretary-General has noted, the next few
months will be complex and very critical for
Afghanistan’s future stability and progress. The
positive momentum that has emerged in spite of the
difficult security situation must be maintained. The

18

increased support of the international community is
essential to maintain that momentum.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to convey my gratitude to the
Secretariat for the report that Under-Secretary-General
Le Roy has just presented on the work undertaken by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) (S/2010/127), and to thank Ambassador
Tanin for his statement. Allow me, Mr. President, to
make the following comments.
We welcome the appointment of Mr. Staffan de
Mistura as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, and we support the
renewal of UNAMA’s mandate for another year, with it
adapting its functions to the new challenges. We affirm
the importance of the United Nations playing a leading
role in coordinating international assistance for
Afghanistan, aimed at strengthening its sovereignty
and independence.
It is essential that the Afghan Government play a
leading role in the security, political and economic
fields, and that the United Nations Mission play an
assisting and supporting role so as to enable the people
of Afghanistan to increasingly ensure their future. We
call for stronger coordination between UNAMA and
the other international actors present in Afghanistan.
At this time it is important to promote
international and regional support in order to help
Afghanistan achieve stability and prosperity. In that
context, we welcome the high-level conference on
Afghanistan, organized by Turkey in Istanbul on
26 January 2010, and the outcome of the London
Conference of 28 January 2010, in which 78 States and
institutions participated. We hope that the Kabul
conference scheduled for later this year will also be a
success. At that conference, the Afghan Government is
to present tangible plans and programmes.
We support the certification of the provincial
council elections and the parliamentary elections,
which are scheduled to be held on 18 September of this
year. We hope they will be transparent, free and
credible. Before then, electoral reform is necessary, in
particular with regard to the establishment of a credible
independent election commission and the lessons that
need to be learned from the earlier presidential
elections. We must also identify the assistance that the
United Nations Mission can provide in that regard.

10-27766

S/PV.6287

Afghan military, civilian and judicial institutionbuilding must be completed, and we must fight
impunity and corruption. Women’s rights must be
promoted, and the Afghan army and police must be
strengthened in order to ensure that they can fully
assume their security functions.
We underscore the complementary nature of
security and development, and in that regard parallel
efforts must be undertaken to address the underlying
causes of that conflict. We should foster an internal
political process and reconciliation with antiGovernment elements, as long as they renounce
violence and respect the Constitution and all
institutions established since 2002.
We are concerned about the increasing security
tensions and terrorist attacks against Afghan civilians
and Afghan and international forces. It is regrettable
that 2009 was the worst year since 2001 as concerns
the loss of civilian lives. We urge the international
forces to continue their efforts to protect civilians
during their military operations. We underscore the
importance of counter-narcotic activities, well aware
that such illicit trafficking is linked to financing
terrorist activities.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Let me join others in
thanking
the
Under-Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Alain Le Roy, for his
valuable briefing. We appreciate the presence of
Ambassador Zahir Tanin at this meeting and thank him
for his statement. We welcome the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in his new
assignment. He can count on our support during his
assignment.
We welcome Afghanistan’s recent progress, as
indicated in the benchmark-assessment reports.
However, it is clear that the challenges facing the
country are enormous, spanning the spheres of security,
politics,
governance,
economic
development,
corruption and drug trafficking.
On politics and governance, we note President
Hâmid Karzai’s commitments at the London
Conference to ensuring that the irregularities and
misconduct observed at the last elections would be
avoided in future. The parliamentary elections
scheduled for September 2010 should therefore be
preceded by thorough and adequate preparations.

10-27766

Electoral
reforms
that
guarantee
the
independence and impartiality of the country’s
electoral bodies and the credibility of the elections
themselves should be undertaken.
Serious reconciliation and reintegration efforts
are required to consolidate peace efforts in
Afghanistan. Thus we welcome the forthcoming
national peace jirga of reconciliation that the
Government has scheduled for April. We hope it will
become a genuine platform for seeking greater political
inclusiveness in Afghanistan. It is critically important
to guarantee Afghan sovereignty by strengthening the
Government’s capacity to take ownership of the
country’s political and development processes.
The security situation in Afghanistan remains
precarious and extremely complicated, with terrorists,
anti-Government spoiler groups, the narcotics trade
and regional warlords creating instability and stalling
economic progress. The establishment of a national
peace and reintegration trust fund to offer economic
alternatives to those who renounce violence and cut
ties with Al-Qaida and other terrorist groups is a
welcome development. Training, equipping and
strengthening Afghan security forces should be an
ongoing focus.
In regard to corruption and judicial reform, we
welcome the establishment of an anti-corruption unit
and the appointment of judges to head the tribunals.
We also welcome the reforms called for in the National
Justice Programme, as well as the adoption of a draft
policy on the integration of formal and traditional
mechanisms into the country’s judicial system.
On the humanitarian front, there is a need for
better coordination of aid and the urgent resettlement
of internally displaced persons. We believe that
adequate donor funding for the recently launched
Humanitarian Action Plan will go a long way to easing
the country’s humanitarian needs.
We support the outcome of the London
Conference. If the commitments made at the
Conference are followed through, Afghanistan will be
on its way to assuming sovereign responsibility for its
security, economic development, social cohesion and
regional cooperation. The forthcoming Kabul
conference, we hope, will build on the London
Conference in order to fast-track the consolidation of
Afghanistan as a stable and peaceful country.

19

S/PV.6287

We appreciate the role that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has
played in managing relief, recovery and reconstruction
activities and in holding elections, in addition to
providing political and strategic advice for the peace
process. At this time of strategic reviews, especially of
the outcome of the London Conference, UNAMA has
an even greater role in peacemaking, State-building
and coordination. We therefore support the SecretaryGeneral’s request for the renewal of UNAMA’s
mandate for another 12 months.

run counter to relevant Security Council decisions,
including the effective implementation of the sanctions
regime against the Taliban and Al-Qaida. Dialogue is
possible only with those who have laid down their
arms, recognized the Government and the Constitution
of Afghanistan and severed their links with Al-Qaida
and other terrorist organizations. It is fundamental that
these principles must guide Afghanistan in approaching
this very important issue. These fundamental principles
should also guide the United Nations Mission in the
mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council.

Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We too, of course, are grateful to UnderSecretary-General Alain Le Roy for his comprehensive
analysis of the situation in Afghanistan, as well as his
presentation of the report on the situation there
(S/2010/127). We have listened attentively to the
comprehensive
statement
of
the
Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Mr. Tanin.

I would like to take this opportunity, as other
colleagues have done, to welcome the appointment of
the new leadership of the United Nations Mission in
Afghanistan and to wish Mr. De Mistura and
Mr. Kobler every possible success in their activities.
They can count on the support of the Russian
Federation, including on issues of strengthening,
operating and staffing the Mission.

We concur with the Secretary-General that the
main results of international efforts in Afghanistan
should be the effective achievement by the Afghan
authorities of sovereignty over the issues of the
security and economic development of the country and
their gradual assumption of basic responsibility for
those areas, with the help of the international
community and preserving the coordinating role of the
United Nations. It is precisely in that light that we are
considering a number of important upcoming events,
including the international conference in Kabul —
which will be the first high-level event organized by
the new Government of Afghanistan — and the
parliamentary elections scheduled for September.
Those elections should serve to further advance the
building of a democratic Afghanistan and its effective
Government institutions.

The situation with regard to the production and
illegal trafficking of narcotics is particularly alarming.
Regrettably, very little light was shed on this subject
during today’s discussion, although the scale of the
drug threat in Afghanistan requires more decisive
action, a transition to a new level of international
cooperation. We assume that the contingents from the
NATO countries in Afghanistan will cooperate even
more actively with the Afghan Government on this
issue. It is essential that more energetic efforts be made
to suppress the flow of precursors, without which
heroin production is impossible.

In the Security Council resolution currently being
drafted on the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
a great deal of attention has been devoted to the
international community’s tasks in the area of assisting
national reconciliation in Afghanistan. Today’s
discussion confirms that this topic is on everyone’s
agenda.
We support the ongoing processes in Afghanistan
concerning political settlement and reconciliation —
provided, of course, that they do not prejudice the
achievement of long-term stability in the country or

20

In combating terrorism, drug trafficking and
organized crime, we must exploit more fully the
potential of regional organizations, which have proved
their effectiveness in this area. They include the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) and
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. Strengthening
counter-narcotic and counter-terrorism security along
Afghanistan’s borders with other countries will not
only help reduce the financial resources fuelling
extremism but will also promote the rapid achievement
of stabilization both in Afghanistan and the region as a
whole.
Here I recall that the CSTO has significant
experience in combating those who traffic in narcotics
in Afghanistan. One of the more successful and
effective manifestations of practical cooperation in this
regard by CSTO member States with a broad range of

10-27766

S/PV.6287

international partners is Operation Canal, which has
enjoyed the status of an ongoing CSTO regional
counter-narcotics operation since September 2008. It is
gratifying that the number of participating States has
grown every year.
New prospects for cooperation between the
United Nations and the CSTO in Afghanistan and a
number of other areas have been opened with the
signing today in Moscow by the Secretaries-General of
the United Nations and the CSTO of a declaration on
cooperation between the secretariats of these
organizations. As I already noted, Afghanistan is one of
the more promising avenues for cooperation between
the two organizations.
Russia supports the efforts of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan,
carried out on the basis of the Security Council’s
mandate. Our practical contribution to that effort takes
the shape of agreements with NATO on the transit
through Russian territory of non-military cargo for
foreign military contingents in Afghanistan. Russia has
concluded agreements with a number of member States
of NATO on the transfer of military cargo through
Russian territory.
We share the concern of the United Nations about
the substantial increase in the number of civilian
victims over this past year. It is quite rightly pointed
out, including in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/127), that the activities of the Taliban and
Al-Qaida are driving this negative trend. That is yet
another demonstration of the fact that the main threat
to the security of Afghanistan and the region as a
whole remains the terrorist activities of Al-Qaida and
the Taliban.
The neutralization of their activities and the
stabilization of the security situation as a whole are of
fundamental importance in the context of the
preparation and conduct of the parliamentary elections
in Afghanistan. At the same time, more energetic
efforts are required from the international military
presence in Afghanistan to prevent civilian victims.
Russia, as Afghanistan’s reliable partner, is
convinced that it is through joint coordination that we
will be able to achieve a sound political settlement in
that country, with a lead role being played by the
Afghan Government and Afghans themselves, of
course. The future of Afghanistan must be determined
by Afghans themselves. A possible option for such a

10-27766

solution could be the restoration of Afghanistan’s
neutrality. The historical evidence itself favours such a
solution, provided that it is chosen by the Afghan
people.
The Russian Federation will continue to
strengthen its cooperation with Afghanistan and with a
broad range of international partners for the successful
post-conflict reconstruction of the country and the
formation of viable State structures, including police,
law enforcement and anti-narcotics bodies.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I, too, would like to thank
Mr. Alain Le Roy for his very useful briefing this
morning. I am also grateful to Ambassador Tanin for
his statement affirming the very strong determination
of his Government to build a stable and democratic
Afghanistan.
I would also like to begin by welcoming the
appointment of the new Special Representative, Staffan
de Mistura, and to acknowledge the valuable
contributions of his predecessor, Mr. Eide. The
Security Council had a brief meeting with Mr. De
Mistura before his departure for his new assignment,
and we support his approach, which focuses on a few
areas of importance in the coming months, as the
political calendar is very heavy and filled with many
significant events.
Japan believes that those areas of focus should
be, first, stronger aid coordination; secondly,
advancing political dialogue; and thirdly, the upcoming
parliamentary elections.
With respect to coordination, the London
Conference reaffirmed that there is no other
international actor that can fulfil the role of the United
Nations in leading the coordination of international
support. That is especially true at this time, when
Afghanistan is in a critical period of transition towards
Afghanization, and we need to seek optimal use of
international assistance.
On aid coordination, we must be mindful of
maintaining a long-term perspective and of ensuring
that our efforts serve to promote the leadership and
capacity of the Afghan Government. The success of aid
coordination hinges upon the willingness of donors to
be coordinated. Through the efforts of Mr. Eide,
assistance priorities have been identified. The expertise
of the proposed senior advisers’ group needs to be fully
utilized. International donors should make certain that

21

S/PV.6287

their efforts are consistent with the goals and priorities
set by the Afghan people. As is often repeated, they
should also make certain that words are translated into
deeds.
Regarding reconciliation and integration efforts,
we have to recognize that there is no substitute for
military operations in combating those who would
resort to violence and obstruct the democratic process.
No political dialogue can succeed from a position of
weakness, so we understand and pay tribute to the
efforts made by members and soldiers of the Afghan
security forces and the international forces. At the
same time, in order to achieve long-term stability, a
political solution must be sought even while military
operations are ongoing. We welcome President
Karzai’s leadership and readiness to seek a dialogue
with those who are prepared to renounce violence and
respect the values enshrined in the Constitution, as
well as to organize a national Peace Jirga.
Japan provides assistance for the efforts of the
Afghan Government in its reintegration programme.
Japan is especially grateful to those countries, such as
Australia, Germany, Greece and Spain, that made
pledges at the London Conference to a trust fund to
finance this Afghan-led programme. The Afghan
authorities are now working on the programme’s
details, and we very much look forward to the
presentation of the full programme in due time. We
also welcome the fact that the United Nations is
expected to play a role in the reintegration programme.
We hope that the Security Council will assign to the
United Nations Mission of Assistance in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) a proper role in this Afghan-led effort.
The third issue is elections. The ownership of the
Afghan authorities must be respected in the conduct of
the upcoming parliamentary elections. At the same
time, we recognize that the necessary electoral reforms
and improvements have to be carried out based on
lessons learned from last year’s elections. We therefore
welcome President Karzai’s commitment to ensuring
the integrity of this process.
Japan also appreciates the President’s readiness to
work in close cooperation with the United Nations. The
Special Representative is expected to play the role of
indispensable interlocutor with the Afghan leadership
in conveying the voice and message of the
international community. We hope that the Afghan
leaders will consult closely with him and that

22

Afghanistan will continue to enjoy full partnership
with the international community following the
elections.
We agree that UNAMA has to be strengthened in
order to meet the high expectations placed upon it. I
reiterate that the highest priority must be placed on the
security of UNAMA and United Nations staff on the
ground. We understand that that an in-depth analysis of
United Nations security requirements is under way and
we are eagerly awaiting its outcome. We also
acknowledge the measures recently taken by the
Secretariat to accelerate the recruitment process to fill
vacancies. A mission of such high importance needs to
be operating at the highest and fullest possible
capacity.
I would like to conclude by expressing Japan’s
appreciation for the work of men and women of the
United Nations in Afghanistan. We obviously support
the extension of UNAMA’s mandate for another
12 months, with the modifications in the priority areas,
as recommended by the Secretary-General.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Gabon.
In turn, I would like to thank Mr. Alain Le Roy
for his briefing, which was very informative regarding
the latest developments on the situation in Afghanistan.
My gratitude goes, of course, to Ambassador Tanin for
his statement, which, among other things, reflected the
Afghan authorities’ determination to abide by their
commitments in the context of the reconstruction
process in their country.
Since 6 January, when the Security Council last
debated the situation in Afghanistan (see S/PV.6255),
one significant development in the Afghan situation
was the organization in London, on 28 January, of the
International Conference on Afghanistan at the
initiative of the British and Afghan Governments and
the Secretary-General. The priorities identified at the
Conference were endorsed by the international
community and mark a new phase in the process of
transferring to Afghan authorities the full management
of their country’s affairs in the fields of security, good
governance and economic and social development.
Gabon supports that approach and the commitment of
the Afghan authorities to implementing the priorities
contained in the plan of action adopted at the London
Conference.

10-27766

S/PV.6287

During this decisive phase, the efforts of the
international community aimed at constructing this
country, must be continued and strengthened. I would
like to renew our full support for United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for the
central role it plays, not only in the coordination of
international civilian actions in Afghanistan, but also,
more comprehensively, in the process of developing
the country. We reiterate our solidarity with the men
and women who, within the framework of this Mission,
are working in the field, especially given the constant
threats to their security.
Gabon also welcomes the efforts by other players
in Afghanistan: the European Union, NATO and the
United States of America. The future of Afghanistan is
being built today, despite the many challenges that
continue to threaten the country’s political and
economic stability. It is thus in our interest to renew
our commitment to a peaceful, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan. That is why we support the extension of
UNAMA’s mandate for a further 12 months.
The next conference, which will be held in Kabul
in a few months, will afford the Afghan Government
and people a new opportunity to reaffirm their
determination to build the future of their country
themselves.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Given that the Council has scheduled
consultations at 3 p.m., I ask the members of the
Council that we complete this meeting, with the hope
that it will end by 3 o’clock at the latest. I request all
speakers to limit their statements to five minutes to
ensure that the Council can end its meeting on time.
I invite the representative of Canada to take the
floor.
Mr. McNee (Canada) (spoke in French) At the
outset, I would like to convey my gratitude to UnderSecretary-General Le Roy for his very useful
presentation this morning.
As the Secretary-General stresses in his latest
report (S/2010/127), the coming months in Afghanistan
will be crucial with regard to the transition to a greater
Afghan leadership. There has already been
considerable progress in that direction during the last
three months, with a London conference that was very
fruitful and the deployment of much-needed additional

10-27766

forces, especially in the south of Afghanistan. It is now
important for the Government of Afghanistan and the
international community to live up to their London
commitments. It is essential that the United Nations
and the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. De Mistura, play a central role as we
move toward our common goals. Mr. De Mistoura has
one of the most challenging posts in the United
Nations. He can count on Canada’s full support.
In the past three months many Afghans and
members of the international community have lost their
lives or been injured. These sacrifices weigh heavily on
all of us. Canada, which grieves its own losses, shares
the pain of all those who have lost loved ones.
Canada looks to the Security Council to renew
the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) so that it remains robust and
enables the Mission to continue its work on a whole
gamut of essential issues. Canada believes that the new
mandate should take into account the development of
the situation in Afghanistan. It should provide
UNAMA with the direction it needs to continue to play
a preponderant role in the coordination of the
international effort with regard to Afghan elections.
The mandate should also reflect the transition-oriented
spirit of the London Conference and authorize the
Mission to play fully its political role and its role with
regard to coordination of international aid.
Furthermore, UNAMA’s human resources also
need to be strengthened as a matter of urgency, as its
staff numbers and ability to fulfil its core tasks have
been severely affected in recent months.
(spoke in English)
The London Conference heralded the hope for a
new transition phase for Afghanistan. It emphasized to
the Afghan public, as well as to the domestic audiences
of countries engaged in the reconstruction effort, that
the Government of Afghanistan intends to strengthen
Afghan leadership in delivering security and support to
the well-being of Afghans. However, the challenge is
now for us all to follow up on the commitments of the
London Conference.
Canada recognizes that the Afghan authorities are
progressing along the difficult road of transition in
assuming increased responsibility for security. That
will require Afghanistan and its international
community partners, including UNAMA and NATO, to

23

S/PV.6287

work closely together to implement a well-coordinated
transition strategy that is based on a careful assessment
of conditions on the ground and that provides the
Government with the capacity to protect its civilians.
There are many challenges, not least of which is
the increased rate of violence caused by insurgents still
fighting efforts to establish a stable and prosperous
Afghanistan. Canada welcomes President Karzai’s
emphasis on reconciliation and high-level efforts to
achieve an inclusive Government. Reconciliation and
reintegration will play an important complementary
role to stabilization and development. Canada
welcomes the holding of an Afghan peace jirga and
hopes that it will provide an opportunity for
substantive exchange and consultation between
different Afghan communities and civil society on
reconciliation.
In addition, because increasing violence has also
targeted women and girls — especially those in the
public sphere — it is essential that women’s
participation be a central feature of the upcoming
peace jirga and Kabul conference as Afghans work
together to build consensus on building peace.
The Kabul conference will be an important
opportunity for the Afghan Government to present
progress and for the international community to lend
its voice of support to positive outcomes. Canada is
looking to the Afghan Government to demonstrate
progress in several areas prior to the conference.
In particular, the London Conference included
extensive commitments on electoral reform. Canada
strongly supports the need for electoral reforms ahead
of the September elections, but we note with concern
reports that changes have recently been made to the
electoral law that may decrease the independence of
the Electoral Complaints Commission. Canada stresses
the crucial importance of undertaking all reforms in a
transparent manner, in consultation with civil society
and Afghan citizens themselves.
The international community also needs to live
up to its London commitments to better coordinate its
efforts with those of the United Nations and other
international partners in support of the priorities of the
Afghan Government. Canada urges the United Nations
system and the rest of the international community to
follow through on the commitments from London to
enhance donor coordination under UNAMA’s lead and
Afghan direction, to make international assistance

24

more efficient and effective until the Government of
Afghanistan is able to fully take on this role. It will
also be important for the United Nations to work in
close cooperation with the new NATO Senior Civilian
Representative to ensure a synergy of mandates and
efforts.
It is important not to lose sight of the overall
vision of an Afghanistan where a democratic
Government fulfils all its essential roles, including the
delivery of basic services, the provision of effective,
transparent and accountable governance, the protection
of its citizens, economic development and the
protection and promotion of the human rights of all
Afghans, including women’s rights. The international
community and the Government of Afghanistan must
continue working together towards making this vision
a reality.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Peter Schwaiger, Chargé d’affaires of the
European Union delegation to the United Nations.
Mr. Schwaiger: Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for giving the floor to the European
Union (EU).
The following countries align themselves with
this declaration: Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro, Serbia, and Iceland, as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia.
Let me join others in expressing our support for
the Secretary-General’s report on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
(S/2010/127) and its recommendations. The EU looks
forward to working with the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Staffan de
Mistura, and wishes him much success in leading
UNAMA.
The European Union welcomes the fact that the
Secretary-General’s report takes on the key priorities
agreed at the London Conference, highlighting in
particular the transition to the Afghan Government of
the responsibility for the security of the country and
the need for more Afghan ownership of reconstruction
and development efforts. We also note the report’s
emphasis on the balance between military and civilian
efforts in the transition process, and we renew our
commitment to building Afghan civilian capacity.

10-27766

S/PV.6287

The EU agrees that reconciliation and
reintegration are key elements of a sustainable political
development in Afghanistan. This process should be
Afghan-led and be in conformity with the Constitution
and
Afghanistan’s
international
commitments,
including those on human rights. Reconciliation should
not lead to impunity. We welcome the organization of
the peace jirga and the recent contacts between leaders
in the region aimed at confidence-building. The EU
supports the political good offices of UNAMA in that
regard. We also stand ready to contribute to a
reintegration fund and look forward to the further
clarification of its modalities.
Transition is also highly dependent on economic
and social development. As a major donor of
assistance, the EU welcomes the implementation of the
cluster approach intended to accelerate the
implementation
of
the
Afghanistan
National
Development Strategy and expects the presentation of
concrete plans before the Kabul conference. The EU
encourages the establishment of a governance cluster.
As pledged at the London Conference, the EU will
increase the percentage of its aid allocated to the
sectors prioritized in the National Strategy and
channelled through the Afghan Government.
Contributions to improving governance, the rule
of law, respect for human rights and Afghan institutionbuilding are at the heart of our support to Afghanistan.
Through our European Police Mission in Afghanistan
(EUPOL), for example, we contribute to making the
Afghan police more sustainable, effective and
respectful of the rule of law and human rights.
The EU notes with concern recent reports of
increased restrictions on freedom of expression and
continued violations of human rights, as well as the
recent publication of the law on public amnesty and
national stability. We reiterate the importance of
upholding international obligations, as enshrined in the
Afghan Constitution.
Given the lessons learned from the monitoring of
the 2009 elections, the EU considers electoral reforms
to be of crucial importance. Future elections must be
credible, inclusive and secure and must reflect the will
of the Afghan people. This should be clearly expressed
in the resolution to be adopted by the Council next
week.
We concur on the need for structural reforms of
the electoral process. Short-term reforms are also

10-27766

urgently needed before the parliamentary elections,
notably regarding the composition of the two
Commissions and the vetting mechanism, also in order
to make it possible for the international community to
lend effective support to the electoral process.
As this year is the tenth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security, we
think it would also be appropriate for the Security
Council to strengthen the UNAMA resolution as
concerns women and gender equality, and for the
Secretary-General to report in greater detail on those
issues in the future. The Government could be
encouraged to accelerate the implementation of the
National Action Plan for the Women of Afghanistan
and to strengthen women’s participation in public life,
including in the upcoming elections and ongoing
processes to ensure sustainable peace, stability and
reconciliation.
By the adoption of its action plan, the EU has
pledged
further
European
contributions
to
Afghanistan’s long-term development and has
committed to improved internal EU coordination. The
imminent appointment of former Lithuanian Foreign
Minister Vygaudas Usackas as our new EU Special
Representative and head of our delegation in Kabul not
only confirms the strong European commitment to
Afghanistan, but should also serve to strengthen
common EU action and improve the coordination with
the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the NATO senior civilian representative.
Let me stress in that context that we continue to
believe that the roles of UNAMA and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in civilian
coordination are particularly important.
We support the United Nations plans for
enhancing coordination among donors and within the
United Nations system while ensuring strong Afghan
ownership. We understand that UNAMA needs the
capacity to deliver on this task; therefore staff
recruitment should be addressed as a priority.
Finally, the EU would like to highlight again the
importance of the regional dimension as the third pillar
of the overall stabilization, together with security and
development, as recognized in London.
The EU supports the renewal of the UNAMA
mandate for a further 12 months, as recommended by
the Secretary-General. With new lead personnel on the
ground and the upcoming mandate renewal, the United

25

S/PV.6287

Nations and the international community at large can
reinvigorate their contributions to Afghanistan’s
development. The EU hopes that the Government will
seize the current opportunities to make real progress
towards security and prosperity for the sake of the
Afghan people and the stability of the whole region.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Thank you, Mr. President,
for giving Germany the opportunity to participate in
this important debate. I would like to join my
colleagues and extend my special thanks to the
Secretary-General for his report on the situation of
Afghanistan (S/2010/127). I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for his briefing and
Ambassador Tanin for his remarks. We noted with
interest and appreciation their remarks on the rather
encouraging decisions by President Karzai on fighting
corruption and on the preparation of the elections.
Germany fully aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of the European Union.
My country enjoys a close relationship with
Afghanistan and its people. We are a major contributor
to the International Security Assistance Force and to
development aid and assistance to Afghanistan.
The London Conference has strongly reaffirmed
the partnership of the international community with the
Afghan people and Government. The upcoming Kabul
conference will be an important next step to review
implementation and agree on further specific
implementation steps, in particular in the field of
economic and social development.

and constructively to overcome the shortcomings of the
recent past. In this context, we would like to echo the
Secretary-General in urging the Afghan Government to
ensure that appointments of members of the relevant
Commissions are made in an inclusive and transparent
manner and with the broadest possible consultation
across the political spectrum, including the opposition
and civil society.
The London Conference decided to explore a new
approach to promoting peace through dialogue.
UNAМA should be ready to assist in that process with
good offices upon request, including through the Trust
Fund. Again, that approach will prove successful only
as an Afghan-led process based on the broad support of
the Afghan people. We therefore welcome President
Karzai’s intention to win political approval for his
concept of peace through dialogue from the Peace Jirga
later this spring.
The questions, fears and concerns raised by many
Afghans with regard to the reconciliation and
reintegration approach should be taken seriously and
must be reflected in the design of programmes. We
support the idea of confidence-building measures, as
indicated in the report of the Secretary-General, and
would like to encourage all Council members to
constructively support that process in the work of the
Council’s committees as well.
The overwhelming majority of Afghans want to
continue to enjoy their rights as enshrined in the
Afghan Constitution, including human rights and
women’s rights. Those rights should not be bargained
away.

The emphasis on Afghan ownership and the
concept of transition of responsibility should be
adequately reflected in the resolution of the Security
Council and the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). In the
context of this Afghan-led process, we strongly support
an extension of the UNAМA mandate as recommended
by the Secretary-General.

With regard to the coordination and effectiveness
of aid, we fully share the view expressed in the
Secretary-General’s report. Indeed, additional emphasis
should be put on capacity-building within the Afghan
Government. The Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board (JCМВ) should continue to play a central role in
aid coordination. The working methods of the JCМB
and its subcommittees can and should be further
improved.

The parliamentary elections are an important step
for a democratic Afghanistan. As requested by
President Karzai, the United Nations, including
UNAМA, should assist with the electoral process and
with the urgently needed work on long-term electoral
reform. This assistance should be based on the
understanding that all parties concerned will work hard

Under the umbrella of the United Nations,
Germany will continue to contribute substantially to
the efforts of the international community in
Afghanistan.
We will raise to 5,350 the number of
German personnel in ISAF missions operating under
the mandate of the Security Council. We will double
the number of our police trainers on the ground. We

26

10-27766

S/PV.6287

will increase our bilateral development aid to
Afghanistan up to a total of $580 million per year. That
is in addition to our contribution through the European
Union. Finally, we are prepared to support the political
process with a substantial contribution to the
reintegration trust fund.
With the new UNАМА leadership team
appointed, the budget increase approved and the
granting of special delegation of recruitment authority
to UNAMA, the Security Council, the SecretaryGeneral and the General Assembly have set important
parameters and have paved the way for re-energizing
UNAMA on the ground. At the same time, our
expectations should remain realistic and focused on
key priorities. We warmly welcome the new leadership
of Staffan de Mistura and his team and look forward to
cooperating closely with them.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): The Netherlands
fully subscribes to the statement of the European
Union. We would like to make a few additional
comments on the upcoming renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and on the situation in Afghanistan.
Experience with post-conflict countries teaches
us a thing or two about how to jump-start progress. In
particular, local authorities themselves must improve
stability, governance and the human rights situation.
All the while, the international community must
empower authorities, and do so in a coordinated
manner. That is why we agree with the SecretaryGeneral when he writes in his report (S/2010/127) that
2010 should be the year of transition towards greater
Afghan ownership.
The overriding objective of such a transition was
of course the main message of the London
Conference — a message directed both towards Afghan
authorities and the international community. In our
view, transition should be defined broadly. Ensuring
more Afghan ownership of security by bolstering the
Afghan National Army and National Police and by
enhancing coordination with the International Security
Assistance Force is one side of the coin.
It will be equally important to make tangible
progress on the civilian side, in particular at local
levels. Key areas I want to mention are, first,

10-27766

significant progress on governance, such as qualified
civil servants, bolstered by an increased push in anticorruption efforts; secondly, election reforms, both in
the short and the long terms; and, thirdly, safeguarding
women’s rights in conformity with international
standards. Upcoming opportunities to achieve tangible
progress in those areas are the Kabul conference, the
Peace Jirga and the elections.
We also agree with the Secretary-General when it
comes to UNAMA’s focus. It needs to concentrate
more on empowering Afghan authorities. In doing so,
UNAMA will, in or view, need to take a differentiated
approach. In some areas, Afghan ministries are by and
large already in charge of donor coordination. In that
connection, therefore, UNAMA’s role can be limited.
In other areas there will be scope for a more
pronounced UNAMA role. We believe that UNAMA
needs to look carefully into specific areas where it can
make a difference when it comes to donor coordination
or the United Nations internal coordination — the socalled One United Nations approach. We look forward
to the guidance of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on that.
Finally, let me underline that Dutch troops have
served with honour in Uruzgan province since 2006.
We have made every effort to find the right balance
between our civilian and our military efforts and are
very grateful for the support and cooperation of our
international allies, UNAMA and the Afghan
authorities. I wish to emphasize that the Netherlands is
and will remain a strong partner for Afghanistan in the
years to come.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Herczyński (Poland): I would like to start by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for his
comprehensive briefing, as well as Ambassador Tanin
for his remarks today.
As this is the first Security Council debate on the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) after his assumption of the post of Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
in
Afghanistan, I would like to wish Mr. De Mistura
every success in his mission and to assure him of the
full support of my Government for his efforts. At the
same time, I wish to thank former Special
Representative Kai Eide for his commitment and
leadership during the past two difficult years.

27

S/PV.6287

Poland aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of the European Union. I
would like to make just a few additional comments
from the Polish perspective.

16, so that almost 20 per cent of our troops present in
Afghanistan will be directly involved in the
improvement of the operational capacity of the Afghan
army and police.

The period since the last Security Council debate
on Afghanistan, at the beginning of this year, was
indeed an eventful one. The London Conference was
the opening of the next stage of transferring greater
responsibility for the reconstruction and stabilization
of Afghanistan to Afghan authorities. While the
international community still stands ready to be
actively engaged in Afghanistan, it is important to
stress the need for greater Afghan leadership. In that
context, we especially welcome the commitments made
by President Karzai to undertake more vigorous actions
in such areas as security, State-building, the fight
against corruption, and counter-terrorism and counternarcotics efforts. We look forward to the conference in
Kabul later this year to be hosted by the Afghan
Government, which will serve as a follow-up meeting
to the commitments made in London.

Turning to UNAMA, it is impossible not to
mention the worrying picture presented by the
Secretary-General in relation to the current vacancy
rate, which has now increased to 42 per cent. Speeding
up the recruitment process, boosting the morale of the
United Nations personnel, and increasing enticements
are now essential if the Mission is to effectively fulfil
its complex mandate. At the same time, we are highly
aware of the difficult security circumstances that the
personnel of UNAMA are faced with. I would like to
underline my Government’s full support for all the
efforts aimed at the enhancement of the security of
United Nations staff.

Poland closely follows the Afghan-led process of
reconciliation and reintegration. The success of the
peace and reintegration programme outlined by
President Karzai during the London meeting will need
broad support, as the Secretary-General rightly
observes in his report (S/2010/127). In that context, let
me recall the proposal made in London by Polish
Foreign Minister Radosław Sikorski about the
readiness of Poland to host a series of meetings that
might be helpful in overcoming the lack of mutual trust
between Afghans. Poland stands ready to share its own
experience in the area of successful political transition.
We are concerned by the difficult security
situation in Afghanistan. We particularly deeply regret
the increase in the number of civilian casualties as
compared with previous periods. In that context, I
would like to stress what the Secretary-General’s report
clearly states, namely, that civilian deaths attributed to
anti-Government elements rose by 41 per cent
compared to 2008, whereas measures taken by
international forces to reduce civilian causalities
contributed to their reduction by 28 per cent.
In the circumstances of a difficult security
situation, the intensification of training of Afghan
national security forces –army and police — is crucial
and urgent. With this in mind, Poland will increase the
number of its training and mentoring teams from 6 to

28

International engagement in Afghanistan will be
successful only if we act together on the military and
development fronts. In this context, let me stress that
the appointments of the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, the new European Union
Special Representative and the new NATO Senior
Civilian Representative in Afghanistan serve as an
excellent opportunity to establish effective ways of
cooperation between these three major international
organizations involved in Afghanistan.
In conclusion, I would like to underline that my
country’s involvement in Afghanistan follows from our
deep sense of responsibility for the situation in that
country, which still poses a threat to international
peace and security. We hope that the decision of the
Government of Poland to increase the number of Polish
troops to 3,000 — 2,600 military personnel in
Afghanistan and an additional 400-troop reserve
deployable in case of emergency — will contribute
significantly to the building of peaceful and prosperous
Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Norway.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): Afghanization is
increasingly the mantra of our support for Afghanistan.
Rather than being a euphemism for exit, it underlines
the importance of an Afghan-led process that is
responsible, inclusive and transparent and promotes the
fundamental rights of the Afghan people. This is of
great importance for three of the key issues being
raised in today’s debate: the follow-up after the

10-27766

S/PV.6287

London Conference, President Karzai’s political
agenda, and the issue of reconciliation. Furthermore, it
has implications for what we should expect from the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in Afghanistan.
First, we join other speakers in welcoming the
conclusions of the London Conference and the stated
need for greater Afghan leadership, supported by the
international community under the leadership of the
United Nations. At the Kabul conference, we must be
clear about our is readiness to transfer authorities to
Afghan ownership. And the Afghan Government
should present concrete national programmes with
tangible planning. Today, Norway provides almost
60 per cent of our $140-million annual aid through
Afghan budgets and programmes. We support UNAMA
plans for enhancing civilian coordination while
ensuring strong Afghan leadership.
Secondly, we should expect real progress from
President Karzai and his Government when it comes to
reform and delivery on the pledges made in London
regarding good governance, measures against
corruption, improvement of the electoral laws, and
other commitments relating to reform of the political
system. The Afghan authorities must also move
forward with reform in a way that addresses the rights
and interests of women; they must bring civil society
on board and they need to address adequately the
national call for justice, including transitional justice.
Norway is particularly concerned about laws and
decrees with far-reaching implications that recently
been adopted without a wide and inclusive consultation
process. Both the process and the content of the
adopted amnesty law give reasons for grave concerns.
Amnesty is one way of healing the wounds of the
country, but those wounds cannot be healed if there is
no accountability and if impunity prevails.

stability and peace in Afghanistan. In London, we
agreed to the broad principles of this process. Yet, we
see the complexities when it comes to both the design
and the implementation of a robust reconciliation
process. The upcoming advisory Peace Jirga announced
by Karzai is an important step in the building
consensus to back such a reconciliation process. The
process must be shaped and led by Afghan authorities,
but only if there is buy-in to the process from
representatives of Afghan society can we avoid
national polarization and reach sustainable national
reconciliation. One cannot build a country on just
50 per cent of the population. Women — and what
women represent — must be taken into account, as
agreed upon by this Council in the resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1888 (2009). Furthermore, the involvement
of neighbouring countries cannot be neglected.
UNAMA should play a facilitating role, using its
good offices and confidence-building measures in
assisting with the advisory Peace Jirga and the larger
peace and reconciliation process. UNAMA should also
encourage closer regional cooperation economically,
socially and politically.
We welcome the extension of UNAMA’s mandate
and the amendments proposed in the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report (S/2010/127). It is important to
protect what has been UNAMA’s strengths: its
legitimacy, political outreach, field presence and status
as guarantor for the integrity of the overall political
process. We need UNAMA to ensure unity among the
international partners, but we also need it to position
itself both close enough to the Government and far
enough to be able to speak out and to voice the
concerns of the Afghan society.
Norway would like to welcome the appointment
of the seasoned diplomat Staffan De Mistura as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, and look forward to cooperate with
him and his new team in Kabul. We pay tribute to the
men and women of UNAMA and will continue to
support their vital mission, especially with regard to
their budget, recruitment and security. Without certain
resources, UNAMA will not be able to implement its
mandate or meet our expectations.

It is also important that the recent amendments of
the election law do not hamper constructive efforts to
reform the Afghan electoral institutions by ensuring
enhanced consultations across the political spectrum
and a credible and transparent process. The election
process towards September must be conducted in a way
that is seen as a step forward in comparison with the
2009 election. UNAMA should be allowed to play an
active role in this regard.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.

Thirdly, a process of reintegration and
reconciliation is necessary to achieving political

Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): May I express
appreciation for the successful Gabonese presidency of

10-27766

29

S/PV.6287

the Security Council. I should also like to thank Alain
Le Roy for presenting the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2010/127) and my dear friend Zahir Tanin, who sits
so patiently through every meeting, hearing everything
that can possibly be said around this table.
This is a timely debate on Afghanistan, with the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). Of
course, that calls for a renewal of everything else that
we intend to express here, but, at the same time, we
cannot forget that, enmeshed in that cruel cyclone that
has hit the world, the region has suffered along with
Afghanistan and, sadly, the situation has affected its
neighbours, especially Pakistan. Yet, I endorse and
express complete support for the international and
regional efforts for stability and peace.
The London Conference has, thankfully, been
taken over by past masters, who perhaps might produce
more expected results acceptable to a wider audience. I
hope that what we call Afghan ownership will become
more apparent if not for the security of the world, then
certainly for the security of Afghanistan and its people.
I remember Peter Galbraith when I speak of the
formation of the Electoral Complaints Commission,
and the technical assistance of UNAMA will further
help to improve the electoral process. We are confident
that the parliamentary elections this year will produce
more binding results.
Pakistan supports the reconciliation and
reintegration process, and I believe that anyone willing
to lay down arms or to consider the possibility should
be considered wholly without recrimination. However,
as suggested by the Secretary-General, we must be
very careful not to over-militarize the peace process,
and I picked that specifically from his report. The
civilian component of the strategy should be at the
forefront, and the military component should slowly —
and that will be the litmus test of our progress and
success — support the overall efforts. At the same
time, the international community must accept and
realize that there is a desire not just to build what is
physically visible, but also to promote the Afghan
national character to one that can support itself with its
head held high.
We
agree
with
the
Secretary-General’s
observation that there can be no sovereignty without
capacity and responsibility. I think that the
international community understands that, and is

30

moving towards increasing capacity and assisting with
more responsibility. With great pleasure, I announce
that, in the recent meetings between President Karzai
and President Zardari in Islamabad, we have further
aided that process by increasing responsibility through
offering 2,000 university scholarships in Pakistan to
Afghans free of cost, and that, to increase capacity, we
have offered to train military and police forces in large
numbers in our institutions in Pakistan. I think that this
will help further the process and accelerate it towards
more sovereign Afghan action.
I would not like to forget Mr. Kai Eide. Yet, I
would like to congratulate Mr. Staffan de Mistura on
his appointment as the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan at this critical
juncture. UNAMA must play a pivotal role in
supporting and strengthening the capacity of the
Afghan Government to confront the enormous
challenges
before
it.
UNAMA’s
supportive
disposition — and I stress supportive — would be
acceptable to the Afghan people.
We attach high priority to our close friendship
with Afghanistan, and I think that the joint declaration
signed in Islamabad on 11 March signifies that. I
believe that Pakistan remains host to over 3 million
Afghans. That gesture, despite our own economic
woes, remains close to our heart, and we carry on in
whatever way possible.
Pakistan supports regional efforts for stability and
peace in Afghanistan, and I think that the reflection of
our desire to make the best possible use of a regional
approach to peace, security and economic progress was
self-evident at the fourth trilateral summit of Pakistan,
Turkey and Afghanistan in Istanbul. We are also
looking forward to the joint jirga, as we call it, which
is the convergence of elders throughout our and the
Afghan areas hosting the Pashtun race, some time at
the end of April, as well as to the Kabul conference.
These and other actions taken by us, we hope, will
produce substantial results. And we continue to pursue
such actions.
What is the international community to do about
it? What is happening to that beautiful country — a
paradise lost, to which brave people, including
Ambassador Tanin here, return, giving up everything in
life to be a part of a process that rebuilds their beloved
land? If it is a paradise lost, I think that the first
important action is for the international community to

10-27766

S/PV.6287

quash the various rumours of pull-outs and early
departure, as they are dampening and hurting the
process of peace in Afghanistan. Much like Satan
thrown out from the realms of paradise, the
international community will have to clench its fist in
defiance and, as Milton says, speak and show the
unconquerable will of the international community. I
believe that to leave Afghanistan alone with those
national challenges is not, in my mind, sound policy.
We must also make a very hard decision. Only 30
to 35 per cent of all aid filters down to those for whom
it was originally sent. The number is significantly low
and does not reflect the progress that will be needed for
Afghanistan.
On a lighter note, as I come towards my
conclusion, what is it that we desire from the Afghan
Government? The answer should be a partnership.
Well, if that is a partnership, I wonder how many
around this table can pontificate to their wives every
morning on how the partnership should be run. Very
few, I would guess. I believe we need to be more
concerned and sensitive to the Afghan Government’s
efforts and to promote that relationship. Let them be
partners and not have to hear merely what is poured
into their ears over long periods of time.
In the end, we congratulate the hardy men who
are our partners in Afghanistan and the efforts they are
making today. Peace and security in Afghanistan are
the desire and dream of the Pakistani people.
Affiliation between the people of two countries is
based on historical, cultural and social ties. Stability
and progress in Afghanistan will have positive
implications for the security situation in Pakistan. We
also call on the international community to remain
steadfast in its commitment to Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Australia.
Mr. Windsor (Australia): Australia supports
Security Council renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and welcomes the opportunity to reaffirm our
commitment to Afghanistan and to international efforts
in support of the Afghan Government and people.
In view of the hour and to facilitate the work of
the Council, I will summarize my statement, which will
be distributed.

10-27766

We are grateful for the briefing by the UnderSecretary-General and for the statement by the
Ambassador of Afghanistan. We wish him and his
mission all the best in advance of Nowruz.
We believe that the draft resolution before the
Council should build on the substantial outcomes of
the London Conference and reinforce the central role
the United Nations has to play in supporting the
security, stability and development of Afghanistan. The
draft resolution should endorse further the concept of
constructive partnership between the Afghan
Government and the international community and the
shared plan of phased transition to Afghan leadership
and ownership of security, governance and
development for the Afghan people — the key outcome
of London.
A renewed UNAMA mandate should also address
the call for a better coordinated and civilian effort in
Afghanistan to improve the impact of international
civilian assistance, and the need for a more rigorous
alignment of international assistance with clearly
identified Afghan priorities, with UNAMA in the
primary coordinating role in these activities.
Australia does not underestimate the significant
and interrelated security, political and economic
challenges facing the Afghan people and ourselves.
There is a real need for much greater focus on the
accountability of the Afghan Government. President
Karzai has made commitments to improving
governance, pursuing electoral reform, taking effective
anti-corruption and anti-narcotics measures and
creating social and economic opportunities for all
Afghans. Australia will work in cooperation with
UNAMA and the rest of our partners to help the
President and his Government deliver on these
commitments.
Parliamentary elections, of course, will be a
crucial test of progress by the Afghan Government in
improving electoral and political processes. In this
regard, we encourage the Afghan Government to
appoint
independent
and
reputable
electoral
commissioners so that the process can be acceptable to
all Afghans, including opposition parties. UNAMA will
have an important role in supporting the preparations
for and conduct of these elections, and we expect — in
fact, as we have heard today — that the Afghan
Government will work closely with the United Nations,
not only to learn from the lessons of 2009, but also to

31

S/PV.6287

lay the ground work for elections in future. We
appreciate the words of Ambassador Tanin this
morning with regard to transparency and credibility in
those future elections.
Australia’s own approach to Afghanistan
recognizes the importance of comprehensive civilmilitary engagement in capacity-building and
development assistance, in concert with sustained
efforts to strengthen security by training the Afghan
army, and the details of that are set out in our
statement. We firmly believe that an Afghan
Government-led and -owned process of political
reconciliation and reintegration is required to draw
back into the fold those people who lay down their
arms, eschew violence, sever links with Al-Qaida and
other terrorist groups, and accept the Afghan
Constitution. For this reason, as the Japanese
Ambassador
mentioned,
we
will
contribute
A$25 million to the peace and reintegration trust fund,
subject to Australia having an appropriate role in the
administration and governance oversight of the fund.
In conclusion, we support the lead role of
UNAMA in guiding the Afghan Government through
the implementation of international assistance
initiatives. We look forward to working with the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
welcome UNAMA and the International Security
Assistance Force working together on enhanced
civilian coordination structures.
I also take this moment to acknowledge again the
dedication and sacrifice of UNAMA personnel
operating in the challenging environment of
Afghanistan. We support all efforts to meet the security
needs of UNAMA staff there so that it may continue to
fulfil its indispensable role throughout the country.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): Allow me to join previous
speakers in thanking Under-Secretary-General Alain Le
Roy for his briefing, and to express my appreciation to
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Tanin, for his important remarks. Let me
also congratulate the new Special Representative for
Afghanistan, Staffan de Mistura, on his recent
assumption of his duties. Italy looks forward to
working with him and wishes him success in his
challenging mission.

32

Italy fully supports the statement delivered by the
Chargé d’affaires of the European Union delegation. I
would like to add just a few remarks, drawing on our
national experience and our significant civil and
military commitment to Afghanistan.
In London in January, the international
community and the Afghan Government agreed to
begin a new phase in their partnership and to renew
their commitment to implementing a reform-oriented
nation-building agenda, as first launched by President
Karzai in his 19 November inaugural speech. The
military operations are no doubt essential to creating
the necessary security conditions that will allow the
Afghan economy to grow, create new job opportunities
and enable civil society to revive itself. They cannot,
however, solve the problems of Afghanistan by
themselves, nor do they represent a durable solution to
the conflict. What is needed is a comprehensive
approach.
Thus, the London Conference confirmed the
central role of the civilian efforts in the overall
international strategy for the stabilization and
reconstruction of Afghanistan, and shifted the focus
more towards reinforcing the political, institutional and
development processes and towards a transition aimed
at making Afghan sovereignty real. Coordination
mechanisms have been better defined, while a new
phase has been inaugurated for the progressive
handover of responsibilities to the Afghan counterparts
in the fields of security, governance, anti-corruption
and economic and social development.
It is now imperative that we all work with the
Afghan Government to achieve real progress and
define clear and concrete actions in view of the
important events taking place in the upcoming months:
the Peace Jirga in April, the Kabul conference in June,
a Security Council mission and, most important, the
parliamentary elections scheduled for September. We
also look forward to the implementation of the cluster
approach, which should allow the various branches of
the Afghan Government and Administration to finetune their priorities, manage international funds more
efficiently and better coordinate the implementation of
international programmes.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) must continue to lead and
guide international civilian assistance; hence the need
to strengthen its resources and structures in order to

10-27766

S/PV.6287

enable it to fulfil its mandate. International donors
must also do their part, commit to the coordination
efforts, and acknowledge the respective roles of
UNAMA and the Afghan authorities. The SecretaryGeneral notes in his report that there has been “a
marginal increase in donor alignment and increased
contributions to the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust
Fund as a result of intense coordination efforts”
(S/2010/127, para. 18). While this is true, the current
situation is far from the goal set in London to increase
contributions made through the Afghan budget to
50 per cent of the total contributions to Afghanistan
over the next two years. I confirm Italy’s readiness to
continue do its part.
We also subscribe to and are ready to make a
concrete contribution to the proposal of the SecretaryGeneral to set up an advisory group on donor
coordination and aid effectiveness. We are also eager to
work with the United Nations and other international
partners to find an urgent solution to the alarming
vacancy rate, which poses serious constraints on
UNAMA’s operability, and on the need to also expand
its presence in the Afghan provinces. At the national
level, we are encouraging candidacies for specific
posts within the Mission.
We support the renewal of UNAMA’s mandate
for a further 12 months and believe that the draft
resolution being prepared by the Security Council
should be centred on the notion of transition, as
defined in London. It should set clear priorities for the
United Nations Mission and call upon the Afghan
Government to fulfil its commitments.
Clarity is also particularly important with regard
to UNAMA’s involvement in the forthcoming
elections. We strongly believe that the United Nations
has an important role to play in assisting the Afghan
Government in the preparation of credible, safe and
secure legislative elections. The lessons learned from
the 2009 elections must be taken into account so as to
deliver improvements to the electoral process of 2010
and beyond.
We therefore encourage Afghan authorities to
follow through with the commitments made. The time
they have at their disposal should allow them to correct
some of the deficiencies, omissions and discrepancies
in the electoral law and to overcome the technical
difficulties for the organization of the elections. This is
particularly important with regard to the appointment

10-27766

of the members of the Independent Election
Commission, the Electoral Complaints Commission
and the media commission, as well as the definition of
their mandates. It is also important for voter
registration, vetting procedures for candidates —
which is a much bigger task for parliamentary elections
than for last year’s presidential elections — and the
recruitment and training of personnel to be employed
at the provincial level and in the polling stations.
We believe that UNAMA, with the consistent
support of the international community, can take on a
decisive role in helping to overcome these hurdles,
suggesting pragmatic solutions and facilitating any
necessary compromises.
UNAMA action should support regional
cooperation — which, alongside security and
development, was enshrined in London as the third
pillar of the overall stabilization strategy — thus
embracing the approach set out at last year’s G-8
ministerial meeting in Trieste.
We also support UNAMA’s political good offices
to sustain reintegration and reconciliation programmes,
as long as they are Afghan-led and transparent and are
carried out in a manner respectful of the Afghan
Constitution and with the support of the international
community. We stand ready to contribute to the
reintegration trust fund, as long as financing
mechanisms will allow for some control over the use of
the resources.
In conclusion, 2010 will be a decisive year in our
overall efforts to stabilize Afghanistan. The events and
processes that will take place in the upcoming months
will be crucial in that respect. It is imperative, as the
Secretary-General underlines in his report, that they be
managed in such a way as to ensure that they reinforce,
rather than undermine, each other. In fact, if well
managed, these events can form the structure of a
transition to greater Afghan leadership.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I trust that, in the
interests of time, Ambassador Tanin and the others who
have reported to the Council will excuse me if I take
the thanks as read.
There is no doubt that today’s Afghan
Government still needs strong support to meet the
challenges it faces, or that it needs an international

33

S/PV.6287

community prepared to provide that support. We are
therefore pleased at the significant developments of the
last quarter. I intend to focus on just three of those.

broad national support. However, we urge the
Government to ensure that reconciliation is not
achieved at the expense of human rights.

New Zealand supports President Karzai’s efforts
to build a new and peaceful Afghanistan. We welcome
the priority that the President placed on these three
areas at the London Conference in January and his
personal commitment to making progress in them in an
integrated manner. Fighting corruption is key to
improving governance, just as failing to do so would
greatly impede economic development.

On economic development, we are pleased to see
efforts to prioritize and cluster components of the
National Development Strategy. New Zealand is in the
process of aligning its own development support to
prioritize agriculture and rural development. We
welcome the current efforts to simplify the
international approach to delivering development
assistance. We support the central role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in coordinating that assistance to support Government
priorities identified in the National Development
Strategy. We welcome UNAMA’s revised mandate in
that regard.

Similarly, improving security is a multifaceted
challenge that requires not only building up the
national forces, but also providing the conditions for
reconcilable insurgents to return to the mainstream and
for countries in the region to play a constructive role.
In that regard, we and other contributors, the
people of Afghanistan who supported democracy in last
year’s elections and the military and civilians who risk
their lives are all entitled to expect, and to see, urgent
progress on improving governance, without which our
combined efforts to achieve peace will falter. A
functioning and credible executive is essential to
effective governance. New Zealand urges both the
Afghan Parliament and President Karzai to work
together to form a full and final Cabinet as a matter of
priority.
We also look forward to the necessary steps being
taken ahead of parliamentary elections in September to
ensure that electoral institutions are transparent,
impartial and independent.
As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/127)
makes clear, corruption is corrosive. Corruption in
Afghanistan is corrosive: it hinders stability and it
inhibits growth. At the London Conference, we joined
those welcoming the Government’s commitment to
fight corruption, address its causes and develop
benchmarks by which to measure progress.
We are pleased in particular to see the formation
of the anti-corruption unit and the appointment of
judges to an anti-corruption tribunal. We look forward
to further measures being implemented before the
Kabul Conference. In passing, we are pleased that that
Conference can take place in Afghanistan, and not
elsewhere.
New Zealand welcomes President Karzai’s plans
to promote reconciliation. We agree that this will need

34

On security, New Zealand, along with other
International Security Assistance Force partners, is
committed to providing a clearly defined pathway for
transferring primary responsibility for security to the
National Security Forces, thus allowing international
forces to draw down and for a shift in the focus of
international efforts to building civilian capacities.
Like other contributors, ideally we would like our
troops home as soon as possible. But the objective is to
leave the country secure and confident in its ability to
meet the security and development needs of its people.
In Bamyan province, New Zealand has already
committed to the progressive transfer of security
responsibility from the New Zealand-led provincial
reconstruction team (PRT) to Afghan authorities. We
aim to have an ambassador on the ground in Kabul
soon and to move leadership of the PRT to a civilian
role, to ensure better support for coherent civilian and
development assistance efforts.
As many have said here today and elsewhere, this
is a critical moment for Afghanistan. As always, time is
short. That said, Afghanistan needs time and space to
rebuild. New Zealand is committed to playing its part
in providing those opportunities. But there must be
measurable progress on all fronts, including
governance, economic development and security, as all
are interrelated. New Zealand fully respects the fact
that it is the sovereign right of the Government and
people of Afghanistan to decide how best to address
these challenges and deliver those outcomes. But
everyone with a stake in Afghanistan now knows that

10-27766

S/PV.6287

failure to act is not an option. The risks of such a
failure are simply too high.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to thank you for scheduling today’s
debate on the situation in Afghanistan and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in that country. This is of
immediate and abiding interest for India, both as a
close neighbour and a civilizational partner of
Afghanistan.
We are grateful for the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/127) and are appreciative of
the briefing by Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy.
We are also thankful to Ambassador Zahir Tanin,
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for his
statement. We welcome the appointment of the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Steffan de Mistura. He has taken over at a particularly
challenging time for the United Nations in
Afghanistan, with major concerns, even regarding the
security of its personnel, requiring to be addressed.
The international approach to Afghanistan in
recent months, in particular the London Conference in
January, has focused on security, reintegration,
development,
governance
and
regional
and
international cooperation. The forthcoming political
processes — the Loya Jirga, the Kabul conference and
the parliamentary elections scheduled later this year —
will be important milestones in this context. If these
are processes to be enduring, Afghan ownership should
go hand in hand with Afghan leadership. With respect
to both the military and the civilian efforts, while
working complementarily and within indicative
timelines, the international community must reaffirm
its long-term commitment to stability, peace and
development in Afghanistan.
Without tangible and sustained improvements on
the security front, it would be too much to expect the
Afghan Government to exercise greater responsibility.
Indeed, improved security could create an enabling
environment for accelerated progress on development
and governance issues. This is also critical in
expanding the footprint of the Afghan Government and
ensuring the greater ownership of these processes by
the Afghan people.

10-27766

The latest report of the Secretary-General
highlights the fact that the deterioration in the security
situation has continued, with 2009 being the most
volatile year since the fall of Taliban in 2001. Despite
the reinforced presence of the International Security
Assistance Force, asymmetric warfare and complex
terrorist attacks have increased. There has been a spate
of such recent attacks all over Afghanistan, including
in urban centres such as Kabul and Kandahar, that have
killed innocent Afghans and foreigners, including
Indian experts and workers involved in our
development partnership. Such acts of terrorism will
not deter us, but will only strengthen our resolve to
fulfil our pledges towards the reconstruction of
Afghanistan and to cement our traditional friendship
with the Afghan people.
In the interest of stabilizing the security situation
in Afghanistan, it is essential to ensure that support,
sustenance and sanctuaries for terrorist organizations
be ended forthwith. The security and stabilization of
Afghanistan will remain a distant goal unless we are
able to isolate and root out the syndicate of terrorism,
which includes elements of Al-Qaida, the Taliban,
Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and other terrorist and extremist
groups
operating
from
within
and
outside
Afghanistan’s borders.
Therefore, in addition to the strengthening of the
International Security Assistance Force, it is critical
that the Afghan National Security Forces be enlarged
and developed in a professional manner and at a much
faster pace. They should be provided with appropriate
resources, combat equipment, enablers and training
before considering any plan for a phased, province-byprovince transition to Afghan-led security. We
welcome the expansion of the capacities of the Afghan
National Security Forces and also appreciate the efforts
being made by third countries to strengthen the
capacities of those Forces.
Against the backdrop of today’s worrying
security situation, the issue of reintegration should be
tackled with prudence, the benefit of hindsight,
foresight and caution. We believe that any integration
process in Afghanistan should be Afghan-led and
include only those who abjure violence, give up armed
struggle and terrorism, and are willing to abide by the
values of democracy, pluralism, human rights and
women’s rights, as enshrined in the Afghan
Constitution. The process must be inclusive and
transparent.

35

S/PV.6287

A sustainable strategy for the stabilization of
Afghanistan must focus on development and
governance issues. In order to strengthen governance
and institution-building, priority should be accorded to
building adequate capacity to deliver on development
objectives.
Presently, the overall civilian approach remains
fragmented. The Secretary-General’s report strikingly
points out that, even after the last eight years of
engagement in Afghanistan, 80 per cent of
international community assistance still bypasses the
Afghan Government and is not closely aligned with
Government priorities. This trend must be reversed and
our efforts must concentrate on the strengthening of
Afghan Government institutions, particularly through
the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board which
has endorsed new initiatives in agriculture, private
sector development, technical assistance and capacitybuilding.
India’s efforts towards the stabilization of
Afghanistan have focused on socio-economic
development. The principal objective of India’s
development partnership, covering the entire country
and straddling all sectors of development, is to build
indigenous Afghan capacities and institutions. This will
enable an effective State system to improve the
delivery of goods and services to the Afghan people
and contribute to stability.

Our assistance, now over $1.3 billion, is spread
over a large number of provinces in Afghanistan. In
addition to several small and medium development
projects, India has built the Zaranj-Delaram road and
the power transmission line from Pul-e-Khumri to
Kabul. We are also constructing Afghanistan’s new
Parliament building, a symbol of our common
commitment to pluralism and democracy. At the recent
London Conference, we announced new initiatives in
the agriculture sector and in institutional capacitybuilding.
Perseverance and tenacity are critical to
effectively confronting the challenges facing
Afghanistan and to ushering peace and security into the
region. There are no quick-fix solutions and it is
imperative that the international community remain
engaged in Afghanistan in a sustained manner,
providing assistance on the security side and
development and nation-building support for as long as
it takes. We support the good work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
We need to be clear that a stable Afghanistan is in
the interests not only of all of us in the neighbourhood,
but for the international community as a whole.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.

36

10-27766
