asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6838

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6838th meeting
Wednesday, 19 September 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wittig . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Karev
Ms. Mxakato-Diseko
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Increased accountability for violations and abuses committed against children
Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2012/261)
Letter dated 6 September 2012 from the Permanent Representative of Germany
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2012/685)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-51510 (E)

*1251510*

S/PV.6838

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Children and armed conflict
Increased accountability for violations and
abuses committed against children
Report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed confl ict (S/2012/261)
Letter dated 6 September 2012 from the
Permanent Representative of Germany
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2012/685)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Greece, Iraq, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kenya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, the Philippines, the Republic
of Korea, Slovenia, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Uruguay and Viet
Nam to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict; Mr. Hervé Ladsous, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations; and
Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF, to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. David Tolbert, President of
the International Center for Transitional Justice, to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas MayrHarting, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

2

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2012/713, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada,
Costa Rica, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Monaco,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Slovenia, Sweden,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to documents S/2012/261 and S/2012/685, containing,
respectively, the report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict and a letter dated
6 September 2012 from the Permanent Representative
of Germany to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
I shall now put the draft resolution to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Colombia, France, Germany, Guatemala, India,
Morocco, Portugal, South Africa, Togo, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Azerbaijan, China, Pakistan, Russian Federation
The President: The draft resolution received
11 votes in favour, none against and four abstentions.
The draft resolution has been adopted as resolution
2068 (2012).
I now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements after the
voting on resolution 2068 (2012).
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
abstained on the resolution that was put to a vote just
now. Children and armed conflict is an important
item for the Security Council. China has taken a
constructive approach from the very beginning in the
consultations on the resolution. We have repeatedly
emphasized that all sides of the Council should be

12-51510

S/PV.6838

patient in consultations and properly address the major
concerns relating to the resolution so as to make sure
that a consensus could be reached on the resolution
and that the Security Council could have a unified
voice on the question of protecting children. However,
the resolution failed to accommodate the reasonable
concerns of Council members, and it was hastily put to
a vote without adequate consultation.
China found it difficult to support a resolution that
continues to give rise to serious differences among the
members of the Council. In accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations and the relevant resolutions of
the Council, the Security Council should focus on the
protection of children in situations of armed conflict.
The resolution must not be willfully interpreted to
equate incidents of terrorist attack in Pakistan, for
instance, to armed conflict, which would exceed the
mandate of the Security Council. Pakistan is at the
forefront of the international fight against terrorism and
has made important contributions to cooperation in the
international fight against terrorism. The international
community should provide more support and help to
Pakistan’s efforts in counter-terrorism rather than
creating difficulties and obstacles.
Mr.
Musayev
(Azerbaijan):
Azerbaijan’s
determination with regard to the protection of civilians,
including children, in situations of armed conflict is
based on my country’s keen interest in contributing
to the protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms and to the achievement of sustainable peace
and development. That interest also stems from our
practical experience in addressing the devastating
consequences of serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law committed during
the war of aggression unleashed against my country.
Azerbaijan has strongly and consistently
supported international efforts aimed at ensuring
more effective protection for the rights of children
and improving the situation of children affected by
armed conflict. We welcome the appointment of the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict. We look forward to
close cooperation with the Special Representative and
stand ready to contribute to her work. We have always
proceeded from the strong belief that international
protection efforts must be free of selectivity and must
address all situations of armed conflict, including those
of a protracted nature and prolonged impact on children,
in particular.

12-51510

In that regard, our delegation considers it important
that the mandate and the methodology of work of the
Special Representative should clearly reflect that
understanding so as to ensure the comprehensive
protection of children in all situations of armed
conflict without distinction. However, resolution 2068
(2012), which we have just adopted, does not fully
accommodate that approach in a more explicit and
unambiguous manner, and thus has not provided the
Special Representative with the appropriate guidance
to that effect.
The primary objective and purpose of the resolution,
as we see them, are to send a clear and unified message,
not to introduce additional elements of uncertainty. We
regret that the Council was unable to adopt a resolution
on such an important issue unanimously. We hope
that the differences among its members will in no way
damage protection efforts in regard to children affected
by armed conflict.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): The
effective protection of children affected by armed
conflict is the primary objective that should influence
Security Council decisions on that issue. In that regard,
we support the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
and welcome the appointment of Ms. Leila Zerrougui.
We have a considerable body of Council provisions
and decisions on that issue, whose effectiveness and
correct implementation should be assessed before we
broaden that legislative framework. What is essential
is to strengthen and increase assistance and national
capacity-building, as well as close cooperation with
States, in order to achieve the effective protection of
children affected by conflict.
Colombia voted in favour of resolution 2068 (2012),
but warns that there is a clear difference between the
incidents and situations that should be considered. The
Council should concern itself with situations in which
armed conflicts indeed threaten international peace
and security and are therefore part of its agenda. We
believe that the resolution which we have just supported
again fails in that regard. The resolution lacks a
reference to the need to restrict the content of reports of
the Secretary-General to the mandate entrusted by the
Security Council, which is clearly limited to situations
and contexts provided for in resolutions 1612 (2005)
and 1882 (2009) and 1998 (2011).

3

S/PV.6838

Colombia supports open consultation processes
that provide for the participation of all members and
the opportunity to address the concerns of all parties
involved through the genuine pursuit of consensus.
That helps to enrich the debate and the consideration
of possible compromise solutions to opposing positions
and ensures a transparent process.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Zerrougui.
Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in French): It is an honour for
me to address the Security Council for the first time in
my capacity as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict. Members
may rest assured that I appreciate the responsibility
entrusted to me and the challenges that await us. In that
regard, I pay tribute to my predecessor, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, for her exemplary work during the
past six years and for the progress achieved made under
her guidance.
I would also like to thank Germany for convening
this open debate. The efforts of the German
chairmanship of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict over the past two years made it
possible to preserve a cooperative and open spirit. In
that regard, I welcome the personnel commitment and
the resolve of Ambassador Wittig and his team.
(spoke in English)
Before the Council is the eleventh report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2012/261). Since the last debate (see S/PV.6589),
there has been tremendous progress — more than
we have seen in previous years. However, violations
continue to be committed against children, the number
of persistent perpetrators has increased, and many new
challenges have arisen.
With regard to dialogue with parties to conflict, we
have seen a number of positive developments. Indeed,
eight years after the Council’s unanimous adoption
of resolution 1539 (2004), action plans have generally
been accepted by listed State and non-State parties as
a unique tool that can successfully lead to de-listing.
In 2011 alone, two parties — the Unified Communist
Party of Nepal-Maoist in Nepal and the Tamil Makkal
Viduthalai Pulikal in Sri Lanka — were removed from
the annexes after having successfully implemented all
concrete and time-bound activities spelled out in their
action plans. That brings the total number of de-listed
parties to nine.

4

However, it is not just about adding or removing a
party from a list. It is about children, first and foremost
about releasing children. Since the framework was put in
place, tens of thousands of children have been separated
from armed forces and groups and reintegrated into
their communities. Indeed, actions plans are not only
a process. They are a unique tool, mandated by the
Council, to bring parties into compliance and to stop
violations against children.
In 2011, action plans were signed in Afghanistan,
the Central African Republic and Chad and, this year,
in South Sudan, Myanmar and Somalia, where the
Transitional Federal Government signed the first action
plan on killing and maiming of children in August.
To date, 20 action plans have been completed or are
in the process of being implemented. It is especially
heartening to note that practically all Government
forces listed for the recruitment and use of children
have now either signed an action plan or are negotiating
one.
I am also happy to report to the Council today that
the action plan with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has almost been finalized and is
expected to be signed in the coming weeks. That action
plan will include activities to end the recruitment and
use of children by the security forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and, in accordance with
resolution 1882 (2009), measures to prevent and halt
sexual violence against children.
The continued mainstreaming of the children
and armed conflict agenda into the United Nations
is central to my Office’s work. We are currently
supporting the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Political Affairs in their efforts
to update the child protection policy for United Nations
field missions. That effort is essential. I would like to
emphasize that maintaining sufficient and dedicated
child protection capacities in peacekeeping and special
political missions is key to the implementation of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism, as well as the
successful conduct of dialogue with parties to conflict.
We also continue to work hand in hand with
UNICEF to enhance child protection capacities
in conflict-affected areas. Beyond our traditional
colleagues, new partners are also joining our efforts,
especially since the adoption of resolution 1998 (2011).
My Office is currently working with UNESCO and has
approached the World Health Organization to enhance

12-51510

S/PV.6838

our monitoring of attacks against schools and hospitals.
We are also increasing our links with the International
Labour Organization, especially in relation to the
economic reintegration of children formerly associated
with armed forces and groups. In addition, we continue
to enhance our cooperation with partners on sexual
violence against children to further our implementation
of resolution 1882 (2009). In that regard, I look forward
to working closely with Under-Secretary-General
Bachelet and Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Zainab Hawa
Bangura.
My Office has also been working to develop and
strengthen partnerships with regional political and
military organizations including the European Union,
the African Union and NATO. That has proven useful,
in particular in the areas of training, awareness-raising
and the conduct of military operations. With that
experience in mind, I will now look into working more
closely with the League of Arab States, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations.
Though much positive progress has been achieved,
our work is hardly accomplished. In this year’s report,
52 armed forces and groups are listed in the annexes.
Forty-two of those are non-State armed groups and 10
are Government forces. At the request of the Council
and as a follow-up to resolution 1998 (2011), the
Secretary-General has listed for the first time five
parties to conflict responsible for attacks on schools
and hospitals.
Of the 52 parties listed, 32 persistent perpetrators
have been listed for five years or more. The majority
are non-State actors operating in situations where
Governments may have the willingness, but not always
the capacities to take measures. That is where the
Council can play a critical role.
The cost of inaction has become too high. It is time
to show the Council’s determination to act. In followup to resolution 1998 (2011), my predecessor requested
Ambassador De La Sablière, former French Permanent
Representative to the United Nations, to prepare a
comprehensive report on the way forward. The paper
proposes a menu of options that could be considered
by the Council against those persistent perpetrators.
Those include increased tailored political engagement
of the Council, strengthened accountability measures
and targeted measures, where necessary. That could

12-51510

be done in an incremental manner, starting with
those individuals in situations for which a sanctions
committee is already in place. It would send a strong
signal that the resolutions of the Council are not only
words on paper and that vigorous action can be taken
when they are not implemented.
Last year, we witnessed a tremendous change
in the international environment. That created new
opportunities but also new challenges for the United
Nations and for this agenda in particular. The situations
in Libya, Syria and Mali, for example, pose new threats
for children that the Council, along with my Office and
its partners, must address.
The situation of children in Syria is dire. My staff
and other United Nations colleagues have documented
Government attacks on school, children being denied
access to hospitals, girls and boys suffering and dying in
bombardments of their neighbourhoods and also being
subject to torture, including sexual violence, sometimes
for weeks. Since the publication of the report before
the Council, my Office has also gathered evidence
on violations committed by non-State armed groups
in Syria. We have received information concerning
indiscriminate bomb attacks that have killed children
in Damascus and other areas, and continue to document
incidents committed by armed actors, such as the Free
Syrian Army, who may have children associated with
their forces.
I have met with the Syrian Permanent
Representative with regard to our concerns. I have
ensured the Ambassador that I am ready to establish
an open dialogue with the Syrian authorities as a sign
of good faith towards their moral and legal obligations.
In that regard, I have also asked the Ambassador to
transmit my call to the Syrian armed forces to evacuate
schools as a matter of utmost priority.
In Libya, the localized violence and continued
presence of so-called armed brigades threaten the lives
of children, long after the generalized violence of 2011
came to an end. It remains of concern that incidents of
the association of children with armed groups are still
being reported. My Office has been in close contact
with the Libyan Mission in New York to strategize
about how best to address the remaining threats to
children in the Libyan context.
Since its inception in March 2012, the crisis in
Mali has been characterized by grave violations against
children. Hundreds of cases of recruitment and use of

5

S/PV.6838

children by the Mouvement national pour la libération
de l’Azawad (MNLA), as well as by Ansar Dine and
the Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa, have
been reported. Particularly alarming are recent reports
of new training camps in northern Mali, run by armed
groups. Sexual violence against children, especially by
the MNLA, is also of great concern.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
resurgence of violence in the east has once again taken
a heavy toll on children. The March 23 Movement
(M-23), an armed group established by former members
of the Congrès national pour la défense du peuple,
has been responsible for intensive child recruitment
campaigns since April this year; reports of recruitment
in Rwanda on behalf of M-23 have also been received.
M-23 has killed, maimed and injured scores of children,
and sexual violence against girls has been reported. I
am disturbed by the fact that M-23 perpetrators have
a long history of violations against civilians, including
children. The flagrant impunity in which they operate
must be addressed once and for all. Measures must be
taken to avoid political legitimacy for M-23 elements
responsible for human rights violations.
Furthermore, the conflict along the border of the
Sudan and South Sudan has put hundreds of children
at risk, including children who are displaced from the
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile regions of the Sudan.
In addition, I remain deeply concerned about the
humanitarian situation concerning access for children
in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile.
Accountability is an integral element both to address
and to prevent violations against children. Though
imperfect, the preventive aspect of accountability is
real. It should start with the criminalization of underage recruitment and the domestication of international
norms and standards prohibiting the recruitment
and use of children. It must also be accompanied by
domestic enforcement through national rule of law
institutions. I would like to emphasize again that
achieving accountability must be a common effort;
while the primary responsibility lies with Governments,
donor countries should support and help to strengthen
national efforts by providing assistance to capacitybuilding.
The Lubanga and Taylor judgements have been a
watershed in addressing violations against children
in conflict in international and hybrid courts, and
the possibility of appearing before the International

6

Criminal Court has proven to be an effective deterrent
for military commanders and is useful as leverage
in dialogue on action plans. Prosecutions for the
recruitment of children have also been undertaken in
Myanmar and Colombia with positive effect.
However, the international community must give
much greater support and attention to local and regional
accountability mechanisms to strengthen institutional
capacity for the long term. There is a need to further
examine best practices in this regard and obtain
institutional and financial support for these initiatives.
Only with local and regional buy-in can we truly say
that we have addressed these issues in a durable way.
As the Council knows, I served for four years as the
Deputy Special Representative for the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I would like to share with the
Council that children and their families have high
expectations of the Council. Victims feel that it can and
should alleviate their suffering. I have seen what the
Council in action can do. It can change the fate of a
child. Many challenges remain, but Governments and
non-State actors have begun to respond to the Council’s
call for action.
I believe that the protection of all children from
grave violations is within our reach. If we stand firm
and united, we can move forward and deliver on what
is expected from us, namely, that the international
community come together and demonstrate its
determination to protect children from war. I would
like to assure all of my partners, including all Member
States, that I am willing to work closely, to listen and to
act together in this endeavour.
The President: I thank Ms. Zerrougui for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I would like to begin
by thanking the Government of Germany for inviting
us to participate in this open debate. Speaking to you
personally, Mr. President, I would like to congratulate
you on your leadership and achievements as the Chair
of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
I would also like to congratulate Ms. Zerrougui
on her appointment as the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
is firmly committed to supporting her work as the

12-51510

S/PV.6838

independent and moral advocate for children affected
by armed conflict. Throughout the years, the Office
of the Special Representative has provided excellent
leadership and established strategic partnerships with
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, UNICEF
and the broader United Nations system. This unique
partnership has enabled us to lean on the comparative
strength of each actor in order to provide comprehensive
and real protection for children on the ground, as this
is, after all, about them.
(spoke in English)
As a key part of this unique partnership, our
multidimensional peacekeeping operations are of course
uniquely placed to contribute to the actual protection of
children affected by conflict. They provide a common
platform that combines political, justice, human rights,
gender, child protection and other civilian expertise
with military, police and corrections experts and
myriad logistical and operational capabilities.
The deployment of child protection advisers to
our peacekeeping operations, with the support of the
Security Council, has enabled us to harness all of our
capacities and to leverage our political, security and
civilian assets to better protect children.
First, at the political level, child protection
advisers support heads of missions in integrating the
United Nations child protection concerns at all stages
of the peace process, including negotiations with
Governments, armed groups or parties to conflict.
Take the example of the Sudan, where, following broad
political consultations held between the Mission and the
Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) earlier this year,
JEM issued a command order last week prohibiting the
recruitment and use of child soldiers. JEM has thus
become the seventh armed movement in Darfur to have
taken such a significant step since 2010.
Secondly, our military peacekeepers actually
play an important role in protecting children from
violations. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where I myself was last week, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) military units and
observers deployed in remote areas have contributed to
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
children by providing information, security and critical
logistical support for their release. Since the beginning
of this year, for instance, MONUSCO has documented
the release of no less than 1,038 children through the

12-51510

assistance of peacekeepers. In the past four months
alone, at least 38 children have escaped from the March
23 Movement in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as Ms. Zerrougui mentioned, and sought refuge
and protection with peacekeepers. These children were
handed over to UNICEF and partners for reintegration
support.
Thirdly, our child protection advisers are
working closely with all civilian components, such
as those dealing with human rights, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, rule of law, justice,
protection of civilians coordinators, women protection
advisers, gender and security sector reform to promote
synergies and a child-sensitive approach to their work.
An important area where the mission harnesses
its broad capacities, including the military, police and
civilian components, is in the implementation of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism. These diverse
components refer cases and provide critical information
on grave violations to United Nations country task
forces, which enables the mission leadership and child
protection actors to respond appropriately and support
the important work of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, which you chair, Mr. President.
All of those efforts can have a real and sustainable
impact when we work closely with national authorities.
An excellent example of this partnership was the recent
renewal of the action plan to end the recruitment and
use of child soldiers signed by the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army (SPLA) with UNICEF, the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict in March 2012.
As a result, the SPLA has screened out 429 children
at recruitment sites and ordered its military units to
vacate all occupied schools immediately. Today, 11 out
of 16 schools have indeed been vacated, and efforts
are under way to vacate the remaining five. These
achievements are a testament to how concerted action
at all levels can result in better protection for children
in conflict zones.
Although we have made significant progress
in providing protection for children, the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2012/261) illustrates that
more needs to be done. One of our priorities moving
forward is to ensure that we maximize our resources to
improve our interventions. We believe that training is
an important tool to achieve this. Indeed, in different

7

S/PV.6838

missions, training on child protection for all military,
police and civilians is a top priority. This year alone,
over 9,000 peacekeepers received awareness training
on child protection in our peacekeeping missions. With
the generous support of several Member States, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations is leading the
updating of training materials for peacekeepers. Those
training tools will be ready in 2013.
A second priority is the update of the DPKO policy
on child protection. We are working jointly with the
Office of the Special Representative and with the
Department of Political Affairs to reflect the most
recent developments in the child protection agenda,
and the broader protection agenda since 2009, and to
strengthen our collective efforts in this regard.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our firm
commitment to the protection of children in conflict.
Under the leadership of the Special Representative, in
partnership with UNICEF, we are deeply committed
to ensuring the full implementation of Security
Council resolutions. Jointly, we believe that indeed we
can deliver tangible and lasting peace for vulnerable
children whose lives are so often disrupted by conflict.
As always, we look to the Council’s mandate and
support to achieve that.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Lake.
Mr. Lake: I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for inviting me to participate today. Let me begin by
thanking in absentia Radhika Coomaraswamy and
Alain LeRoy for all of their work. I also want to heartily
welcome our new partnership with Leila Zerrougui
and Hervé Ladsous. We very much look forward to
ever stronger work together in this tremendously
important field. Let me also thank Germany and you,
Mr. President, for your devoted, even passionate, work
in this cause and all your work as Chair of the Security
Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict.
More than ever — under the leadership of the
Council, the Secretary-General, you, Mr. President,
and so many others — the issue of children and armed
conflict is getting more of the focus, attention and
action that it deserves, as participants you heard from
my colleagues. But it deserves still more.
In a child’s eyes one will find the light of hope
and of promise for the future. But look into the eyes
of former child soldiers, or the eyes of children who

8

have suffered from terrible abuses, or even the eyes of
those who have simply witnessed the horrors of war.
That light is still shadowed by fear, pain and the terrible
knowledge of humanity at its worst. Those children
have seen too much, too soon.
An orphan boy from a small village recruited at
gunpoint to become a soldier, handed a gun of his own
to recruit others, blinded by prejudice and hate, trained
to kill without emotion. A girl living through the horror
of rape. A boy robbed of his legs after stepping on a
landmine planted outside his school. A sick, bed-ridden
child waiting for medicine that will never arrive in her
village because soldiers stand in the way.
The world is making progress in holding perpetrators
of such acts accountable. The recent verdicts against
Thomas Lubanga by the International Criminal Court,
and against Charles Taylor by the Sierra Leone Special
Court, for example, demonstrate global progress
against impunity and for justice. But accountability
runs in many directions. Just as perpetrators need to
be held accountable for the fate of children in conflict
zones, so do Governments, and so do we.
The nine resolutions adopted by the Council since
1999 represent a clear commitment to accountability
and action on behalf of children trapped in the horror
of conflict. That includes last year’s ground-breaking
resolution 1998 (2011) to make attacks on schools and
hospitals an automatic trigger for listing parties in the
Secretary-General’s report.
The United Nations monitoring and reporting
mechanism is also built around accountability and a
commitment to end grave abuses of children’s rights.
The information on violations collected by United
Nations task forces around the world is helping us
to shape timely and appropriate responses in regions
blighted by conflict, and to meet our goal of protecting
all children.
UNICEF is working closely with Governments
and communities to protect and rehabilitate children
affected by conflict. In addition to monitoring and
reporting violations, we are offering a range of
responses, including mine-risk education, psychosocial
support, vocational training, assistance to survivors of
sexual violence and help for children who are being
reintegrated into society after their association with
armed forces and groups.

12-51510

S/PV.6838

We must recognize that the future of those children
hangs in the balance. We cannot leave them to fend
for themselves. This is our commitment and our
accountability. The responsibility of Governments to
their citizens, and of citizens to each other, is most fully
measured by their accountability to the most vulnerable
in their societies. They must therefore support efforts to
monitor, report and respond to grave violations against
children and their rights.
Governments and others must allow United
Nations involvement to help them establish national
systems to prevent sanctions violations and deliver the
right response services to those who need them without
delay. Those actions cannot take place in isolation. They
can only be effective through the active involvement
of all those concerned, including Governments and
communities, as well as the engagement even of those
responsible for perpetuating violations against children.
That work includes negotiations with armed forces and
groups to secure the release of children who have been
recruited, sometimes abducted and forced into combat.
In Mali, for instance, UNICEF and our partners
have engaged with community leaders who are in active
contact with armed parties to the conflict to advocate
for children’s rights and to end child recruitment. In
the Central African Republic we are working with three
armed groups with whom we have signed action plans
to release children from their ranks. Similar efforts
are under way in Afghanistan, Chad, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Somalia, South Sudan and elsewhere.
This work is enormously complex, especially in
situations involving cross-border conflicts and refugee
flows into neighbouring countries. For the United
Nations it demands that we leave room for negotiation
and walk a fine line — between our hunger for
justice and our thirst for peace, between our work on
prevention and our work to rehabilitate the victims, and
between our outrage at the perpetrators and our need to
persuade them.
In short, there is a natural tension at the heart of
UNICEF’s efforts to deliver impartial humanitarian
assistance while protecting and advocating for children’s
rights. That work, of course, is not only inherently
intense, it is also resource-intensive, especially as we
establish the monitoring and reporting mechanism in
new situations and implement various action plans with
parties to the conflicts.

12-51510

As we accept those necessary costs and ask for help
in managing them, we will always keep our eyes on
our ultimate goals, namely, protecting, rehabilitating
and upholding the rights of children trapped in conflict
zones. When one meets one of these children faceto-face, as many of us have, one notices something
extraordinary. A few kind words; a welcoming ear of
an adult who is not there to take advantage of them or
to cast judgment upon them; an offer of food, water
or medicine — those simple gestures can bring her or
his guard down, even for just a moment. Despite the
horrors endured, there is resilience there, a glimmer of
gritty hope.
These children are not beyond our reach. Our
message to them must be that noe of us will not turn
away; that our resolve to bring perpetrators to justice
will not falter; and that every one of us accepts the
burden of accountability.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Tolbert.
Mr. Tolbert: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity and the invitation to
participate in this open debate. I am very honoured to
speak alongside Hervé Ladsous and Anthony Lake. I am
also very honoured to meet Leila Zerrougui today and
to hear her remarks as the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. The International Center for Transitional
Justice (ICTJ) looks forward to working together with
her office to bring an end to impunity for violations
against children in armed conflict.
The Council itself is seized with a number of
situations that highlight the importance of that issue,
perhaps most urgently the situation in Syria.
The Council has already achieved many important
advances on the protection of children in armed
conflict. Over the past five years, 20 action plans
have been concluded by the United Nations with
armed forces and armed groups, as part of the broader
framework developed by the Security Council over the
past decade. The action plans are a crucial first step
in ending violations against children in situations of
armed conflict. However, more needs to be done to end
impunity for those crimes. I will therefore focus my
remarks today on ways to achieve greater accountability
in contexts where action plans have been signed or are
being negotiated.

9

S/PV.6838

There are two critical steps that the Council and its
members can take to advance that aim.
First, the Council should press States to leverage
international resources and expertise to support
national processes. Second, the United Nations should
include a greater focus on an integrated approach to
accountability for violations against children once
action plans are implemented.
Before discussing those two key measures, I
would like to first address our understanding and our
concept of accountability. For many, accountability is
thought to mean criminal prosecutions. Prosecutions
are, after all, essential for accountability. They send
a clear message that certain violations will not be
tolerated by society or by the international community.
However, ICTJ’s work over the past decade in over
40 countries has shown that, in isolation, prosecution
is not enough. Accountability for violations against
children in armed conflict is best achieved through a
comprehensive approach to justice that addresses not
only the responsibility of perpetrators but also the rights
of victims within a broader process of social change.
A comprehensive approach to justice should include
truth-seeking, reparations and institutional reform, in
addition to criminal prosecutions. Together, those are
the key elements of transitional justice.
If we are to effectively confront violations against
children and their consequences, we must be able to
understand the underlying causes and the patterns of
their occurrence. Truth-seeking mechanisms, such as
truth commissions, can address such factors. Military
and security forces or armed groups that engage in
criminal acts, such as the recruitment of child soldiers,
must be thoroughly restructured as part of a process
of institutional reform, if such unacceptable practices
are to be eradicated. Reparations are crucial if we
are to send a message to child victims that the harms
they have suffered were violations of their rights and
that the State is committed to upholding those rights
in the future. When such approaches are applied in
an integrated and genuine manner, they promote civic
trust and strengthen the rule of law.
The Council has succeeded in raising awareness
of the need to address violations against children
internationally. It should also seek to leverage its position
so as to strengthen and support national processes. In
its first judgment the International Criminal Court
convicted Thomas Lubanga Dyilo for the war crime of

10

conscripting and enlisting children in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. That was a crucial step in the
process of establishing an internationally respected
norm against the recruitment and use of child soldiers.
But the Lubanga trial was never intended to address all
perpetrators.
We have observed in our work that the recruitment
of children continues, and that many perpetrators enjoy
impunity. In that context, the Security Council has the
opportunity to use that step forward in international
justice to leverage the verdict in the Lubanga case in
order to strengthen national processes in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In line with the Rome Statute,
what the Democratic Republic of the Congo needs now
is international support for national judicial processes,
notably for national courts and comprehensive
reparations programmes.
I therefore call on the international community
to support the efforts of victims to enforce existing
national court decisions awarding reparations, as well as
to encourage donors and the Congolese Government to
help the Trust Fund for Victims implement reparations
for communities affected by forced recruitment.
The Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict should urge donors to support national
processes that seek to achieve comprehensive
accountability. In terms of expertise, the Working
Group can also draw on the work of non- governmental
organizations working on the ground. In much the same
way that the monitoring and reporting mechanism
brings together the United Nations and partners to
document violations against children, we need to create
synergies to provide remedies to the victims of those
violations once documented.
Recalling measures in its 2006 “tool kit” document,
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
should include in its country-specific recommendations
“support to transitional justice and truth-seeking
mechanisms, including support in the development
and implementation of child-sensitive procedures”
(S/2006/724, addendum).
That leads me to my second point, which is to call
for a greater focus on accountability in the context of
action plans. As one example, Myanmar is a country
where we have been actively engaged for several years.
ICTJ welcomes the recent signing of the Security
Council mandated action plan for the release and

12-51510

S/PV.6838

reintegration of children associated with state armed
forces. Alongside this, the complaints mechanism of
the International Labour Organization has been an
effective, if limited, accountability mechanism in
Myanmar, in part because it has been able to balance
awareness-raising and engagement with the military,
with concrete consequences for recruiters of child
soldiers.
Currently, within the State armed forces, the
consequences for recruiting children in Myanmar are
less severe than the consequences for not bringing in
enough recruits. That is one example of an incentive
structure that needs to be turned upside down to
guarantee that the recruitment of minors is stopped.
During an interview with an ICTJ staff member, a
former child soldier told us that he wants acknowledgment
that he was unable to finish his education because
he was recruited, something that a truth commission
could address. In contexts where action plans have been
signed, as part of a transitional justice approach, truth
commissions could by incorporating a focus on children
reveal the root causes of the child soldier phenomenon.
They could also serve to identify the multiple ways in
which children have been affected and provide a forum
to officially acknowledge the violations that victims
have suffered.
I urge the Council to consider action plans as
a starting point for achieving accountability for
violations against children. I would strongly encourage
the Council to support an integrated approach to
accountability, one that pursues perpetrators and
also provides acknowledgement and remedy for the
violations suffered by victims and initiates a process
of institutional reform. That can be done, in part, by
calling for comprehensive transitional justice measures
to form part of United Nations responses in tandem
with action plans.
Finally, and in closing, as the Council continues the
significant progress it has already made on accountability
for children, it should continue to recognize that the
protection of children — and accountability for serious
crimes and grave violations against them — are part of
the Council’s role in upholding peace and security. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict has been instrumental in
advancing that work, alongside with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, UNICEF, the International
Labour Organization and other United Nations entities.

12-51510

Their mandates regarding children and armed conflict
should be supported and strengthened. The challenge
ahead is to translate progress at the international
level into lasting change at the national level. We at
ICTJ strongly believe that an integrated approach to
accountability, through the full range of transitional
justice mechanisms and increased support for national
processes, will assist the Security Council and the
community of nations in our efforts to end crimes
against those most vulnerable among us — the children
caught up in armed conflict.
The President: I shall now give the floor to Council
members.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome Germany’s initiative in convening today’s
meeting. I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Zerrougui, Under-Secretary-General Ladsous
and UNICEF Executive Director Anthony Lake for
their respective briefings. I also listened carefully to
the statement made by Mr. Tolbert.
China attaches great importance to the issue of
the protection of children in armed conflict. China
condemns violations against children in situations of
armed conflict and rejects the recruitment and use of
child soldiers. China supports the continued efforts
of various United Nations agencies to promote the
protection children in armed conflict, in accordance
with their mandates and bringing into full play their
respective expertise and strengths. In that connection I
would like to emphasize the following four points.
First, in accordance with the provisions of the
United Nations Charter and the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council, the Council should address the
issue of the protection children in armed conflict as a
priority. The protection of children is an integral part
of its overall efforts to prevent and settle conflicts. The
problems and the root causes of the abuse of children
in conflict must be addressed, by tackling the root
causes of conflict and increasing preventive diplomacy.
The Security Council should encourage and support
the peaceful settlement of disputes by such means as
good offices, mediation and negotiation. Only actions
to prevent and reduce armed conflicts and to promote
post-conflict reconstruction, including comprehensive
measures to ensure the reintegration of children into
society, will help create a favourable social and security
environment.

11

S/PV.6838

Secondly, Security Council resolutions on the
protection children in armed conflict must be strictly
implemented. All parties to a conflict have the
obligation to respect and protect the rights of children.
An objective and just approach should be adopted on the
question of the protection of children, so as to prevent
the politicization of the issue and the application of
different standards for different conflict situations.
Arbitrary interpretation of Security Council mandates
and actions, beyond the authorization of the Council,
will be nothing but detrimental to the common efforts
of the international community to protect children.
Thirdly, countries in armed conflict bear the
primary responsibility to protect their children. The
sovereignty of countries in conflict should be respected.
The key to the implementation of relevant resolutions
and the effective implementation of various initiatives to
protect children lies in support, cooperation and action
on the part of the countries concerned. Strengthening
capacities of countries in armed conflict should receive
sufficient attention. Sanctions should remain as the last
resort available to the Council to address situations that
pose a threat to international peace and security. China
has always advocated caution in adopting sanction
measures.
Fourthly, the Secretary-General’s report on the
question of children and armed conflict (S/2012/261)
sets out important principles for actions by the Council.
Safeguarding the authority of the report will facilitate
the implementation of Council resolutions and
strengthen cooperation among Member States on the
issue. In drafting such reports attention should be paid
to communication with the Governments concerned and
the information provided by the countries concerned.
In considering the Secretary-General’s reports, the
Security Council should listen fully to the opinions
of all parties and in particular those of the parties
concerned.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this debate. I also thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Zerrougui, Under-SecretaryGeneral Ladsous, Executive Director Lake and
Mr. Tolbert, President of the International Center for
Transitional Justice, for their briefings. Before I begin I
would also like to thank former Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Radhika Coomaraswamy
for her six years of dedicated service and enormous
contributions, and to welcome Special Representative

12

Zerrougui to that very important and demanding
position. The United States very much looks forward to
working with her.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/261) notes
some encouraging developments. In 2011 the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General signed three
action plans, with the Government of Chad and two
armed groups in the Central African Republic. Thus
far in 2012, the United Nations has signed four action
plans, with South Sudan and Burma and two with
Somalia. The Democratic Republic of the Congo has
submitted a draft action plan on child soldiering,
which is being reviewed by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General’s office. Such action plans
are a proven tool for promoting child protection and
rehabilitation.
There were other signs of progress as well. The
Maoist party in Nepal was delisted from the SecretaryGeneral’s report after it ended the recruitment and
use of child soldiers and completed its action plan
commitments to suspend payments, cease providing
housing and encourage disqualified minors to register
for reintegration programmes. The delisting of the
Iniya Bharati faction was a major step in resolving the
last elements of child soldiering in Sri Lanka, although
more remains to be done.
Discussions on action plans with armed groups
also made progress. In Afghanistan the Ministries of
Interior and Defence undertook initiatives to prevent
the recruitment and exploitation of children. Those are
real and tangible results, and we commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General’s Office for
its success in significantly improving the situation of
children in such countries.
Still, much of the Secretary-General’s report
documents many ongoing instances of appalling abuses
against children. The Lord’s Resistance Army, for
example, continued its barbaric operations in several
African countries, abducting 101 children in the
Central African Republic and carrying out 211 attacks
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Many of
those attacks used child soldiers, and they resulted
in the abduction of 124 children in a portion of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s Orientale Province
alone. The report documents almost 1,000 cases of
child recruitment in Somalia, mainly by Al-Shabaab,
and notes the registration of 7,800 child casualties of
conflict in the three main hospitals in Mogadishu.

12-51510

S/PV.6838

The carnage committed by Al-Assad and the clique
around him is particularly distressing. As the report
states,
“Children as young as 9 years of age were victims
of killing and maiming, arbitrary arrest, detention,
torture and ill-treatment, including sexual
violence, and use as human shields. Schools have
been regularly raided and used as military bases
and detention centres.” (S/2012/261, para. 19)
Such atrocities, including the torture of young
children, continue with alarming frequency and serve
as further evidence that the Council should do more to
support humanitarian assistance and political transition
in Syria.
As we look to the future of the process we should
reflect on what more we can do to better protect
children in areas of armed conflict. We agree with
the Secretary-General that we must find a better way
to affect the conduct of persistent perpetrators. Since
most Government forces have signed action plans or
given indications that they will do so, our main concern
should be with non-State armed groups. In addressing
such armed groups, we must consider two issues.
First, because national Governments have the primary
responsibility to protect children in their territory, the
United Nations must work with armed groups only in
close cooperation with national authorities. Resolution
2068 (2012), which we adopted a few minutes ago,
correctly reaffirms that position, which the Council
emphasized last year in resolution 1998 (2011).
Secondly, the United States strongly believes that
the Security Council should consider a broader range of
options to increase pressure on persistent perpetrators
of violations and abuses committed against children in
situations of armed conflict. At this time, a free-standing
sanctions regime on children in armed conflict would
not seem to address the need for better tools to deal
with persistent perpetrators. As the Secretary-General
documents in his report (S/2012/261), four countryspecific sanctions committees with designation criteria
on violations and abuses against children already exist.
However we encourage the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to provide a report to the
working group evaluating the range of possibilities
in this area, with a view to facilitating a report by
the group to the Council. A thoughtful analysis of
different proposals on how to promote accountability
would help bring an end to the cycle of violence that

12-51510

plagues children living in conflict-affected areas where
persistent perpetrators operate.
Our work today to remove children from the scourge
of armed conflict has seen great progress, through
the implementation of action plans and focused work
to educate armed groups. But we must still summon
the resolve to hold accountable the most recalcitrant
perpetrators, and redouble our commitment to end
impunity.
Mr. Osorio: (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me, at the outset, to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate. I commend your particular
devotion to this issue and your preparation of the
concept note (S/2012/685, annex), on the basis of which
we carried out arduous negotiations.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
issuing his annual report on children and armed conflict
(S/2012/261). I am also graterful for the briefings by
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Mr. Anthony
Lake and Mr. David Tolbert. I wish to again welcome
Ms. Zerrougui as the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, as well as to assure her of my
Government’s commitment and readiness to work with
her office in order to strengthen protection for children
affected by armed conflict in various parts of the world.
As I said in explaining Colombia’s vote, my
delegation would like to again draw attention to the
series of existing norms on the protection of children
in armed conflict. It is therefore necessary to examine
the ways they have been implemented and how they are
functioning and to carefully consider whether or not it
is necessary to adopt new instruments.
When consisdering this matter, it is important
to continuously bear in mind that the Council must
assess and focus on situations of armed conflict that
represent a serious threat to international peace and
security. It must draw a clear distinction between such
situations and others not on its agenda. Each case must
be individually analysed to determine appropriate
responses to the specific circumstances and contexts of
each situation.
Moreover, I think that it is important to emphasize
in our discussion on this issue that the Council and other
United Nations entities must strictly adhere to the agreed
mandate, which has been formulated in absolutely clear
terms. We must deal with the protection of children in
armed conflict, which would exclude any situation that

13

S/PV.6838

could not be defined as such a conflict. For those cases
there are other bodies and others ways of dealing with
the issue. When the Council decided that the report of
the Secretary-General should include a second annex
referring to situations not on its agenda, namely, “other
situations”, it did so clearly with the understanding that
these would, in all cases, refer to parties to an armed
conflict as determined by the applicable standards of
international law.
In order to improve its consideration of the
issue of children and armed conflict, it would be
appropriate for the Council to consider strengthening
national capacities for the protection of boys and girls.
Reporting and monitoring tools can prove useful, yet not
definitive. In that context, the Security Council and its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict must
evaluate the efficiency of existing mechanisms in order
to help to strengthen States’ national capacities. That
has been a core concern of the Colombian Government,
for which the defence of children is not only an
obligatory constitutional tenet but also an ethical and
moral imperative for any civilization. Colombia has
established an intersectoral commission with that goal
in mind, which works under the mandate of a document
created by our country’s economic and social council.
State bodies bearing responsibility on the matter work in
harmony to achieve a comprehensive policy to prevent
the recruitment of children and other violations against
them throughout Colombia, with special emphasis
on areas and locations where the greatest challenges
in relation to the issue have been identified. In that
regard, I would like to refer to the “My rights first”
programme, which is a comprehensive prevention plan
that aims to provide children opportunities to develop
freely and to be able to use their free time for games
and leisure activities.
Taking into account the context of this debate,
I should like to point out that sanctions only make
sense when a Government fails to heed appeals by the
international community. However, applying sanctions
to armed non-State actors in situations not on the
Council’s agenda pose a panoply of complications,
starting with the fact that clearly this can have a bearing
on fundamental interests of the country involved, as
well as on matters of national security. Similarly, the
targeted sanctions mechanism is applicable only in those
situations on the Council’s agenda, where the Council
has determined, pursuant to Article 39 of the Charter
of the United Nations, that such situations constitute a

14

threat to international peace and security. The Council’s
readiness to adopt this sort of measure when it comes to
persistent perpetrators cannot therefore be considered
as applicable to situations referred to in annex II of the
annual report of the Secretary-General.
In conclusion, we believe that the issue of the
protection of children in armed conflict requires
improved dialogue and continuous consultation
between the United Nations system and Governments,
which bear primary responsibility on the issue. For our
part, our Government remains ready to work and to
cooperate jointly on this issue.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased to take part in this debate on an issue
of key importance to the United Nations and its States
Members and appeals to our collective conscience. It is
presided over by you, Sir, and represents a just tribute
to your commitment and efforts devoted to the matter.
Furthermore, I congratulate Ms. Leila Zerrougui
on her appointment as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict. I
wish to assure her of Morocco’s commitment to support
her efforts as we have done with her predecessor,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy. Lastly, let me thank
Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Mr. Anthony Lake and Mr. David
Tolbert for their briefings.
Today’s debate gives us the opportunity to take
stock of the progress made in assessing the challenges
surrounding the protection of children, as well as the
scope and gravity of the violence committed against
this vulnerable sector of society, in violation of the most
basic principles of human rights and international law,
including international humanitarian and refugee law.
The magnitude of the atrocities endured by children in
these conflicts demands firm, unwavering commitment
on the part of the international community to ending
such things, with their devastating consequences for
the victims and their families.
We can only condemn and fight any exploitation of
children’s innocence, vulnerability and ingenuousness
designed to induce them to take part directly or
indirectly in conflicts. No rationale or pretext can justify
recruiting children into armed conflict or mitigate the
criminal responsibility of those who encourage it or
force them to be involved. It goes without saying that
denouncing and prosecuting such practices, as has been
noted, must be supported with strategies and specific
measures aimed at preventing them.

12-51510

S/PV.6838

As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/261)
emphasizes, prevention strategies must address the
problems in a comprehensive manner, first at the
national level, by enacting laws that make recruiting
under-age children a crime; then, at the local level,
by improving measures designed to protect them
and raising family and community awareness; and
by establishing national re-education, training and
employment programmes that offer young people better
prospects. Such efforts should involve not only public
authorities but also non-governmental organizations,
national human rights institutions and civil society, and
should furthermore enjoy priority and significant donor
financing. In that regard, my delegation specifically
endorses the Secretary-General’s recommendation that
Governments that ask be given help in implementing
prevention strategies. Here we can only welcome
the growing number of action plans signed or being
negotiated, as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General mentioned, and that reflect the merit
of an approach that involves dialogue and cooperation.
The Child Protection Policy adopted jointly in 2009
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
and the Department of Field Support has helped to guide
United Nations activities regarding the protection of
children in armed conflict and to support the mandate
of child protection advisers in peacekeeping operations.
We welcome the steps the DPKO has taken to educate
and train United Nations forces in order to enable them
to protect children in situations of armed conflict. At
the same time, we believe it essential to strengthen the
capacity of the countries concerned, with the sustained
commitment of the United Nations to cooperation and
technical assistance, in order to help those countries
implement their action plans successfully.
Recruiting children into armed conflict is a crime
to be condemned by any and every standard. We are
all indisputably obliged to combat it, and we must do
everything to put an end to it. Coordinating the efforts
of the various stakeholders in the United Nations
system is a guarantee of effectiveness and success;
but, as has been widely emphasized and demonstrated,
primary responsibility for that lies with the parties to
conflicts, who must be prevailed on to respect the lives
and rights of children, as expressed in Security Council
resolutions and international conventions.
In conclusion, I voice the hope that the international
consensus on the importance of protecting children
in situations of armed conflict will be transformed,

12-51510

through dialogue, cooperation and recognition of
different sensitivities, into a truly universal consensus,
fully endorsed by all parties, to be welcomed by every
child living in a situation of armed conflict.
Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We thank our German colleagues for organizing today’s
meeting, and we are grateful to the guest speakers for
their useful briefings and assessments of the state of the
protection of children in armed conflict.
It is clear that, despite the measures that have been
undertaken at the international and national levels,
along with the existence of a broad international legal
foundation, children continue to be among the most
vulnerable groups affected by armed conflict. Russia
condemns all serious offences committed against
children, regardless of who perpetrates them, and
advocates the prosecution of all such perpetrators. We
also firmly condemn intentional attacks on civilians,
including children, as well as the indiscriminate and
disproportionate use of force that produces the same
results. The primary responsibility for protecting and
rehabilitating children belongs to national Governments,
while steps taken by United Nations entities should
be designed to support and complement those efforts.
United Nations representatives may be allowed to
engage with non-governmental armed groups only with
the consent of the Government of an affected nation.
The parameters for protecting children in armed
conflict and post-conflict recovery are laid out in
resolution 1612 (2005). They relate both to the operation
of the monitoring and accountability mechanism and
to the activities of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. Those mechanisms must focus
primarily on the most pressing and large-scale situations
of armed conflict on the Council’s agenda.
As far as other situations are concerned, they can be
considered by the Working Group only with the consent
of the State involved. Under Germany’s leadership,
the Working Group has achieved a great deal in terms
of crafting recommendations on specific situations.
Implementing them effectively requires developing
close cooperation with the Governments concerned
in an atmosphere of trust and dialogue, which should
ultimately help to improve conditions for children on
the ground.
A key role in the Security Council’s activity in
the area of protecting children in armed conflict
unquestionably belongs to the Special Representative of

15

S/PV.6838

the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
In that regard, we welcome the appointment to the post
of Ms. Leila Zerrougui and hope that her considerable
experience in the United Nations system will help her
make a significant contribution to measures taken at
the international level to protect children affected by
armed conflict, and to make efforts in this area more
effective. Based on the experience already gained, we
would like to make some recommendations that we
hope will help enhance the effectiveness of the Special
Representative’s work.
In recent years, we have unquestionably been quite
effective in achieving system-wide coordination of
efforts in the area of the protection of children in armed
conflict. Information and outreach activities have been
very successful. Here we should mention specifically
the active part played by the Special Representative in
the International Criminal Court’s first prosecution of a
war crime for the recruitment and active use of children
in combat in the Lubanga case. At the same time, there
are still several issues concerning the implementation
of certain aspects of the Special Representative’s
mandate.
First, we note that the Special Representative’s area
of responsibility does not cover every issue related to
the protection of children in armed conflict, but only
those situations that are on the Security Council’s
agenda. In that context, the concept of armed conflict
itself should not be too broadly interpreted, including in
the Secretary-General’s reports. It is essential that the
information used be accurate and objective. Carefully
weighed evaluations, based on credible and reliable
information, will guarantee the subsequent practical
implementation of recommendations made, above all
by establishing mutually respectful dialogue with the
Government concerned. For example, with respect to
crimes committed against children in Syria, the report
(S/2012/261) of the Secretary-General accuses only
Government forces and their supporters. They alone are
mentioned in annex I to the report. Crimes perpetrated
by representatives of the opposition are referred to only
in passing in the same report.
With respect to Libya, we never received complete
information with respect to the situation of children
in that country and the investigation of the deaths of
children as a result of the NATO military operation in
that country. There are ample credible reports in this
case, not only on children’s deaths but also on their
recruitment.

16

There is one other issue: elaborating specific
procedures and criteria for delisting parties to an
armed conflict from the annexes to the annual report
of the Secretary-General. It is our view that the current
inclusion of 32 such parties is evidence, inter alia, of
the need to devise understandable criteria for delisting
parties from such lists. It cannot be denied that States
on whose territory such parties are engaged in an
armed conflict are working very hard to remedy the
situation. The lack of simple and clear criteria not only
does not help the Governments of those countries but
continues to engender certain suspicions with respect
to the objectivity of the instrument as a whole.
Devising plans of action on putting an end to this
type of crime, as was proposed in the 2010 report
(S/2010/181) of the Secretary-General, is not, in our
view, the sole response to this issue. On the one hand,
certain parties to armed conflict have adopted such
plans but are still listed, and, on the other, it is well
known that the existence of this type of document in no
way ensures that it is being implemented in practice or
even that there is an intention to do so.
In conclusion, we deem regrettable that for the
first time a draft resolution on the issue of children
and armed conflict was not adopted unanimously by
the Security Council. As we see it, this has highlighted
once again the importance of ensuring that when such
important instruments are negotiated, the views of all
members of the Council, without exception, are taken
into account. In our view, consultations on the text
should have continued, since during those consultations
we saw positions converging, and prospects remained
for reaching a consensus on the text. We hope that in
future such situations will be avoided.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to thank those who spoke before me
for the explanations they have provided, and I very
warmly welcome the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui. On behalf of
my delegation, I wish her every success in her important
new role.
I shall be relatively brief. Many of my colleagues
have already said what I wanted to say, in particular
in terms of emphasizing that the mechanism we have
devised for the protection of children in armed conflict
shows that our Organization is faithful to its ideals in
responding to the demands of our collective conscience.
The mechanism, a successful endeavour on the part of

12-51510

S/PV.6838

the United Nations, makes it possible to demobilize
more than 10,000 child soldiers per year. That success
is attributable first and foremost to the work done by
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy over the past six years,
and I should like, as my colleagues have done before
me, to thank her.
But that success is due also to the instruments with
which we have equipped ourselves, which have made
possible the signing of 20 action plans, the last two of
them over the summer, with the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia and the Government of Burma.
We are also pleased to learn that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is ready to sign a new plan of
action and that negotiations have begun with Libya.
We must persist in our efforts in order to achieve
a world without child soldiers in 25 years, including
the goal set by Ms. Coomaraswamy, that of no child
soldiers in Government armies in 10 years’ time.
But this meeting should not be about triumphalism.
Not only do a number of persistent perpetrators remain;
new ones have emerged. UNICEF believes that, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, more than 2,000
children have been forcibly recruited in the past five
months in North Kivu. Reports indicate that the M-23
movement recruited dozens of children in July and
August to use in its fight against the Congolese armed
forces.
Because of the deliberate attacks targeting schools
and hospitals in Syria, which are often turned into
centres for detention and torture, and because of the
acts of violence committed against children, who are
being tortured, raped and killed outright, this year the
Syrian army and its auxiliary forces have been put on
the list of infamy. Let us recall that 49 children’s bodies
were discovered by United Nations observers lying
among those of the 108 victims of the Houla massacre,
who had been mowed down by Syrian artillery and had
had their throats cut by its auxiliary forces.
We must also enhance and strengthen our
instruments, in particular to deal with the problem of
persistent perpetrators, which have been on the list of
infamy for five years or more and continue to violate
children’s rights with impunity; today they number 32.
In most cases, we have no means of effectively punishing
such violators, which undermines the credibility of the
child-protection mechanism established by the Council.

12-51510

France therefore would wish to see the
strengthening of measures to combat impunity. It was
in that spirit that we adopted resolution 1998 (2011) and
that today we adopted resolution 2068 (2012). But we
need to go still further. For guidance we can turn to
the recommendations made by the former Permanent
Representative of France, Ambassador De La Sablière,
in his report, which was requested by the previous
Special Representative. The report recommends that
the problem of persistent perpetrators be tackled at
the appropriate political level by means of Council
consultations and press statements and by encouraging
the Working Group to ensure concrete follow-up of the
issue. Targeted measures must also be devised. The
Working Group could, for example, become an ad hoc
sanctions committee when the situation so requires.
We also would be in favour of enhanced dialogue
with the International Criminal Court. That could
mean at first an invitation to the Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, to brief the Council on this issue. France
would like these proposals to be considered by the
Working Group.
The Council’s Working Group must also be
endowed with the resources necessary to accomplish
its task. We therefore trust that field missions will
continue at the current pace, following those to Nepal
and Afghanistan in 2011. We would like to see their
funding earmarked as new measures under the regular
budget for 2013-2014, which will be adopted in the fall.
I wish to conclude by saying that together with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, UNICEF and our
partners in the steering committee, we will convene
the fifth ministerial follow-up Forum on the Paris
Commitments and the Paris Principles in November. The
Paris Principles and Commitments are complementary
to Security Council action, and we call on all States
Members of the United Nations to endorse them as soon
as possible.
I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate
you, Mr. President, as well as your team for the manner
in which you have chaired the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, and I thank you for
having convened this debate.
I cannot conclude, however, without ruing the
fact that not all Council members agreed to the text
that was adopted. Unanimity was possible and could
have been achieved had certain States foregone their

17

S/PV.6838

attempts to weaken our measures and to politicize
United Nations action in this sphere. Only the rejection
of politicization and adherence to the text will allow the
United Nations to remain faithful to our ideals in this
major undertaking.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this open debate on children and armed
conflict, an issue to which Portugal attaches great
importance. Let me congratulate Germany on its
leadership in the Working Group and the work that has
been accomplished there.
I naturally thank the briefers for their excellent
presentations and join others in warmly welcoming the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui. I assure her of Portugal’s full
support in her work and efforts to ensure increased
protection of children in situations of armed conflict.
I would also like to add a word of appreciation to the
former Special Representative for her work over the
past six years.
Portugal obviously shares the views that will later
be expressed by the observer of the European Union
regarding this issue, but allow me to underline some
aspects of particular significance to my country.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/261) provides us with a clear overview of the
progress made on the situation of children and armed
conflict. Much has been done, and we have added steps
to prevent the recruitment and to end the use of children
by armed forces and groups. Some of these important
steps have already been mentioned today. Every release
of a child is indeed a concrete advancement, and by
now tens of thousands of children have been released
worldwide.
The advocacy and dedication of the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, as
well as of UNICEF and peacekeeping missions, have
been crucial in furthering this agenda. In this regard,
specific commitments by parties to conflict to stop
the recruitment and use of child soldiers have proven
to be very effective, and we should encourage them.
The strong normative framework and the mechanism to
monitor, report and respond to grave violations against
children, established by the Security Council, are also
fundamental tools to stop child soldiering. Resolution
2068 (2012), which we adopted today, is another
important piece of this normative framework.

18

The theme of this open debate is very relevant
indeed. The need to tackle impunity regarding
persistant perpetrators who have been clearly identified
should certainly guide our work in the near future. We
are referring to individuals or entities that have been
identified as persistent perpetrators for five years
or more, and most of them are non-State actors. The
Council needs to address those difficult cases and
ensure that such individuals are accounted for and
sanctioned. If we do not do so, it will be the credibility
of the system that we have built that will be at stake.
The Security Council has started to apply targeted
measures against persistent perpetrators in situations
on its agenda, but we strongly believe that the mandates
of existing sanctions committees, as they are being
renewed or established, should also include child
protection criteria, as is already the case with some
of them, thus furthering the normative framework for
child protection in situations of armed conflict.
We also believe that the Council needs to find a
way to consider targeted measures against perpetrators
of grave violations against children in situations where
a dedicated sanctions committee does not exist. We
welcome the discussion that will take place in the
Council on this issue, and we believe that one possible
solution to increase pressure on persistent perpetrators
would be to establish a thematic sanctions committee
to target individuals and entities that are identified as
such.
But sanctions are and should continue to be a last
resort, too. Prevention through national strategies and
concrete commitments on the part of the parties and
Governments is obviously the most effective tool for
promoting and protecting children. In this context,
national protection and accountability mechanisms
are fundamental. As has already been mentioned, the
primary responsibility for child protection lies with
national authorities, and any international action in that
regard must be closely coordinated with them.
Finally, in the past year decisive steps have been
taken to ensure accountability for those responsible
for recruiting and using child soldiers. Portugal has
welcomed the recent decisions of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone and the International Criminal Court,
which constitute important landmarks for international
justice and demonstrate that accountability is achievable
and can be implemented. Such verdicts send a clear

12-51510

S/PV.6838

signal to parties to armed conflict throughout the world
that impunity is unacceptable.
The Security Council must also show strong resolve
and political engagement to render even more effective
its response to counter impunity for crimes against
children and to enhance accountability for violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Ms. Mxakato-Diseko (South Africa): We thank
Germany for facilitating this important debate. We are
grateful for the very useful statements made by the
Special Representative of the Secretary General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms Leila Zerrougui; the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Herrvé Ladsous; the UNICEF Executive Director,
Mr Anthony Lake; and the President of the International
Centre for Transitional Justice, Mr. David Tolbert.
We congratulate Ms. Zerrougui on her appointment
and we wish to acknowledge the significant contribution
of the former Special Representative, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, to the protection of children in armed
conflict. We also welcome resolution 2068 (2012), just
adopted.
The plight of children in armed conflict remains
an issue of deep concern to South Africa. Armed
conflict continues to disproportionally affect children,
who remain the most vulnerable to attacks, forced
recruitment and deprivation of their basic rights.
Children involved in armed conflict are deprived of an
opportunity to grow up in a secure environment where
they can realize their full potential. The international
community’s response to the plight of the most
vulnerable in situations of conflict is a direct reflection
of its commitment to protecting children caught up in
armed conflict.
South Africa is pleased that the issue of children
and armed conflict continues to receive the attention
it deserves on the agenda of the United Nations in
general and the Security Council in particular since
the compilation of the first United Nations report by
Ms. Graça Machel in 1996 on children affected by
armed conflict (A/51/306 and Add.1).
We have noted that the Security Council has
identified six grave violations committed against
children in armed conflict. South Africa believes that
each must be given equal priority and attention by the
Council. In this regard, we welcome the expansion
of the trigger mechanism for punitive measures. It is

12-51510

imperative that all parties to armed conflict refrain
from any action that could violate the rights of children.
We call on all parties involved in conflict to abide by
international law, including international humanitarian
law, and refrain from attacks against civilian targets,
particularly those wherein children would be present.
We have noted that the efforts employed by the
Council, including the threat of being listed in the
reports of the Secretary-General, has led to some
actors modifying their behaviour. However, despite the
commendable work of the Council, and in particular the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
there remain State and non-State entities that continue
to persistently perpetrate violations and abuses against
children.
We should note that State actors in most cases
have been cooperative and have worked constructively
in preparing and implementing concrete, time-bound
action plans to cease and prevent abuse and violations
against children. The major challenge, however, has
been bringing armed opposition and rebel groups
into compliance. Thus, when considering compliance
measures, we need to ensure that they will be effective
against non-State parties in particular.
Despite our efforts to address these persistent
violators in a non punitive way, there has been a
dramatic increase in their number from 13 to 32. We
therefore need to assess whether the actions we have
taken thus far are sufficient and effective to deal with
these cases, because clearly they are not, as the numbers
attest. We therefore share the concern of the SecretaryGeneral about the unacceptable, high and growing
number of persistent perpetrators of grave violations
against children, as well as his call that further decisive
and immediate action is needed to halt such violations
and to ensure that persistent perpetrators are brought
to account.
It is therefore imperative that we consider
appropriate action; otherwise, we would be rendered
ineffective and unable to assist some of the most
vulnerable victims of armed conflict. The report
(S/2012/261) of the Secretary-General provides us some
concrete recommendations for addressing this matter.
It is the responsibility of the Council to take positive
action in that regard.
Resolution 1612 (2005) reaffirmed the Council’s
intention to consider imposing, through country-

19

S/PV.6838

specific resolutions, targeted and graduated measures
against those in violation of applicable international law
relating to the rights and protection of children in armed
conflict. The expansion of designation criteria for listing
by some Sanctions Committees — including those on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia, the
Sudan and Côte d’Ivoire — of those committing grave
violations against children is a welcome development.
The Council should therefore consider the expansion of
the criteria when contemplating sanctions measures. In
that regard, the Council could receive recommendations
from the Working Group on listing individuals involved
in gross violations against children in armed conflict.
That would necessitate a close working relationship
between the Working Group and the country-specific
sanctions committees.
Another recommendation offered by the SecretaryGeneral is closer cooperation with national and
international courts to address persistent perpetrators
who continue to commit grave violations against
children in conflict situations. In that regard, we
welcome the recent decision by the International
Criminal Court in respect of Mr. Thomas Lubanga
Dyilo and the decision of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone in respect of Mr. Charles Taylor for their crimes
against humanity, which include violations related to
children.
It is also regrettable that a larger number of persistent
perpetrators are on the African continent, with the
Lord’s Resistance Army in particular continuing to
devastate the lives and the livelihoods of communities,
including the security impact thereof. That should of
course come as no surprise, as most conflicts are on the
African continent. It is therefore vital for the United
Nations to work with the African Union and subregional
organizations on the African continent in addressing
this challenge. That will ensure effective coordination,
monitoring and reporting mechanisms, in addition to
galvanizing political will.
It is vital that we do not forget the long-term needs
of children who have been affected by armed conflict.
South Africa therefore underscores the importance of
adopting a broad strategy regarding conflict prevention.
It should address the root causes of armed conflict in
a comprehensive manner and create an environment
conducive to the protection and promotion of children’s
rights.
In conclusion, South Africa commends the work
of the Working Group, especially its role to review
20

progress in the development and implementation of
time-bound action plans by parties to conflict to halt the
recruitment and use of children, which are violations
of international obligations. We would like to express
our continued commitment to work with Council
members and international community to ensure that
the protection of children remains our priority.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I should
first of all like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
placed this very important issue concerning children
on the agenda of the Security Council under Germany’s
presidency. I also congratulate Ms. Zerrougi on
her appointment as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
I wish her every success in her work. Lastly, I would
like to thank Mr. Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, for his introduction of the
report (S/2012/261) of the Secretary-General, as well as
Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF, and
Mr. David Tolbert, President of the International Center
for Transitional Justice, for their relevant contributions
to this debate.
It is evident that armed conflict has always posed
a grave threat to peace and security where children are
concerned, including to protecting their rights. Quite
often, they become deliberate targets and collateral
victims of such conflicts, while not themselves being
the cause for them. It is therefore a source of great
concern to note that, in most conflicts throughout the
world, children are forced to play an active role by
participating actively in combat or by taking on other
roles incompatible with their status as children.
In the world today, approximately 250,000 child
soldiers are subjected to grave violations of their rights,
specifically through recruitment, sexual violence,
death and mutilation and attacks against schools. In all
of that, they are the primary victims. It is difficult to
explain such attacks against the honour and dignity of
children against the backdrop of the 20 November 1989
international Convention on the Rights of the Child,
which calls for respecting and protecting children’s
rights. The reason for that is clearly owing to the inability,
difficulty or refusal to implement the provisions of the
Convention, as well as similar legal instruments. But it
is also due to a lack of national policies to safeguard the
well-being of children. Moreover, where Governments
have taken steps or adopted action plans on children,
implementation suffers from the lack of follow-up and

12-51510

S/PV.6838

a low level of real involvement on the part of local
authorities and civil society.
My country would nevertheless like to commend
the decisive role of the United Nations in protecting
children’s rights, which is manifested in the adoption
of the Convention as well as numerous resolutions of
the Security Council on this issue. That constitutes real
commitment and advocacy on behalf of protecting the
rights of children.
In that regard, I would like to commend the
Security Council’s holding of private consultations to
present the criteria for the listing in annex II of the
reports of the Secretary-General of groups responsible
for grave violations against children in situations of
armed conflict. Those consultations are very much in
line with the implementation of resolution 1998 (2011),
which included attacks on schools, hospitals and their
personnel as criteria for listing perpetrators on the list
contained in the Secretary-General’s report — whereas
previously the criteria included only sexual violence,
murder, mutilation and the recruitment of child soldiers.
It is also important that we commend the results of
the Security Council’s Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, which include providing guidance to
the Council with respect to its conclusions, resolutions
and presidential statements, with the aim of helping
countries experiencing armed conflict to safeguard
children.
As party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
as well as other relevant international legal instruments,
Togo strives to make the protection of children’s rights a
reality by adopting legislative and regulatory measures,
including making school mandatory and providing
free primary schooling. Moreover, in July 2007, Togo
adopted a law on children that mandates a prohibition
on recruiting children under the age of 18 for service
in our national armed forces. For some time now, my
country has carried out awareness-raising campaigns
on this issue among the population, in particular aimed
at parents.
Every State Member of the Organization should
engage with determination in establishing the
conditions in which children can grow up free from
all violence and any violation of their rights. One of
the ways to reach that goal is to include respect for the
Convention on the Rights of the Child among the rules
governing the conduct of officials and all actors in
national society, as well as to stipulate penalties when

12-51510

there is a failure to implement those rules. That is why
my country fully endorses the proposals contained
in the report of the Secretary-General, especially the
request made of the Security Council to encourage
States that have not yet done so to become party to
all the international legal instruments concerning
the rights of the child, as well as to work to integrate
them into their national legislation so as to ensure
their effective implementation. Similarly, we support
the recommendation that the Council ensure that the
specific provisions with respect to the protection of
children continue to be in all of the relevant mandates
of United Nations peacekeeping operations. In that
regard, I would again like to commend the work being
done by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in
that area.
Togo continues to believe that the ongoing
perpetration of violations of children’s rights in armed
conflicts is due to the impunity of the perpetrators.
The latter, whoever they are, must be tracked down
and arrested, so that they can be held accountable
for their acts. We also commend the decision of the
International Criminal Court in the Thomas Lubanga
Dyilo case, which clearly illustrates the efforts of the
international community to put an end to the impunity
of perpetrators of abuses against children. Identified
perpetrators need to be brought to justice, which would
presuppose, inter alia, strengthening the national
legislation of the countries involved and establishing
close cooperation between States in order to restrict the
freedom of movement of violators who are being sought.
When there is no more impunity or safe haven for the
perpetrators and masterminds of serious violations of
the rights of the child, our world will be able to hope
to put an end to the violence against children in armed
conflict.
In conclusion, I would point out that, in voting
in favour of resolution 2068 (2012) this morning, my
country wished to reaffirm its firm commitment to
fighting against the serious violations against children,
particularly in situations of armed conflict. That is why
we regret that the Council failed to adopt the resolution
unanimously despite the efforts undertaken by various
parties to reach a consensus on certain key issues. We
firmly believe that when it is a matter of issues such
as the fate of children in armed conflict, the Security
Council should do its utmost to reach the necessary
unanimity, which will only lend greater credibility to
the text that it adopts.

21

S/PV.6838

Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
the German presidency for convening today’s open
debate on children and armed conflict and for its active
role and leadership in advancing that significant theme
in the work of the Security Council.
We welcome Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, to the Council and wish her every
success in fulfilling her important and responsible
mandate. I would also like to thank Mr. Ladsous,
Mr. Lake and Mr. Tolbert for their statements.
Azerbaijan’s firm views with regard to the issue
under consideration are well known and stem from
our keen interest in contributing to the achievement
of sustainable peace and development and from our
practical experience in addressing the impact of
armed conflict on civilians, including children. The
war unleashed against my country and the military
occupation of our territories has had a considerable
impact on, inter alia, humanitarian issues in our
country, primarily affecting the most vulnerable
groups. Azerbaijan continues to suffer from having
one of the highest numbers of refugees and displaced
persons in the world, many of whom are children. The
most serious crimes of concern to the international
community have been committed during the conflict,
and not even children have been spared.
Azerbaijan remains deeply concerned by the
negative impact of armed conflicts on children and
strongly condemns all violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law committed against
them. We have always been consistent in demanding
the strict observance by the parties to armed conflict of
their obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law in all circumstances.
Azerbaijan reiterates its commitment to continuing
to support the activities of existing United Nations
mechanisms aimed at ensuring more effective
protection for the rights of children and improving the
situation of children affected by armed conflict.
We welcome the growing attention of the Security
Council to the topic and support the activity of its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
The heightened vulnerability of children in wartime
brings an element of urgency, dedication and strong
commitment to our protection efforts, which must be
free of selectivity and politically motivated approaches
and preferences. Azerbaijan knows the role that the

22

mandate of the Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict must play in that regard. We encourage
the Special Representative to fulfil her mandate to
attend to the suffering of children in all situations of
armed conflict, including, in particular, those of a
protracted nature and of prolonged impact on children.
Important steps have been taken in a number of
situations of armed conflict to achieve accountability
for grave violations of children’s rights, including the
development of international jurisprudence. However,
serious challenges remain. Unfortunately, the violation
of international humanitarian and human rights law
in some situations of armed conflict has not received
attention and response at the international and regional
levels. It is obvious that more resolute and targeted
measures are required to protect children in situations of
armed conflict and to end impunity for the most serious
crimes of concern to the international community that
have been perpetrated against children.
It is incontrovertible today that no official or
political status can cloak the person responsible with
immunity for such crimes. Combating impunity is
important not only for the purposes of prosecuting
such crimes and bringing those responsible to justice,
but also for ensuring sustainable peace, truth and
reconciliation.
Particular consideration should be given to
internally displaced children in terms of ensuring their
inalienable right of return and to the implications of
illegal policies and practices in situations of foreign
occupation for the protection of children’s rights. In
addition, among the pressing issues requiring urgent
attention and action is that of children taken hostage
and reported missing in situations of armed conflict. In
that context, it is essential to ensure that all appropriate
measures are taken to determine the fate of such
children, including searching for them and reunifying
them with their families, in particular by strengthening
international cooperation.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that there is
a need for more resolute and consistent efforts aimed
at addressing existing challenges and finding longterm and sustained solutions to the problems involving
the protection of civilians, including, in particular,
violations and abuses committed against children in
situations of armed conflict.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Sir, for convening today’s important debate on

12-51510

S/PV.6838

children and armed conflict. We welcome the strong
leadership that Germany has brought to the issue, both
in its role as President of the Council and particularly
in its chairmanship of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. I also thank the four briefers for
their important statements today.
I would like to take this opportunity to express warm
appreciation for the former Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy,
for her advocacy and active engagement over the last
six years, which resulted in the release, reintegration
and protection of countless children across the world.
The United Kingdom welcomes Ms. Leila
Zerrougui to her appointment as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. It is a demanding but extremely
important role on a dossier of central importance to the
core mission of the United Nations. She will have the
United Kingdom’s full support, and we look forward to
working closely with her.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/261) is strewn with evidence of hideous crimes
committed against children that cannot be ignored.
Thousands of children have been killed or injured by
improvised explosive devices, landmines and rocketpropelled grenades. Tens of thousands have been denied
access to humanitarian assistance critical to their
survival. There are hundreds of examples of attacks
on schools and hospitals. There are cases where girls
and boys, some as young as six, have been sexually
assaulted and raped by armed groups. Children, in
some case younger than 10 years old, have been forcibly
taken from their families and recruited as combatants,
escorts, cooks and porters for armed groups.
In the face of such evidence, our individual and
collective ambition on the agenda must remain high.
United Nations efforts to help children affected by
armed conflict can work, and well. Action plans
have resulted in the release and the reintegration of
thousands of children recruited and caught up in the
fighting. In its verdict against Thomas Lubanga in
March, the International Criminal Court issued its first
judgement on the issue of child recruitment, setting
groundbreaking jurisprudence for future cases and
sending a strong message to those who continue to
believe that they can safely commit grave violations
against children with impunity. In our efforts to address
such grave violations, the Special Representative of the

12-51510

Secretary-General and the Council’s Working Group
are vital tools that must be preserved and supported.
Against that background, we welcome the adoption
today of resolution 2068 (2012). It sends an important
message of the Council’s determination to take forward
the agenda of children and armed conflict in an active,
forward-looking and wide-ranging manner. The United
Kingdom welcomes the fact that the resolution secured
strong Council support, spanning all regions. We
would have liked the resolution to have been adopted
unanimously, and regret that that did not happen.
We disagree with the assertions of some Council
members that insufficient efforts were made to find
consensus. In our view, extensive negotiations were
conducted in circumstances in which some delegations
maintained solidly negative positions towards the
agenda, proposing amendments whose effect would
have been unacceptably to constrain the role of the
Special Representative. Significant compromises were
made in an effort to reach consensus, but we cannot
accept the assertion made by some Council members
that the former Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral overreached her mandate in the conduct of her
business. That accusation is completely unfounded.
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned
about the unacceptably high and increasing number
of perpetrators of grave violations against children,
namely, 32 parties that have been listed for grave
violations against children for five years or more. We
need an innovative and practical approach to address
the increasing number of armed groups that persistently
rob children of their futures. We must demonstrate that
they will be held accountable for their actions. We
should not tolerate such abuse.
We encourage the Security Council and the
Working Group to consider what further tools should
be available to help bring to justice those who commit
grave crimes, threatening the peace, security and
well-being of children. Children and armed conflict
is an agenda that the Security Council should be
consolidating and advancing. Consensus and Council
unity are desirable, important and worth striving for,
as happened in the negotiations, but they are not ends
in themselves. Consensus should not be secured at the
expense of an effective approach to the global challenge
of children and armed conflict. We must maintain
a high level of ambition for the agenda in the United

23

S/PV.6838

Nations and elsewhere. We believe that resolution 2068
(2012) gives us the right basis for doing so.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): Pakistan welcomes this
opportunity to have a frank discussion on the subject.
We thank all the briefers for their presentations.
We welcome the appointment of the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, who brings
with her a wealth of experience for carrying out that
mandate. We are confident that she will favour positive
and constructive engagement over the approach that led
to the unfortunate divergence and controversy related
to implementation of the mandate. We stand ready to
extend our full support and cooperation to her.
Allow me to begin by explaining Pakistan’s vote
on resolution 2068 (2012), adopted earlier this morning
without consensus. Our delegation constructively
engaged in the negotiations and made various proposals,
supported by several delegations, to improve the draft
text and to reinforce the true spirit of the mandate.
Regrettably, those proposals were not accommodated.
Contrary to claims by one Council member, the
process of consultations also was bereft of openness
and a willingness to achieve consensus. In the end,
a non-consensual text was presented as a virtual fait
accompli. I would like to highlight some of the critical
aspects that should have helped in building the needed
political consensus on the resolution.
The issue of full observance of or working strictly
within the mandate is at the heart of the problem. Pakistan
and other delegations had proposed several options to
the Chair to address that. However, as referred to in
paragraph 1 of the resolution, the issue of the mandate
remains vague and inadequately addressed. The
unwarranted references in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2012/261) to non-mandated situations
reflect the extent of the misuse of such a mandate. A
report that deviates from the given mandate cannot
be accorded legitimacy. We clearly articulated our
position on the reference to the report in the resolution.
Discrimination and double standards in the exercise of
different mandates is a reality. In order to address that,
we proposed a paragraph. However, the proposal was
distorted by the sponsors and the Permanent Five as
comprehensively protecting children in all situations.
That does not reflect the selectivity that exists on the
ground in approaching different situations of armed
conflict.

24

We also made proposals expressing concern at the
inclusion in the Secretary-General’s report of situations
that are not in the mandate. We reiterated the need to
fully respect the mandate in future reports. Regrettably,
those proposals were not accepted.
Separately, the sponsors arbitrarily introduced the
element of automaticity as regards annual reports, thus
impacting the desired transparency and accountability
in the process. Our constructive engagement and
compromise proposals were disregarded and the text
was pushed through in haste. While we would have
voted against the draft resolution owing to our serious
concerns over the text, we decided only to abstain to
underline our commitment to the mandate and our
willingness to work constructively with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
I would like to take this opportunity to express our
deep appreciation for those members of the Council who
shared and showed an understanding of our principle
concerns on the issue, as also expresses through their
votes on the resolution.
Love for children is a natural phenomenon that cuts
across all geographical divisions and transcends any
social, cultural or developmental factors. All children
are entitled to equal attention and care, as the future
of humankind rests on ensuring their well-being. The
United Nations Charter therefore rightly starts with
the noble objective to save succeeding generations.
That aims at ensuring due protection of and the proper
investment in the cause of children. Pakistan is fully
committed to that objective.
The rights of children need to be protected in all
circumstances. However, being a part of vulnerable
groups, their rights are adversely affected, particularly
during situations of armed conflict. The Security
Council created the mandate of children and armed
conflict precisely to ensure that the rights of children
are also protected in such situations. Pakistan supports
the mandate, including its reporting and monitoring
procedures on the specific trigger mechanisms.
The reports of the Secretary-General on the subject
are an important medium of monitoring and reporting
on such situations. Unfortunately, however, recent
reports of the Secretary-General have blundered into
situations that are outside the scope of the mandate
authorized by the Security Council. Such overreach has
not only diluted the focus on the core challenges, but

12-51510

S/PV.6838

also created undue divisiveness, thus undermining the
consensus that exists on this important mandate.
In addition, such adventurism creates legal, political
and practical difficulties for both the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations system as a whole.
Most regrettably, the latest report once again contains
references to non-mandated situations, in particular,
an unwarranted and completely misleading section on
Pakistan.
That not only misrepresents the context of Pakistan’s
law enforcement and counterterrorism measures, but also
serves to accord undeserved respectability to terrorists
and criminals. That disturbing trend is bringing into
disrepute both the intergovernmental body that created
the mandate, namely, the Security Council, and the
esteemed Secretary-General. Despite acknowledging
that specific acts of terrorism mentioned in the report
were carried out by the Taliban and Al-Qaida elements,
the former Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflicts refused
even to label them as terrorists in the report.
Similarly, the practice followed by the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflicts on condemning specific
acts of violations of child rights is selective. While they
did not lose time in issuing statements regarding acts
of terrorism involving children in specific countries,
even when those were not situations of armed conflict,
the Office is known to have turned a blind eye to the
killing of children in actual armed conflict situations.
Such selectivity has only led to the strengthening
of the belief of Member States that United Nations
special procedures need to work more independently
and strictly within the carefully crafted and common
meaning of their mandate.
It is important to recall here that there is no
provision whatsoever in the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflicts to report on situations other
than those involving armed conflicts. Resolution 1882
(2009) unmistakably links the situations of concern
under that resolution to paragraph 16 of resolution
1379 (2001), which asks the Secretary-General to use
the trigger mechanisms in the relevant resolutions
to list parties in annexes to his reports in situations
of armed conflict that are on the Security Council’s
agenda or others that, in his opinion and in accordance
with article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations,

12-51510

threaten the maintenance of international peace and
security. Indeed, the tendency of the former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflicts make her own rules and veer
away from her mandate led the Security Council in
2011 to ask the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to brief and report to the Security Council on
the criteria and procedures used in listing and delisting
parties to armed conflict in the annexes of the periodic
reports in the Secretary-General’s 2012 report.
Despite a very useful discussion on the subject
in the Security Council in February of this year, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflicts failed to reflect that
discussion in the 2012 report, yet another manifestation
of failing to give due respect to the views of Member
States and the intergovernmental process. Nevertheless,
we stand ready to engage in a constructive discussion
on the need to respect the legal parameters of that
mandate and support the activities associated with it.
Pakistan wants to strengthen the political consensus
around that mandate to ensure better protection of
the rights of children in situations of armed conflict
by all stakeholders. It is our sincere hope that the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflicts will interact closely
with all Member States in order to better understand
their concerns and restore the needed respect for that
mandate. Pakistan has also been constructively engaged
in the work of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, under the leadership of Germany, and
has contributed to expediting its work in a consensual
manner.
Let me also make the following additional points.
The primary role of States in child protection should
be emphasized. Relevant United Nations agencies and
mandate holders can support such efforts within their
respective mandates. Reinterpretation of the mandate or
any expansion of its scope beyond what is authorized by
the Security Council is illegitimate and unacceptable.
As reflected in paragraph 2 (b) of resolution
1612 (2005), cooperation with and the participation
of national Governments are indispensible to the
implementation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism. Information collected through that
mechanism must be accurate, objective, reliable
and verifiable. Any dialogue established within that
framework by the United Nations with non-State
actors must be conducted within the framework of

25

S/PV.6838

peace processes where they exist and with the explicit
permission of the Governments concerned. Listing and
delisting criteria should be objective and balanced. The
criteria must be finalized as a priority matter by the
Secretary-General in full consultation with Member
States.
The issue of persistent perpetrators is of concern
to all. Concerned Member States must bring to justice
those responsible for such violations through national
justice systems and, where applicable, through the use
of international justice mechanisms. We stand ready to
discuss possible further measures to be taken by the
Council to address that genuine concern.
To conclude, let there be no doubt that Pakistan
condemns in the strongest possible terms any use of
children by extremists or any other group to promote
their nihilistic agenda and is taking appropriate action
to stop such practices. At the same time, we sincerely
hope that future reports of the Secretary-General will
be high on objectivity and squarely correspond to the
given mandate.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Let me, at the
outset, thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s
open debate on the issue of children and armed conflict.
I want to congratulate Ms. Leila Zerrougui on her
appointment as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflicts.
We wish her great success and look forward to working
closely with her. I would also like to thank our briefers
today for their statements.
Children constitute a third of humanity, and, I dare
say, the most important third, as they represent our
future. Being also the weakest and most susceptible, it
is imperative that all of us, nationally and as members
of the international community, act for their well-being
and development. Situations of armed conflict are per
se situations of suffering, but children tend to be the
worst affected. We therefore firmly believe that the
international community has the responsibility, and
indeed the obligation, to do its utmost to provide succor
to children affected by armed conflict.
We have engaged constructively in the ongoing
efforts to make the United Nations more relevant and
effective in the area of children affected by armed
conflict. We have also actively engaged in the work of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
to address the plight of children in situations on the
agenda of the Security Council.

26

As the largest contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping operations over the past six decades,
Indian peacekeepers have been at the forefront in
creating an environment of peace and security in which
national authorities can fulfil their obligations towards
the most vulnerable sections of those affected by armed
conflict. Based on our wide-ranging experience, we
wish to stress that the major challenge is the question
of resources. While some members of the international
community never tire of pushing to expand the mandate,
they are unwilling to provide adequate resources even
for meeting the requirements of the agreed mandate.
Since the adoption of resolution 1379 (2001), which
brought the issue of children and armed conflict to the
Security Council’s agenda in 2001, significant progress
has been made, and the United Nations deserves credit
for the same. However, a lot more remains to be done.
As the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflicts commences
her work, we think that it is the right time to take stock
of the implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
Council and consider the way forward. We are sure that
today’s debate will provide an opportunity to reflect
on the functioning of the United Nations processes and
mechanisms, and help us identify gaps and address
them.
Let me therefore underscore our key concern,
which has also found an echo in the words of several
representatives that have spoken before me today. We
believe that the earlier this is addressed, the better the
result will be for children in armed conflict. This will
also rebuild the consensus that the issue has enjoyed so
far in this Council and, I might add, that is important.
Paragraph 16 of resolution 1379 (2001) requested
the Secretary-General to report on situations that
are on the Security Council’s agenda or that may be
brought to the attention of the Security Council by the
Secretary-General, in accordance with Article 99 of the
Charter, which in his opinion threaten the maintenance
of international peace and security. All subsequent
resolutions, including resolution 1882 (2009), which
makes reference to other situations of concern, draw
their legitimacy from paragraph 16 of 1379 (2001). In
spite of that clearly spelled-out mandate, the SecretaryGeneral’s reports include situations that do not meet
the threshold for being an armed conflict or a threat
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
The fact that the Legal Counsel also has issues with
such referencing should have led to the removal of such

12-51510

S/PV.6838

situations, not their continued inclusion with a blasé
disclaimer. This should be rectified and the mandate
strictly adhered to. Mandate creep also distracts from
efforts to urgently address the plight of children in
situations of armed conflict that are on the Council’s
agenda, where lack of resources is the critical problem
for the relevant United Nations entities.
The monitoring and reporting mechanism of the
United Nations envisaged the involvement of and close
cooperation with the country concerned. In addition to
ensuring the veracity and reliability of data collection,
developing such capacity will significantly assist the
country concerned in its fight against impunity and in
ensuring accountability. It is also important that United
Nations access to armed groups is carried out under the
cooperation framework between the United Nations
and the Government concerned, in keeping with both
the letter and the spirit of the Council’s resolutions.
It is important that there be regular and substantive
consultation between the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
relevant resolutions, including of provisions concerning
listing, delisting, persistent perpetrators, impunity and
accountability, among others.
In conclusion, let me reiterate India’s strong support
for the United Nations on issues of children and armed
conflict, and reaffirm that we will continue to work
closely on this with a view to increasing efficiency,
cost effectiveness and the impact of United Nations
efforts and those of Member States in dealing with this
important issue.
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank Germany for organizing
this open debate. We acknowledge its leadership as
Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict and on resolution 2068 (2012), which we have
adopted today. We appreciate the presence of Ms. Leila
Zerrougui and her briefing to us, and we take this
opportunity to welcome her appointment as the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict. We also appreciate the
statements by Mr. Ladsous, Mr. Lake and Mr. Tolbert.
We note that 32 out of 52 parties listed in the
annexes to the Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/261)
are persistent perpetrators. The majority belong to
non-State armed groups. This raises the question of
discussing ways and means to increase pressure on

12-51510

groups that, by definition, we have difficulty reaching.
Such parties to conflict have not been affected by
being on the naming and shaming list, they are not
accountable for their acts and they do not comply with
recognized international rules, human rights law or
humanitarian law. They are considered as illegal or
criminal within their own countries. In addition, they do
not seem to care about their reputation or international
image. Many of those non-State armed groups oscillate
between acting on political motives and fulfilling
criminal objectives. Those doing the latter are even less
responsive to incentives and deterrents to change their
modus operandi in areas under their control.
We therefore believe that the Council must reaffirm
its leadership role and its willingness to act against
persistent perpetrators, emphasizing the responsibility
of those States on whose territory parties to a conflict
persistently commit such crimes against children, in
order to put an end to impunity and to prosecute those
responsible for violations and abuses against children.
We must ensure that those States have specific laws
that criminalize war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide, as well as strengthen the capacity
of national institutions to prosecute individuals
responsible for committing such crimes, especially
persistent perpetrators, or referring those cases to
international tribunals. For their part, international
tribunals have demonstrated their capacity to deal with
crimes committed against children. The judgements
against Thomas Lubanga Dyilo and Charles Taylor give
us hope that we can take action against the impunity of
persistent perpetrators.
Another issue that has been thoroughly discussed
is the more frequent use of sanctions. Although we are
aware of the difficult issues this raises, we support the
idea of monitoring the implementation of the sanctions
regime, starting with the four sanctions committees
that now have criteria defining serious violations
against children, namely, those for Côte d’Ivoire,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia and
the Sudan. Further work is necessary to ensure that
sanctions are imposed against individuals or entities
who commit grave violations against children. We hope
that other sanctions regimes, such as those against AlQaida and the Taliban, adopt criteria defining serious
violations against children. The imposition of sanctions
sends a signal to parties who commit such crimes and
contributes to greater compliance with the Council’s
agenda on children and armed conflict.

27

S/PV.6838

We hope that the recently appointed Special
Representative of the Secretary-General will continue
to further strengthen cooperation with the sanctions
committees to take action against persistent perpetrators,
include the four serious violations in the mandate of all
relevant sanctions committee and continue to inform the
Security Council and the Working Group on emerging
situations that involve children in armed conflict. We
should spare no effort to end the unlawful recruitment
and use of children by armed forces and non-State armed
groups.
With regard to the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, we believe that the issue of persistent
perpetrators should be an item in its agenda. The
Committee should issue recommendations to ensure
that grave violators are accountable for their crimes.
However, we do not believe that the Working Group
should function as a sanctions committee, since that
would fundamentally alter its nature. We would like
to encourage the Group to achieve its goal of adopting
conclusions within two months, in order to keep the cycle
of situations on its work plan within an 18-month period.
In conclusion, Guatemala will continue to be
committed to the protection of children in armed conflict
and the fight against impunity. Addressing the problem
of persistent perpetrators is a challenge. It is of the utmost
importance that the protection framework that has been
established preserve its credibility by putting an end to
unacceptable practices.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.
At the outset, I would like to very warmly welcome
the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, wish her every success
and assure her of Germany’s full support to her in her
assignment. I also want to pay tribute to the dedicated
work of her predecessor, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy,
and her commitment and great achievements. Let me
also thank Mr. Ladsous, Mr. Lake and Mr. Tolbert for
their impressive briefings.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later on during this debate on behalf of the
European Union.
We heard it from our briefers: the number of children
suffering in armed conflict is still shockingly high.
This is a reminder for us. We have to increase
our joint efforts to stop and prevent heinous crimes

28

committed against children. It has to be said that, since
2005, encouraging progress has been made. Twenty
action plans have been signed by parties to conflict.
Consequently, tens of thousands of child soldiers have
been released. This is a remarkable achievement of
which the United Nations and the Security Council
can be proud.
The recent convictions of Thomas Lubanga and
Charles Taylor have made clear that accountability for
the recruitment and abuse of children is advancing.
But we must not be complacent. There is still reason
for concern. The listings of new parties in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/261) are proof of
the seriousness of the problem. New parties have been
listed for the recruitment and use of children and for
the killing and maiming of children. There have also
been first listings for attacks on schools and hospitals.
What can we do better?
First, we should explore ways to improve the
existing protection framework. Child protection and
child protection training should be an integral part
of all peacekeeping and special political missions.
In that regard, we strongly commend the efforts of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
Department of Political Affairs to develop a joint
Child Protection Policy. Child protection issues
and, in particular, the release and reintegration of
children, need to be systematically included in peace
negotiations and agreements.
Secondly, we need to address the issue of
accountability. Perpetrators of crimes against children
need to be held accountable. This goes especially
for the alarming number of so-called persistent
perpetrators. The Security Council needs to look at
new ways to address the issue. The report of former
French Ambassador De la Sablière provides a good
overview of possible options. Let me mention just two.
One option that Germany favours is that the
Security Council increase its political engagement,
for example, through sessions dedicated to the issue.
The second option we should pursue is that the
Security Council make more use of targeted measures
against individual perpetrators through sanctions
committees, starting with the expansion of existing
sanctions committee mandates. We should take those
suggestions forward in our future discussions.
Germany is gratified that the Security Council
today once again adopted a resolution (resolution
12-51510

S/PV.6838

2068 (2012)) that underlines the importance of the work
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, that reiterates the
Council’s readiness to adopt targeted and graduated
measures against persistent perpetrators, and that
authorizes annual reports of the Secretary-General.
It goes without saying that we would have
preferred a consensus decision on the resolution we
adopted today. We regret that some members chose
not to support that resolution. We had one week of
extensive discussion, and we, as penholder, made an
extra effort to accommodate all delegation’s concerns.
We walked the extra mile, but we could not do one
thing — compromise on the integrity of existing and,
so far, accepted mechanisms of the United Nations.
That would have been irresponsible. I hope that the
wish to strengthen the existing United Nations system
to protect children in armed conflicts will unite us all,
although a few members might have different opinions
on the way forward.
In closing, 1 would like to reiterate Germany’s hope
that the Security Council will keep up its good work
on this important issue. Our ambitions for this agenda
must remain high. We owe it to the children. We owe
it to them as the most vulnerable group of our society.
We owe it to them to spare no effort in enhancing the
protection of their rights in armed conflict.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to thank Germany
for hosting this open debate on children and armed
conflict. Germany has made significant contributions
on the issue of children and armed conflict, which
include efforts that led to the adoption of the resolution
1998 (2011), and we strongly commend its efforts. The
issue is important, not only from the humanitarian
perspective of protecting children, but also in terms of
peace and security, as the use of child soldiers has tragic
consequences. This is why it is extremely important to
address the issue at the Security Council.

12-51510

The Government of Japan warmly welcomes
the appointment of Ms. Leila Zerrougui as the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict. We also thank the
Special Representative; UNICEF Executive Director,
Mr. Anthony Lake; Under Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations Mr. Hervé Ladsous; and
President of the International Center for Transitional
Justice, Mr. David Tolbert, for their briefings.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/261) includes attacks on schools and hospitals
as a listing criterion for the annex I and II lists, and
the Government of Japan welcomes this development.
Attacks on and unjust occupation of these facilities not
only invite the killing and maiming of children, but
also deprive children of their right to an education and
prevent them from accessing health services, which
can have long-term repercussions on society. Such acts
must cease immediately.
I would like to focus on the issue of persistent
perpetrators and the fight against impunity. It is
our grave concern that the number of persistent
perpetrators has increased drastically according to
the latest Security-General report. Currently, some,
though not all, sanctions committees have designation
criteria for grave violations against children; however,
the De La Sabliére report presents various in-depth
options to address the issue, including the creation of
a thematic sanctions committee. The Security Council
should assess the viability of those options and exercise
practical measures against persistent perpetrators;
otherwise, the annex lists will be at risk of losing
substance.
The role of judicial organizations is also very
critical. This year, the Special Court for Sierra
Leone found Charles Taylor guilty for such crimes
as the recruitment and use of child soldiers. This is a
significant advancement in the fight against impunity.
Also, the International Criminal Court (ICC) found
Thomas Lubanga guilty of the war crime of conscripting
and enlisting children or using them to participate
actively in hostilities during domestic conflicts in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This is a milestone
sentence in strengthening the rule of law, given that
it is the first sentence since the establishment of the
ICC 10 years ago.Furthermore, let me underscore that
the Security Council, which is authorized to refer
a case to the ICC, and the ICC, which conducts the
investigation, prosecution and trial, need to deepen

29

S/PV.6838

substantive dialogue between each other, collaborate
more constructively and build a relationship where
each is accountable to the other.
More than a decade has passed since the issue of
children and armed conflict was included in the Security
Council agenda in 1998. From those discussions we saw
emerge a series of structural developments, including
the creation of the annex lists and action plans. It is now
necessary that we implement those mechanisms.
In that regard, the Government of Japan welcomes
the signing, in June, of an action plan for the release
and reintegration of children associated with the
Government forces in Myanmar, as well as the signing,
in July, of an action plan by the Somali Transitional
Federal Government to end the recruitment and use of
children. We also highly commend the efforts of former
Special Representative Radhika Coomaraswamy in
conducting a number of field trips to hold dialogues
with various parties and bring about tangible results.
Japan was a sponsor of resolution 2068 (2012), and
we welcome its adoption.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I congratulate
Mr. President, for convening this debate.

you,

I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Hervé Ladsous for his briefing. I also convey to Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui our best wishes in her
new and very demanding job and thank her for her
presentation. I am also grateful to Mr. Anthony Lake
and Mr. David Tolbert for their informative remarks.
Attacks on children hurt the most vulnerable in
any armed conflict, and severely impact precisely
those who are key to fostering sustainable peace. The
international community needs to persevere in finding
ways to prevent children from bearing the brunt of wars
that adults choose to fight.
The Council has established a comprehensive
framework to protect children in situations of armed
conflict. The concrete results achieved through tools
such as the monitoring and reporting mechanism and
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
must both be commended.
As indicated in the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2012/261), we have recently witnessed
significant steps towards greater accountability for

30

perpetrators of grave violations against children. The
verdict of the International Criminal Court condemning
Thomas Lubanga sent a powerful message to those who
commit crimes against children in armed conflict.
It attests to the international determination to fight
impunity and bring to justice those who commit such
horrific crimes. The increase in the number of sanctions
regimes that include designation criteria governing
grave violations against children also shows that the
Council is committed to acting against perpetrators
when their actions pose a threat to international peace
and security.
Although children have particular needs and
vulnerabilities, the development of a specific legal
regime for the protection of children in armed conflict
must remain within the scope of broader international
humanitarian law and should be consistent with
other legal mechanisms aimed at protecting civilian
populations as a whole.
In 2010, as Chair of the Sanctions Committee
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Brazil
organized the first briefing ever to such a committee
by a Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict. We were guided by Brazil’s firm belief that
improving cooperation between the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
relevant sanctions committees would strengthen the
Council’s response to persistent perpetrators.
However, the Council should be careful when
considering coercive measures in the field of children
and armed conflict in contexts for which no sanctions
regime exists. As we all know, measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter can be adopted only in cases that
constitute a threat to international peace and security,
as determined by the Security Council. It is therefore a
matter of concern for Brazil that some situations that
are not armed conflicts are being mentioned in reports
on children and armed conflict.
While we strive to improve accountability for
grave violations committed against children in
conflict situations, attention should also be given to
the imperative of ensuring that States receive resolute
support and cooperation for strengthening the rule of
law.
We often hear calls for the Council to take bolder
decisions. The plight of innocent children surely
amplifies that call. Nonetheless, we must avoid the

12-51510

S/PV.6838

temptation to associate “bolder decisions” with a
merely punitive approach.
There is only so much that can be achieved through
naming and shaming mechanisms and the imposition of
sanctions. We must not lose sight of the importance of
cooperating with Governments and parties to conflicts
in order to find sustainable solutions for the protection
of children.
In the same spirit, Brazil fully endorses the
Secretary-General’s call for support to the sustainable,
long-term reintegration needs of children in the context
of the implementation of action plans, including
economic reintegration. To ensure that children
affected by conflict are able to participate in efforts
to build peaceful and prosperous societies, we need to
offer them the opportunity to be fully reintegrated.
Furthermore, as rightly pointed out by the former
Special Representative of the Secretary General in
her last annual report to the Human Rights Council
(A/HRC/21/38), it is also necessary to tackle the
structural causes that lead to the recruitment of
children by armed groups. Evidence suggests that there
is a strong association between recruitment into armed
forces and poverty. In fact, social exclusion has been
found to stir frustration among youth and to create
significant incentives to join armed groups.
Improving children’s living conditions and
providing them with alternatives, particularly through
education, can significantly contribute to preventing
their recruitment by armed groups, thereby breaking
the vicious cycles of conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have the
honour to take the floor on behalf of the European Union
and its member States. The acceding country Croatia,
the candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia, the countries of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
Let me begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
and the German presidency for organizing this very
important debate and for the leadership you have
constantly shown on this issue. The European Union

12-51510

is very grateful for Germany’s efforts, initiatives and
continuous endeavours, including in the Security
Council Working Group that you, Sir, chair.
Allow me to use this opportunity to express our
appreciation to former Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Radhika Coomaraswamy for
her highly esteemed work. Her relentless effort has
contributed immensely to the progress we witnessed
during her mandate. I would also like to warmly
welcome the new Special Representative, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, and to assure her of the full support of the
European Union.
The annual report of the Secretary General on
children and armed conflict (S/2012/261) reminds us
of the importance of the Security Council’s work on
that issue, which we highly appreciate. We have seen
continuous progress in many aspects and different
regions — for example, through the conclusion of several
action plans leading to the release and subsequent
reintegration of children. Still, we have also witnessed
deterioration in other places, such as Syria, where many
children are among the victims of egregious crimes and
where the tremendous suffering of girls and boys has
been going on for much too long. As long as children
still suffer from armed conflict, we are reminded that
we have to further intensify our work.
It is of special significance to us that for the first
time the Secretary-General included attacks on schools
and hospitals in his annual report, in accordance with
the expanded list of triggers from last year’s groundbreaking resolution 1998 (2011). That expansion of
triggers and their effective implementation means
concrete progress for the instruments at the disposal
of the Security Council’s Working Group, thereby
contributing effectively to improving the situation for
the children concerned.
The reports of the Secretary-General and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict also illustrate the severe
problem of persistent perpetrators — an issue that
increasingly needs our particular attention. While it
is essential to continuously name the relevant conflict
parties, the Security Council also has to look for
effective ways to take action, combat impunity and
prove that the 32 persistent perpetrators currently listed
will eventually be held accountable for their heinous
crimes, including by imposing targeted sanctions. Let
us not accept impunity. Encouraging steps have been

31

S/PV.6838

taken by the International Criminal Court, for example
by the recent judgment in the Lubanga trial on the war
crime of conscripting and enlisting children under
the age of 15 and making them participate actively in
hostilities.
The recommendations of the former Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations,
Ambassador De la Sablière, upon the request of the
Special Representative, provide interesting food for
thought in this context. The toolbox of the Security
Council’s Working Group needs to be applied, with
effective links between the Working Group, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the existing sanctions committees. Especially when
establishing or renewing the mandate of relevant
sanctions regimes, it should be considered to include
provisions against parties to armed conflict that engage
in activities in violation of applicable international law
relating to the rights and protection of children in armed
conflict. Dialogue and increased political pressure and
cooperation with national and international courts will
also be important. Furthermore, we encourage the
Council to regularly invite the Special Representative
to provide briefings on situations of armed conflict that
affect children.
The implementation of existing commitments
is crucial. Let me update the Council on some of the
steps taken by the European Union to contribute to our
common goal. High Representative Ashton has named
the rights of the child as one of the three priorities in her
joint communication on human rights. Consequently,
the EU is systematically including child protection
issues in all EU foreign policy missions, operations

32

and training ,and has committed to further step up
its implementation. The European Union has spent
€200 million in 2009-2012 on assistance to children and
armed conflict in the countries listed in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. To cite just one example, the EU’s
police mission in Afghanistan provided training on
child protection, and in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo the European Union has cooperated with the
United Nations and local police in child protection and
juvenile justice projects.
The humanitarian work of the EU also aims at
protecting children in conflict-affected areas. We
continue to strongly support the universal ratification of
the Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict and the sale of children, child prostitution and
child pornography. Those are just some of the examples
of our dedication in this field.
Far too many children in too many parts of the
world still suffer every day from the effects of armed
conflict or are directly involved as child soldiers.
Children should attend school, play with their peers and
be able to enjoy their childhood without suffering from
the effects of war and armed conflict. Let us do our
outmost to further improve their lives by intensifying
the use of the instruments at the disposal of the Security
Council.
The President: There are still a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting. I intend, with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, to suspend
the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.

12-51510
