-.-

UNITED

NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVE’NTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

25 MA

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2335)

Adoptionofthe

, , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . +. . . . .

agenda ,,.,,....,.,,,,.,,,,...,,..,,.,.....,.

1

.. . . . . .. . .

I

Letter dated 19 March 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/14913) . . . . . .

1

SjPV.2335

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures, Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
’: 1
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~rppl~~nw~~ts of the Of3ficial Records of’ the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
,’
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Swurity
Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 196.5, became fully operative
on that date.

2335th MEETING
eid in New York on Thursday, 25 March 1982, at 10.30 a.m.
Mrs. Jeane J. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America).

P,r.ridenr:

Pwsrut: The representatives of the following States:
China, France. Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Pan;\m:\, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland. United States of America. Zaire.

Provisional

from the representatives of Angola. Cuba. Honduras
and Mexico in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose. with
the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure.

agenda (S/Agenda/2335)

I.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

Letter dated 19 March 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Nicaragua to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
CS/l4Ul3)

Adoption of the agenda

Letter dated 19 March 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General (S/14913)
I+ The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Nicaragua, in which he requests
that his delegation be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite the delegation of Nicaragua to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
;lccordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
2. I request the Chief of Protocol to escort Mr. Daniel
Ortega Saavedra, co-ordinator
of the Governing
Junta of National
Reconstruction of Nicaragua, into
the Council Chamber and to a place at the Council
table.

3. The PREISIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have also received letters

4. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council is
meeting today in response to the request contained
in the letter dated I9 March from the representative
of Nicaragua
nddressed to the Secretary-General
(S//49/3].
Members of the Council have before them
also documents S/l4908 and S/14909, which contain
the texts of two letters dated 16 March from the representative of Nicaragua addressed to the SccretaryGeneral. and S/14919, containing the text of a letter
dated 23 March from the representative of Honduras
addressed to the Secretary-General.
5. The first speaker is the Co-ordinntor of the Governing Junta of National Reconstruction of Nka~*z\gt~t~.
Mr, Daniel Ortega Saavedra. I invite him to make his
statement.
6.

Mr,

ORTEGA

SAAVEDRA
(Nicaragua) (interMadam President, and members of the Council, 1 extend to you my most sincere
greetings and those of the Nicaraguan people and Government.

pl’c’t~/tiotl.fi.otll

Spunish):

7. Throughout
history, humanity has engaged in ;I
constant struggle to achieve better and more just ways
of life. As part of this historical process, the Central
American region in recent times has been in upheaval
because of the constant action of its peoples, who have
so long been oppressed and who are determined to free
themselves, in the face of the resistance of privileged
minorities
who are at pains to halt the changes which,
sooner or later, must come to these unjust societies.
8. Through sacrifice and great efforts. the Nicaluguan people were able to break the chains of a brutnl
and inhuman system on I9 July 1979, And also through
sacrifice and great effort, the people of El Salvudol

are giving continuity and increased value to a struggle
begun many decades ago-a struggle which has been
repressed and suppressed on different occasions but
which has always been just.

conflicted even with that of the allies of the United
States because it was based on arrogance rnthcr thnn
reason.
14. Such programmes put forward during the electoral campaign would not have been so important and
would have remained mere elements of electoral propaganda if the policy applied by the new Government
had manifested itself in realistic terms and, above all,
in keeping with the responsibility
its great power
demanded.

9. It is to a certain extent understandable that corrupt and bloody ligimes such as that of Maximiliano
Hernlindez in El Salvador would slaughter more than
30,000 Salvadorans on 22 January 1932 and that the
Somozist dictatorship
would massacre more than
100,000 Nicnraguans during 40 years of terror in order
to maintain themselves in power, but something that
defies logic and is therefore difficult to understand is
that behind Maximiliano
Hermindez and the Somozas
there stood various governments of the United States
of America, giving them unconditional
support.

IS. But the reality was hard and even dramatic. when
the planks of the electoral campaign rapidly began to
be translated into facts: economic aggression. verbal
threats, destabilization
plans, tolerance and encouragement of armed counterrevolutionary
activities by
the United States itself are among the most noteworthy events encouraged by the current United States
Administration
in its year and two months in office.
against ;I country of ordinary men and women dedicated to rebuilding their country, which represents
no threat to the national interests of the American
people.

IO. We Nicaraguans have had hard and bitter expericnce of the policies of different United States Administrations which have supplied continuous backing
to anti-popular governments, have harassed and overthrown good governments, and have carried out armed
intervention
against our people. A review of these
un.just actions would find them repeated time and
ngnin throughout our history.

16. At the same time. a resumption of military aid
in weapons. training and advisers to the Salvadoran
army and security forces was the Administration’s
only response to the crisis in El Salvador, thus once
again compromising
the United States Government in
a lost and unjust cause and thereby compromising the
very values and moral strength which gave rise to the
United States itself.

In the final weeks of our people’s struggle. when
Somoza was bombing. strafing and burning our cities,
at the Seventeenth Meeting of Consultation
of Ministcrs of Foreign Affairs of the Organization of American States (OAS) the United States attempted once
more, through an inter-American
force, to win approval for its intervention in Nicaragua. Today, with
differences only of detail, history is repeating itself,
with the present United States Administration
doing
everything
imaginable
to effect an intervention
in
Central America.
Il.

17. Protests against this mistaken and dangerous
policy were not long in coming. Responsible peoples
and serious Governments rejected the pretexts put
forward tojustify United States support for the immoral
cause of the murderers of humble peasants, workers.
students,
professionals,
intellectuals,
children,
women, old people, journalists. priests and clergy.
For it has always been clear that the often-cited EastWest confrontation
is not the cause of the revolutionary chnnge in Nicaragua and of the struggles of the
peoples of El Salvador and Guatemala, as has so often
been claimed.

12. When our revolution triumphed, notwithstanding
the historical inconsistency of United States policy,
we felt -and indeed proposed-that
it was necessary
to normalize relations with the United States within a
new framework of respect and co-operation. It was in
this spirit that I met in Washington in September 1980
with President Carter, and we must acknowledge
that an effective dialogue then became possible. This
mutual disposition to read.just and improve relations
between Nicaragua and the United States underwent a
sharp change when, in January 1981, the new Administration assumed the presidency of the United States.

IX. As I pointed out in my address at the thirty-sixth
session of the General Assembly,’ no one can cast
doubt on the fact that the true causes of the struggle
in Central America were present there even before the
Bolsheviks seized power in Tsarist Russia. Nor can
there be any doubt that even before, as far back as
IY12. the United States was pursuing the erroneous
policy that was manifested in Nicaragua by the armed
intervention of its Marines, which met with the heroic
resistance of our people.

13. The new United States Administration
at this
point had to face the reality of a triumphant revolution
in Nicaragua
and the determination
of oppressed
peoples in El Salvador and Guatemala fighting for farreaching changes that were needed in all sectors. It
was a grave responsibility for the new Administration,
which, in its electoral platform throughout its campaign. had proclaimed, among other things, courses of
action aimed at destroying the revolutionary
process
in Nicaragua and halting, at all costs, the process of
change in the Central American region--a policy that

19. The cause of the crisis in the region is so c!etu
and the response on the part of the United States SO
weak and misguided that Governments such as those
of Mexico, Venezuela and Canada have proposed a
2

I

..‘.

L

gll~L~i11and nun-di~criminutory
programme
to permit ;\
joint
resp’onse
in the economic
field that would help
allcviutc
the social nnd political
conflicts
stemming
h-am economic
injustices.
This initiative
has not been
I;&CII LIP i\S it should hVe
heen by the United States,
which
has in fact pursued
ii unilatera],
limited
:lnd
e\.elusionary
policy that has excluded
Grenada,
Cuba
and Nicaragtra,
thus weakening
the efforts promoted
by the Governments
1 havt~ mentioned
rind making it
impossible
to respond
to the urgent request
of the
CL”ntri\l American
countries
for a minimum
of $20 bitlicln in financing
and credits
in order to be :tble to
.r~wvivc over the next five years.

men and women who in the United States Congress
are making great efforts to prevent the intervention:
because 1 share the legitimate
concern of the most
important
nnd high-minded
mass media of the United
States. nnd that of the United States people:
those
ordinary citizens. their religious leaders and those of
their civic organizations,
their intellectuals
and thei]
trade unions, who reject another Viet Nam in theit
history and share the desire of the Nicaraguan
people
for peace, for both are peoples whose deep-seated
historical
memories
contain images of intervention
and of the agonies of war.

20.
Wc ci\n affirm nt this time that the policy of the
pl-csent United States Administration
is still out of step
with the realities
in the region and that, despite what
some
had predicted.
the threats
made against the
rcpiun
in the Government’s
platform
were not mere
campaign
rhetoric
hut are increasingly
becoming
a

28. We have requested this meeting for serious and
extremely urgent reasons, and not to make use of this
forum to hurl insults at the United States Government.
We wish to make every effort that we are morally
obliged to make to avoid a conflagration
with untold
consequences
for the Central American
region and
which could endanger world peace.

dreadfnl

fwt,

29. I want to say to you with the utmost sincerity
nnd simplicity,
and with the moral support
of OUI
entire people, that if our fervent efforts for Peace
should fail. neither imperial will, nor threats, nor blockades. nor invasions will be able to put an end to the
historic struggle we are prepared to wage to safeguard
our legitimate
right to self-determination,
fighting
to
the last man and shedding the last drop of our blood.
Hut it is not confrontation
that we desire, but peace and
tranquillity:
that is why we have come here before
you.

21.
The waging
of covert
aggression
against our
revolution
has now intcnsificd
the crisis to the point
at which
the imminence
of intervention
in Central
;\meric:\
has cumpcllcd
us to request a meeting of the
C’c>rlncil.
3-l
&I-.
I can only affirm that since my ilpptX~rNlce before
thir Gcncrul
Assembly
at its thirty-sixth
session, in
the course
of which
we transmitted
concrete
peace
proposals
from
the Sulvodoran
revolutionaries,
the
crisis situation
in Central America
has assumed greatel
dimensions.
and numerous
efforts to bring peace and
political
stuhility
to tht region have been thwarted.

or to set out a
30. We are not here to enumerate
chronological
list of all the aggressive and destabilizing actions promoted
by the Government
of the
United States from the very moment
the present
Administration
took office. We shall confine ourselves
to a brief review of the main events that have taken
place in the last few months, events which paint a
picture enabling us to assert that the intervention
in
Central America is already under way.

23.
It is lxxx~se
of the dynamic
of these developments
thnt 1 have found myself obliged
to appear
]>cfc)rc you to warn the nations of the earth that the
C’cntri\I
American
crisis has now reached the point of
iI tragic explosion.
24.
I find nlysclfohligcd
to appear before you because
<>f the growing
concern
of world public opinion
ovel
the uncertain
course of cvcnts in Ccntrnl America.

3 I. Therefore.
we want you to know of the existence
in the state of Florida, on the territory
of the United
States itself, of training camps for Somozist
counterrevolutionaries,
and of the feeble, legalistic
excuses
offered by the United States authorities
when we have
demanded
the dismantling
of those camps,
which
violate the Neutrality
Act that is part of United States

2s.
1 have come before this body because Nicaragua
has military
pacts with no one. because we cannot
conceive
that the insensitivity
of the United States
Administration
towi\rds
the region’s
need for change
should
spark off :I crisis of global proportions,
and
btX;luse
WC do not want the just struggle of our Peoples incorporaled,
by unilateral
action.
into the geoPolitic:11 cnlculations
of grand world strategies.

law.

32. We want you to know of the existence
of Somozist counterrevoIution2u.y
camps on the territory
of the Republic
of Honduras
in the vicinity
of the
border with Nicaragua,
where some 2.000 counterrevolutionaries
have been brought
together,
and
tr;\ined, supplied and armed by officials of the operations section of the Division of Hemisphere
Affairs
of the Central
Intelligence
Agency (CIA).
In this
regard, despite the public statements
made by the
Honduran
Government
concerning
its position
Of neLI-

26.
I come to appeal to this United
Nations
body
bccause we cannot :bcccpt OLII‘ being left with no alternative but to die defending
our country.
as we would
never allow uu~~selve~to be subjugilted
by force.
27. 1 find myself obliged
cause I +,hure the legitimate

to appear before you beconcern of the responsible
3

trality, actions by the CIA to compromise
trality have become increasingly forceful.

that neu-

the opposite--that
is. he was forced to invent a story
in an nttempt to implicate Nicaragua.

33. We want you to know that in the last five months
alone. these armed bands of Somozist counterrevolutionaries operating from Honduras have penetrated
our territory, devastating the communities
of Raiti,
Alamicamba.
Tuskrutara
Siki-Yari in the northern
zone of the Department
of Zelayn: they have also
penetrated El Espino, El Cuadro and Las Brisas in the
Departments
of Chinnndega
and Nueva Segovia,
leaving a tragic toll of 67 dead and 20 wounded among
civilian and military personnel,

38. We want you to know that in recent days there
hiIs been an increase in aggressive acts on the part
of naval units of Honduras and El Salvador again\1
Nicaraguan fishing vessels, leaving a toll of two Nicaraguans dead and one wounded.
39. These actions have taken place mainly in the
Gulf of Fonsecn, as a result of the campaign of false
accusations about purported traffic in weapons from
Nicaragua to El Salvador along this route-a cnmpaign which has contributed to an increase of bordc~
tensions in these waters.

34. Today, at 1.30 a.m., an attack was launched
from Honduran territory on the Nicaraguan frontier
post of El Espino. That aggression resulted in the
burning of the Nicaraguan customs warehouses. Then,
at 4.30 a.m. today, counterrevolutionary
bands coming
from Honduran
territory
attacked the Nicaraguan
frontier post at El Sacatdn, eight kilometres northe:tst of Cinco Pines in the Department of Chinandega.

40. We must also mention the provocation which
occurred on 21 March, when four Super-Mist;]-e aircraft of the Honduran Air Force attacked a Nicaraguan
vessel that was carrying out marine resources monitoring and protection activities in Nicaragua’s tcrritorial waters. It seems inconceivable
that official
spokesmen of the Department of State would hasten
to take the side in this incident of the Honduran Army.
instead of adopting a prudent stance of non-intcrfcrence in order to contribute to a lessening of tension
belween Honduras and Nicaragua.

35. Therefore. we want you to know that in the Honduran Department of El Para~so, on the border with
Nicaragua, about 700 Somozist ex-guardsmen have
been concentrated in several camps: that in the zone
of C:\camuyn there are another 60 counterrevolutionaries: and that in the Department of Lempira on the
Honduran Atlantic coast and on the Nicaraguan border there are located several camps of Somozist countel.revolutionaries
numbering more than 1,000 men.
Since IS March this year, these camps have been
receiving an increasing supply of arms and war equipment, including hundreds of FAL and M-16 rifles,
demolition
and fragmentation
grenades, grenadelaunchers and explosives.

4 I. YOU should also know that the United States has
made the decision to construct on Honduran territory
both air and naval bases, the first of them on Amapala
Island: and a treaty has been proposed to be signed
in the next few days legalizing the United States military presence on Honduran territory. This development, so unfortunate for peace and security in the
Central American region, is a premeditated result of
the continuous campaign which has been launched
against our country about an alleged Nicaraguan military buildup.

36. We want you to know that several days ago a
documentary
was shown on a United States television newscast in which United States and Argentine
officials were shown-many
of the Argentines recently having been discharged by their country’s
army-training
Somozist counterrevolutionaries
and
Latin American mercenaries in Honduras.

42. You should also know that the United States
Embassy in Tegucigalpa officially acknowledged on
the 19th of this month that a minimum of 72 United
States military
personnel are currently stationed in
Honduras. This is an unprecedented number in thilt
country.

37. We want you to know that on Friday, I9 March,
Mr. Noel Ernest0 Vtisquez Gutiirrez asked for asylum
in the Nicaraguan Embassy in Honduras and was subsequently seized and forcibly removed from the protection of our Embassy and abducted by Honduran
authorities. Mr. VBsquez was able to announce through
that country’s mass media that he had been recruited
in California
to enter the service of the Somozist
coilnter’revolution~lry
groups that were operating
freely in Honduras, and that in the places he had visited he wus able to count as many as 22 Argentine
military men, led by Colonel Santiago Villegas. engaged in conspiratorial
activities against Nicaragua.
Now. in ;I crude and discredited manoeuvre, the same
person h;rs been presented on an official television
programme of the Honduran armed forces saying just

43. The United
States Navy destroyer C’trr.c)f?.
equipped with sophisticated electronic espionage technology. has been stationed off Nicaragua’s Pacific
coast facing the Gulf of Fonseca, carrying out SWveillance tasks, as the United States Government has
publicly acknowledged.
44. We also want you to know about the visits to
Latin America at the end of February and the beginning of March by Mr. Thomas 0. Enders, aimed
ut orgunizing what is supposed to be an inter-American
peace force ready to intervene in the area.
4.S. We want you to know that when United States
newspapers,
magazines and other media publish
4

reports that the United States National Security Council hns approved a budget of $19 million to promote
destnbilizing
and covet-t actions that entail, among
other things. economic sabotage, attacks, training and
nptns shipments to Somozist counterrevolutionary
Groups, not ;I single spokesman or authority of the
united States Government has denied such reports.
Indeed, on the contrary, those who have referred to
them have wrapped them in doubt or given them an
~~ffirmntive character. Furthermore,
after these disclosures were made we began to feel the actual carrying
out of terrorist actions: bombs aboard our passenger
aircraft and in civilian airports, with a tragic toll of
death nnd injury; destruction of bridges: and the
resurgence of actions by counterrevolutionary
gangs,
such as the so-called “Red Christmas”
operation
along the RIO Coca River, which took the lives of
60 of our compatriots. who were murdered.

evidence of ;I Nicaraguan arms buildup. they were
officially
acknowledging
espionage
against Nicaraguan territory. This so-called arms buildup by Nicaruguu has been disproved in the light of the military
realities of the region.
51. Our military resources are the most modest in the
region. We have no air force. Nevertheless. it is Nical-agua
which is being encircled with military bases und
it is against Nicaragua that a permanent hostile and
bellicose attitude is being aimed, with spy aircraft and
vessels und naval manoeuvres. We are the only State
in Central America over which hangs the constant
threat of the world military might of the United States.
52. The only true military superiority for the defence
of our homeland lies in the formidable combative und
organizational
readiness of our entire people, since we
are the only Government in Central America that can.
in ~111confidence, distribute weapons to the people.

46.
We want you to know that since 14 March, exercises have been going on in the Southern Command
in the Panama Canal Zone in which forces from United
States territory and the 1931-dInfantry Brigade of that
Sitme Command are taking part, and that within the
fI-amework of the OAS, pressures are being exerted
to obtain a resolution that would legalize intervention
:&ainst El Salvador and Nicaragua.

53. We want you to know that the Department of
State of the United States, in a puerile gesture aimed
at accumulating
any sort of evidence which could
justify interventionist
action against Nicaragua, presented to the United States press at the State Department on I2 March a Nicaraguan, Orlando Josh
Tardencillas.
who had been held prisoner by the Salvadoran Army for more than a year and who had been
transferred from the dungeons of San Salvador to the
offices of the State Department in an act without precedent in terms of violation of international
juridical
norms relating to the minimum respect due to the sovereignty and independence of the Salvadoran nation.

47.
We want you to know that from June 1981 until
I 1 March of this year, we were the victims of 40 violations of our airspace by RC-135 aircraft of the United
States Air Force. The violations of our airspace which
have been detected arc: one on 28 July 1981: two on
3 and 25 August 1981: four on 4, I I, 17 and 25 September 1981: 10 on 2, 9, 13, 17, 20, 22, 24, 25, 28 and
30 October 1981: IO on 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, IO, 12, I4 and
16 November
1981--on the 7th of that month two
flights were detected: two on 2 and 30 December 198 I:
one on 3 January 1982: six on 2, 4, IO, 16, 24 and
27 February 1982: and four up to I I March 1982, the
flights occurring on the 4th, 8th, 10th and 11th of this
month.

54. United States citizens should ask themselves
whether these events do not contain serious violntions of their own laws: participation
and complicity
in the kidnapping of a person: pressure and threats
to force someone to lie and make statements against
his own will: threats to 21 person’s life and physical
integrity: concealment and complicity in coercion and
physicul and mental torture.

48. All those flights were carried out over the Pacific
coast of Nicaragua and along our borders with Honduras and Costa Rica, and it seems highly significant
thtlt IO of them took place in October and IO others
in November
1981, precisely when both President
Reagan and Mr. Haig were voicing the possibility of
decisive and immediate military actions against Nic:ltagua.

55. We want you to know that, on 14 March. at
2244 hours, two bridges strategic for the defence und
communications
of the country were blown up in acts
of sabotage: the bridge over the Rio Negro, which was
totally destroyed, and the bridge over the Rio Coca.
which suffered considerable structural damage making
the passage of vehicles impossible.

49. On the basis of what norms of international law
does the United Stntes Government claim the right to
conduct espionage against our country and violate
our airspace?

56. Both bridges are in Departments bordering on
Honduras,
and these criminal actions demonstrate
once nguin the implementation
of the covert actions of
the CIA, approved by the State Department. These
assertions of ours were amply confirmed by Presidential Adviser Mr, Edwin Meese. who, when asked
on I6 March by United States journalists if the destruction of the bridges meant that the covert plan
had been put into operation. replied: “This is the kind
of event which we cun neither confirm nor deny under

50. We want you to know that when the Deputy
Director of the CIA, Admiral Bobby Inmnnn, and the
Deputy Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency
of the Pentagon, Mr. John Hughes, presented to the
media and public opinion of the United States alleged
5

any circumstances. because in either case we cannot
rule out what we could be doing in any other situation.” And the picture becomes even more serious
if we recall that on IS February President Reagan,
when asked by Tlrv Wtr.vhin,ytotl Post about approval
of plans for foreign covert political and paramilitary
operations
in Nicaragua,
instead of categorically
denying the existence of such actions, refused any
comment on the subject.

peace in the Central American and Caribbean region
made resolutely and in a true Latin American spirit
by the President of Mexico, JosC L6pez Portillo, on
2 1 February at Managua, the capital of Nicaragua.
64. This global proposal considers as indispensable
parties to the search for a proper response to the
Central American situation the United States, the
warring parties in El Salvador, Cuba and Nicaragua.
This has been welcomed by the Cuban Revolutionary
Government,
by the revolutionaries of the Farabundo
Mart] Front for National Liberation (FMLN) and the
Revolutionary
Democratic Front (FDR) of El Salvador.
and by the Government of National Reconstruction
of Nicaragua.

57. Furthermore,
a veteran of the United States
Army’s “Green Berets” who fought in the Viet Nam
war told the CBS network that his former Special
Forces Chief hud tried to recruit him to participate
in mercenary operations in Nicaragua on a $50.000,
six-month contract and that many ex-“Green Berets”
were already at their point of destination.

65. Since that time, the United States Government
has entered into a period of meetings with representatives of the Mexican Government. After a round of
meetings with the Mexican Foreign Minister, Mr, Jorge
Castaneda, Mr. Alexander Haig made public a fivepoint proposal aimed at initiating conversations with
Nicaragua
following
the elections scheduled fol
28 March in El Salvador.

58. We want you to know that, already in the month
of November
1981, the Southern Command of the
United States with headquarters in the Panama Canal
Zone had completed an electronic encirclement of our
country to monitor and control, and even distort or
cut off, all communications
in our national territory.
In this operation without precedent in Central America, Phantom
A-4C reconnaissance
aircraft were
employed, as well as AWACS and RC-135s.

66. The very fact that the United States has made
public its willingness to negotiate with Nicaragua on
the basis of these points could be considered an encouraging element, but it turns out to be contradictory
because, as I have been trying to demonstrate throughout this exposition, the aggressive and destabilizing
actions undertaken against Nicaragua by the United
States Administration
have been increasing dramatically.

59. We also want you to know that since October
1981 I in camps situated in the eastern sector of the
Panama Canal Zone, three companies made up of
Somozist ex-guardsmen began receiving training in
paratroop landings and the use of explosives from
“Green Beret” instructors of the United States Army.
General Wallace Nutting, Chief of the Southern Command, has visited these camps.

67. It is our obligation to state before the Council
that in the days immediately
preceding and following
28 Mwch, the date set for the elections in El Salvador.
predictions regarding the imminence of an intervention are more than justified; and on the basis of the
events that have been described, we must assert that
although the United States is making public its willingness to enter into negotiations, it has already before
that date begun to develop the alternative, aggression,

60. Similarly,
the Panama Canal Zone, under the
authority of the Southern Command, is being used by
the Argentine Army as a stopover point in an air
bridge between Buenos Aires and San Salvador to
transport the Argentine Air Brigade, as well as advisers, equipment
and weapons. In the last foul
months, more than 45 flights of this kind have been
carried out. At Fort Gullick, 20 Argentine advisers
are training Salvadoran special troops.

68. Apart from those considerations, the five points
announced by Mr. Haig do not constitute a global
approach to the problem, so as to search for and find
realistic solutions. This proposal fails to take into
account the fact that the fundamental problem of the
crisis in Central America does not lie in the neverproven allegation that arms are reaching the Salvndoran revolutionaries
via Nicaragua, while on the
other hand the United States is indeed supplying arms,
aircraft. helicopters, advisers, technical support and
accelerated military training to the Salvadoran army.
It is imperative, on the contrary, to accept responsibly
that the causes of the phenomenon lie in the injustice
that reigns in El Salvador, and that therefore it is
urgent to find by means of negotiation an outcome
that deals with the possibilities of the wholesale transformation demanded by Salvi\down society.

61. Those are the fundamental
elements that have
compelled us, beginning on 15 March, to adopt exceptional measures for the defence of the integrity and
sovereignty
of our homeland, decreeing a state of
national emergency.
62. But, at the same time as these aggressive actions
have been carried out, it is only fair to acknowledge
and support the efforts made over the last few months
by the Governments of Mexico and France with a view
to seeking a political solution to the crisis of the Central
American area.
63. In addition to these efforts, there has been i\ consistent proposal for global negotiations in pursuit of
6

75. Finally. I should like to sum up this intervention
with concrete points that have been voiced before.
both when I appeared before the General Assembly
at its thirty-sixth session, in October 1981 ?I and in the
proposals made by the Sandinista National
Liheration Front before the Permanent Conference of Latin
American Political Parties. which met in Managua on
I9 February 1982. Those points are as follows.

69. It is, however. inconceivable
that the country
that is carrying out the greatest arms buildup and
spending the most money on weaponry in the history
of mankind should seek to demand of us that we fail
to fulfil the minimum requirements for the defence of
our country. Nicaragua rejects the attempt by the
United States to impose humiliating
restrictions on
its inescapable prerogatives with respect to national
defence, We are certain that no sovereign State in the
world would accept such a thing. This position is all
the more un.justified since Nicaragua, as a revolutionary country, has categorically proclaimed that it will
never use its arms against any brother country in Latin
America or the Caribbean. We take this opportunity
to reiterate this commitment,
as well as our willingness to sign non-aggression treaties and agreements
with all the countries of the region.

76. First, neither Nicaragua nor any of the countries
of the Central American region and the Caribbean cun
be considered as a geopolitical preserve of the United
States or as part of its so-called “strategic frontier”.
a concept that restricts the exercise of our sovereignty
and independence.
77. Secondly, Nicaragua can therefore in no way
represent a threat to the security of the United States.
We are a small country, a dignified and poor country
that pursues a policy of international
non-alignment.
The national interests of the people and nation of the
United States should not be confused with the particular policy of the present Administration,
which is
trying to make its own points of view prevail even nt
the cost of the peace, security and tranquillity not only
of its own citizens but of a whole complex of countries which, like our own, have II right to determine
their own destiny.

70.

We feel that we are all obliged to find a solution
confronting the region through negotiated political means and never to consider the possibility of negotiations being exhausted. We believe
that all efforts must be focused on finding responses
that are in keeping with reality and that would allow
us to begin negotiations immediately,
discarding preconditions of any kind.
to the problems

71.

We want you to know that the Government of
United States has turned the Salvadoran parliamentary elections- one more of those elections on our
continent sponsored by military elites-into
something that is. ridiculously
enough, crucial to its own
interests. But the extreme tension resulting from the
confrontation of the forces in conflict in that country
at the time of the elections must not lead the United
States Government to impose the response of armed
intervention. especially in the foreseeable event of the
elections’ failure, On the contrary, such circumstances
must confirm the urgent need for a political solution
by means of negotiations.
the

78. Thirdly, we are willing to improve the climate of
relations with the United States on the basis of mutual
respect and unconditional
recognition of 0111’ right to
self-determination.
79. Fourthly, we are willing to begin immediately
direct and frank conversations with the Government
of the United States, even in a mutually agreed-upon
third country, with the objective of reaching concrete
results through such negotiations.
80. Fifthly. the Salvadoran patriots of the Furabundo
Mart1 Liberation Front and the Revolutionary
Democratic Front have authorized us to transmit their wiliingness to begin immediate negotiations without preconditions, once more reiterating the call they made
through me when I addressed the General Assembly
at its thirty-sixth session.’

72, The peoples of the region demand a negotiated
political solution: United States public opinion demands a negotiated political solution: the peoples of
Latin America and good Governments call for a negotiated political solution: the peoples and Governments of the world are expecting a negotiated political
solution.

81.

73.

We do not wish to see ourselves forced to resist
and struggle to prevail over foreign intervention,
with
the vigour that peoples acquire when they are invaded,
the same vigour that enabled the Americans to win
their independence in 1776.

Sixthly,

the Revolutionary
Government of Cuba
me to communicate to the Council its
also to begin negotiations immediately.

has nuthorized

willingness

82. Seventhly, the Government
of National Reconstruction of Nicaragua, the Government of Cuba and
the Salvadoran
patriots of the Farabundo
Marti
National Liberation Front and the Democratic Revolutionary Front back the initiative for negotiations proposed by the President of Mexico. Jose Lopez Portillo, on 21 February in Managun.

74. We have not come here to level accusations, but
rather to demand an end, once and for all, to the
policy of aggressions, threats, interventions,
covert
operations and invasions against our homeland and
the region, and to make it clear that the unfairly distributed resources of humanity on this planet do not
give the powerful the right to act against weak and
SIllall peoples.

to
83. Eighthly. Nicaragua is willing immediately
sign non-aggression pacts with all neighbouring coun7

from the representative of Argentina in which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the agenda. In confol’mity with the t~sual
practice. I propose. with the consent of the Council,
to invite that representative to participate in the discussion without the right to vote. in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,

tries of the Central American region. in order to ensure
the peace and internal stability of the zone.
X4. Ninthly.
Nicaragua is obliged to reject the
attempt by the United States to impose humiliating
restrictions on its invioinble and sovereign prerogatives regarding national defence.
8.5. We demand. on the other hand, that the Government of the United States immediately
put a halt to
every measure and covert plan among the many
which have been announced and denounced but which
have never been denied officially: to secret destabilizntion plans and the organization and financing of
paramilitary
forces advised and trained by United
States military personnel stationed in Honduras and
by active and retired military personnel from Argentina and other South American countries.

00. The PREZSIDENT: I shall now make 21statement
in my capacity as the representative of the UNITED
STATES.
91. In his letter requesting the convening of this
meeting [S/149/3], the Co-ordinator of the Nicaraguan
Government,
Mr, Daniel Ortega Saavedra. made some
extraordinary
charges against the Government of the
United States. We naturally desire to respond to the
grave charges that Mr. Ortegn has levelled against our
policies and our intentions and to comment on the state
of relations between our two countries.

86. We demand that it put a stop to the use of Honduran territory as a base for armed aggression and
terrorist operations against our homeland: put a stop to
the traffic in arms and counterrevolutionaries
between
the territory of the United States and Honduras: put
;I stop to the existence of counterrevolutionary
military training camps on United States territory, mainly
in Florida: put a stop to the participation of the United
States intelligence community in the financing, training
and organizing of forces and clandestine plans against
our homeland: put a stop to the presence of United
States warships in the waters of Central America and
off the coasts of Nicaragua; put a stop to overflights
by spy-planes violating the airspace of Nicaragua;
and that the United States Government officially and
explicitly
voice its commitment
not to attack Nicaragua, nor to initiate or promote any direct, indirect
or covert intervention in Central America.

92. The essence of Mr. Ortega’s complaint is that
the United States is about to launch a large-scale military intervention
against his country. Thus he wrote.
in the letter in which he requested this meeting, of an
“ever-increasing
danger of a large-scale military
intervention
by the armed forces of the United
States of America [which] constitutes a grave threat
to the independence and sovereignty of the Central
American countries and to international peace and
security.”

87. Nicaragua calls on the Security Council to issue
an explicit pronouncement,
in line with the Charter of
the United Nations, regarding the obligation to seek by
peaceful means iI solution to the problems of the Centr;\I American region and the Caribbean, and calls on
the Council to re.ject all acts of force or threats and to
repudiate any direct, indirect or covert intervention
in Ccntrnl America.

strategy” of
93. He spoke of the “interventionist
the Government
of the United States and of statements and “concrete actions that clearly evidence an
intention to attack Nicaragua and to intervene directly
in El Salvador.”
94. To support his charges, Mr. Ortega charges us
with the “systematic repetition of. . . aggressive statements [which) seriously affects the normal conduct
of international
relations . . .“, and with “bellicose
statements”
as well. The United States actions,
Mr. Ortegn asserts, violate the Charter, the principles
and goals of the United Nations and constitute il
“grave threat to the independence and sovereignty
of the Central American countries and to international
peace and security”.

8X. In memory of the millions of people killed in wws
throughout history: in memory of the millions tortured and murdered in the Nazi concentration camps
in the Second World War: in memory of the thousands of patriots who fell in the struggles for liberation and against colonialism,
racism and all kinds of
in memory of the Central American
oppression;
patriots who have fallen in the fight for independence,
justice and peace. for the right of peoples to be free,
sovereign and independent, for the right of humanity
to desire peace and to demand peace-let
there be
peace in Central America,

95. The attack made by Nicaragua on the United
States is not haphazard: the charges made by the
Government
of Nicaragua are not random. The Government of Nicaragua has accused the United States
of the kinds of political behaviour of which it is itself
guilty-large-sc~~le
interventions in the internal affairs
of its neighbours, persistent efforts to subvert and

80. The PRESIDENT:
1 should like to inform membr:rh of the C’ouncil that I have just received a letter
8

overthrow by force and violence the Governments of
n~i~hhouring
States, aggressive actions which disrupt
the normal conduct of international
relations in the
r’bion-acts
and intentions
inconsistent
with the
c‘h :\rter of the United Nations.
96.
These charges, as extravagant as they are bnseless. are an interesting example of projection, a psychological operation in which one’s own feelings and
jntentions
are simultaneously
denied and attributed
t-that
is, projected on to-someone
else.
97.
Hostility is the dominant emotion and projection
the key mechanism of the paranoid style of politics,
;I Style which, much to our regret, has characterized
the political behaviour of the Sandinista leadership
since its arrival in power. The principal object of Sandinista hostility, I further regret, is the Government
und people of the United States.
98.
Nicaragua’s new political dlite-which
calls itself
Sandinista-has
constructed :I historical myth to justify its demand for full power. According to this myth,
the United States is responsible for all problems and
disasters-natul.al
and social-that
Nicaragua has eve1
suffered. The Sandinista anthem describes us as the
enemy
of mankind and Sandinista ideology defines
US ils implacably opposed to the nutional independence and economic development of everyone and to
Peace in the world. Since the moment of their arrival
in power, the Sandinistas have predicted that the
United States was about to overrun them. The Yankees
are coming, they have reiterated: the counterrevolutionaries
will get us if we do not silence criticism,
mobilize the population into armies, destroy freedom.
99.
The familiar totalitarinn
assertion that one is
surrounded
by enemies both internal and external has
been heard again and again to justify the elimination of
opponents
and the concentration of power in a tiny,
one-party ilite.
100,
In the past two and one-half years, Nicaragua’s
hopes for greater freedom. democracy and security
from government tyranny have very nearly died as the
new rulers have moved expertly, first to establish and
then. progressively, to exercise control over the various sectors and institutions in Nicaraguan society.
The extension and consolidation
of power have followed the pattern of “coup &&tat by instalments”,
to
use Konrad Heiden’s apt description of the Nazi
seizure of near-total power in German society.
lOI.
One step at a time, the Sandinista directorate
hns rnoved against the faint-hearted
“bourgeois”
democrats
in their ranks. One sector at a time, they
have moved against Nicarnguan society-now
seizing
radio and television
stations and newspapers. now
n;ttion:Jizing
new industries. now tightening control
of the economy, now moving bkgainst independent
tl-:lde unions. now banning a bishop from access to
television,
now organizing and reinforcing the Sandi-

nistu defence committees that bring the revolution.
with its demand. rewards and surveillance. into every
neighbourhood
of Nicaragua.
102. Alongside it all came ;I dramatic, extraordinary expansion of Nicaragua’s army and of its international role. Today the militia of Nicnrnguu is many
times the size and strength of the one that reinforced
Somoza’s rt?gime, and it reinforces a political mnchine
many times more sophisticated than Somoza’s.
103. A political scientist describing the Nazis’ consolidation of power in a single German town, ThaIburg,
noted, concerning that process of destruction of society and politicization
of human relations:
“Hardly anyone in Thalburg in those days grasped
what was happening. There was no real comprehension of what the town would experience if Hitlel
came to power, no real understanding
of what
nazism was.”
It is no easier to understand what is happening today
in Nicaragua.
But it is clear that at each stnge. the
Government’s
demands for increased power have
been accompanied by new charges concerning enemies
without and within.
104. We are confronted in Nicaragua with the farniliar patterns of doublespeak with which totalitarian
and would-be totalitarian
rulers of our times assault
reality in the attempt to persuade us. and doubtless
themselves as well, that making war is seeking peace,
that repression is liberation, that a free press is 11very
carefully controlled one, Thus, on I9 February, Commander Ortega, whom we have just heard, solemnly
assured the opening session of an international
conference-the
Standing Conference of Latin American
Political Parties-that
the forced. violent transfer of
Meskito Indians was naturally carried out only to
protect their human rights.
10.3. In their statement of 18 February. Nicaragua’s
bishops described those forced relocations as involving “grave violations of the human rights of individuals. families and entire populations of peoples.”
These include, said Nicaragua’s bishops,
“relocations
of individuals
by military operations
without warning and without conscientious dialogue:
forced marches, carried out without sufficient consideration for the weak, aged, women and children:
charges or accusations of collaboration
with the
counterrevolution
against all residents of certain
towns; the destruction of houses, belongings and
domestic animals; the deaths of individuals in circumstances that. to our greut sorrow, remind us of
the drum;\ of other l~!oplcs of c)t~t’ region.”
!OG. Ciiven this pattern of’ rcplcshic)n. ol+uscation
:md churgcs. it should. 1 suppose,
hiivc
come as no
surprise when, last week, Commander Cjrtega levelled

new charges against the United States Government
at precisely the same time that Nicaragua suspended
its Constitution
and promulgated a new Law of National Emergency which threatens to eliminate the
limited liberty and pluralism that remain in that country. That new Law of National Emergency provides
that all discussions in the Sandinista-controlled
Council of State of the proposed media and political parties
laws be suspended. It provides that the Minister of
Interior may make an unspecified number of preventive arrests of people who are suspected of having
ties with counterrevolutionaries.
Under that decree,
Radio Cat&lica has been closed down indefinitely and
all radio news programmes, except official news statements. are prohibited. The one remaining independent
newspaper in Nicaragua--Lo
Prcn.vrr-and all other
media have been required to submit their news stories
for prior censorship. Yesterday it proved impossible
for Lrr Pwnso to publish, since more than 50 per cent
of the paper was found objectionable.

I II.
We might have hoped-in
fact, we did hopethut support from the United States would alter the
Sundinista leadership’s hostility to our Government.
Alas. it had no such effect. By its words and deeds.
the United States Government-the
Congress and [he
executive branch alike-demonstrated
not only it\
respect for the sovereignty of the Nicaraguan politic;rJ
process and the right of Nicaraguans to determine
their own Government, but also our concrete. effective
desire to give a boost to Nicaragua’s new Government,
to help it overcome the devastation of civil war. Unfortunately,
Sandinista ideology overcame the reality
of United States assistance. The fact of United S[atrr
support for economic reconstruction
and nntiumr!
independence proved less powerful in the minds of
Nicaragua’s
leadership than the stereotype: we remained the Yankee enemy of mankind,
112. Like others in this century who have seized
power by force, the Sandinista leaders are haunted by
the expectation that they will fall victim to the violent
intrigues by which they won power and exercise it.
They are haunted by the fear that their neighbour\
will in fact treat them in the manner in which they
systematically
treat their neighbours.

107. Under the new Law of Emergency, opposition
political leaders have been informed that they may
not leave the country. The passport of one was seized
when he attempted to make a routine trip abroad.
Under the new law, a “patriotic tax” is to be imposed
on businesses to help finance its latest mobilization
campaign.

113. It is, of course. they, the Government of Nicaragua, who systematically seek to subvert and overthrow neighbouring
Governments.
El Salvador has
had the misfortune to be the principal target,

108. Thus the dialectic of revolution unfolds in Nicaragua: liberation has already produced its antithesis
in Sandinista Nicaragua. Old, familiar arguments are
invoked to justify new, more effective repression.

114. A clandestine support system established in
1978 at the time of the Nicaraguan civil war continued
to operate after the fall of Somoza in July 1979 with
a new final destination: El Salvador, The existence of
this support system has been repeatedly and vigorously denied by Nicaraguan and Cuban spokesmen.
Yet it is perfectly clear that those denials are fulsc.

109. Nicaragua’s new Government could have satisfied the longings of its people for peace instead of
making war on them; it could also have accepted the
United States’ offer of friendship. It did not need to be
thus. The United States Government did not, in fact,
oppose the Sandinista rise to power and it has not
attempted to prevent their consolidation of power,

11.5. Nicaragua offers a support system with thrcs
major components: external arms supplies, training,
and command and control. Within weeks after the
fall of the Somoza Government in July 1979, the Sun.
dinistas began to co-operate in the support of the Sal*
vadoran insurgents by establishing training camps rind
the beginning of an arms supply network. This chm
destine assistance initially involved local black markets and relatively limited resources. In 1980, irfter
meetings in Havana had unified Salvadoran MarXists
into u single military command structure, the Sandinista leadership agreed to serve as a conduit for afl
arms trafficking system of unprecedented proportions.
originating outside of this hemisphere. That structure
remains in place today.

1 IO. Quite the contrary: with our help, the Government of Nicaragua received more loans in two years
from the International
Development
Bank than the
Somoza Government received in any decade, During
the first 18 months of the existence of the Government of Nicaragua, the Government
of the United
States provided more economic assistance to Nicarngun than any other Government did. The fact that
the United States Government gave the Sandinistas
moral and political support in crucial phases of the civil
war, cut off their opponents’ supply of arms, ammunition and gasoline, and negotiated the resignations of
Somoza and Urcuyo did not affect the Sandinista
leadership’s
view of the United States’ attitudes,
Neither did the $75-million
supplemental
aid bill
rushed through the Congress to assist in the job of
reconstruction,
or our continued active support for
Nicaragua’s credit applications in multilateral
lending
institutions.

I 16, Arms and ammunition for the Salvadoran insurgents reach Nicaragua by ship, and occasionally bY
direct flights from Havana to Nicaragua. Three Nicaraguan ships, the Monirnho, the AI’NL’cI~ and the h%wTLIO, frequently
transport arms and ammunition
(Q
Nicaragua from Cuba in their cargo. Salvadoran guerrills headquarters near Managua arranges for their
IO

I
z
I->

shipment into El Salvador. The timing of the resupply
operations is co-ordinated
with the planned level of
fighting. since before each surge in the fighting it is
possible to detect new large arms deliveries.
117. When a clandestine shipment of arms is captured or a safe house is found containing arms and
terrorist supplies, it is often impossible to know with
certainty whether the ultimate recipients are destined
Lo be Guatemalan,
Honduran, Costa Rican or Salvadoran. since the arms supply networks established by
Cuba and Nicaragua
are funnelling lethal military
supplies to guerrillas and terrorists in all four countries.
118. A few examples chosen from among dozens
will illustrate these clandestine smuggling techniques
and routes.
119. Look first at the air flow. The Papalonal airfield
provides a clear case of the direct airlift of weapons
from Nicaragua to guerrillas in El Salvador. Papalonal
is a commercially
undeveloped area 23 nautical miles
north-west of Managua, accessible only by dirt roads.
In lute July 1980, the airfield was an agricultural dirtstrip approximately
800 metres long, but by early 1981
the strip was lengthened by 50 per cent to approximately 1.200 metres. A turnaround was added to each
end. A dispersal parking area with three hardstands
-a feature typical of a military airfield-was
constructed at the west end of the runway. Three parking
aprons were cleared and six hangar and storage
buildings were constructed on the aprons. The hangars were used to stockpile arms for the Salvadoran
guerrillas. Flights of C-47s from the air base corresponded with sightings in El Salvador, and several
pilots were identified in Nicaragua who regularly flew
the route into EY Salvador. This particular route was
closed by March 198 I, but some air infiltration continues to this day despite the increasing difficulties
that Nicaragua has experienced in recruiting pilots for
this very hazardous work.

the El Guusnule crossing from Nicurnguu. This truck
was apparently heading for Gu;ltemaln. Ammunition
and propaganda materials were hidden in the side walls
of the trailer. The same arms traffickers operated a
storehouse in Teguciyalpn.
Honduras. with ;I false
floor and a special basement for storing weapons.
122. A special legislative commission established in
June 1480 by the Costa Rican legislature confirmed
in its May 1981 report that :I clandestine arms supply
link between Costa Rica and Nicaragua was established
during the Nicaraguan civil war and that the link continued to function between Costa Rica and El Salvador
once the Sandinistas had come to power in Nicaragua.
123. In April and July 1981. Cuatemalan
security
forces captured large caches of guerrilla weapons in
safe houses in Guatemala City, Several of the vehicles
captured at Guatemala City safe houses bore recent
customs markings from Nicaragua,
thus suggesting
that the operation was part of the well-established
pattern.
124. Within the past three months, shipments of arms
into El Salvador reached unprecedented peaks, nveraging out to the highest overall volume since the
so-called final offensive of last year. The recent Nicaraguan-Cuban arms flow into El Salvador has emphasized both sea and, once again, overland routes through
Honduras.
guerrilla
grwp
125. Last month,
a Salvadoran
picked up a large shipment of arms on the Usulutiln
Coast after the shipment arrived by sea from Nica1*agua.

126. On 15 March 1982, the Costa Rican judicial
police announced the discovery of a house in San Josh
with a sizeable cache of arms, explosives, uniforms,
passports. documents, false immigration
stamps from
more than 30 countries, and vehicles with hidden
II connected with an ongoing arms
compartments-a
traffic through Costa Rican territory to Salvadoran
guerrillas,
Nine people were arrested: Salvadorans,
Nicaruguans,
an Argentine, a Chilenn and a Costa
Rican. Costa Rican police so far have seized 13 vehicles designed for arms smuggling. Police confiscated
some 150 to 175 weapons, from Mausers to machineguns, TNT.
fragmentation
grenades, a grenadelauncher. ammunition
and 500 combat uniforms. One
of the captured terrorists told police that the arms and
other goods were to have been delivered to the Salvadoran guerrillas before 20 March, “for the elections”.

120. Weapons delivery by overland routes from NiciuXgUa passes through Honduras. Several examples of
this arms traffic can be and have been identified.
Honduran authorities have intercepted various shipments of arms en route from Nicaragua and concealed
in caches in Honduras.
In early January 1981, for
example. Honduran police caught six individuals unloading weapons from a truck en I’OLU~ from Nica~~gua. The six identified themselves as Salvadorans
and as members of the lnternational Support Commission of the Salvadoran
Popular Liberation Forces.
They had in their possession a large number of altered
and forged Honduran,
Costa Rican and Salvadoran
passports and other identity documents. That one
truck contained over 100 M-16 and AR-15 automatic
rifles. 50 81-millimetre
mortar rounds, approximately
100,OQO rounds of 5,56-millimetre
ammunition,
machine-gun belts, field packs and so forth.

127. Nicaragua’s
fraternal assistance to its neighbours is not limited to arms, Training is also provided.
This co-ordinated
Nicaraguan
and Cuban political
and military training creates the basic framework FOI
the use of arms by guerrillas operating within El Salvador and elsewhere in Central America.

12 I. In April I98 I 1 Honduran authorities intercepted
;I tractor-trailer
truck which had entered Honduras at

I28.
Since at least mid- 1980. Salvndoran guerrillns
have been trained in Nicaragua in military tactics.

mcnts. Frankly. we thought that some progress to that
end might be in sight. We were somewhat surprised
when the Nicaraguan Government decided to attempt
to expand and embitter regional conflict at this time.
One explanation for Nicaragua’s decision to expand
the conflict at this time is that it fears that the United
States Government is about to invade. But, of COUIW,
that is a ridiculous charge. The United States Government is not about to invade anyone, and we have
stated as much at all levels of our Government. at all
times and on many occasions.

and explosives at tempoweapons. communications
rary training schools scattered around the country and
on Sandinista military
bases-of
which there are
many. At several military sites in Nicaragua,
Snlvadorans receive training under guidance from Cuban
and other foreign advisers. For more specialized
training, guerrillas transit Nicaragua for Cuba. They
are provided false identity documents to help them
transit third countries. Guerrillas trained in Cuba are
reinfiltrated through Nicaragua and back into El Salvador. The attacks on llopango Airport in January lY82
and on the El Ore Bridge, in El Salvador, in October
198 I showed the clear effects of this training. Both acts
were performed by saboteurs who had enjoyed the
benefits of very sophisticated help.

132. It is true that once we became aware of Niciil.itgutt’s intentions and actions, the United StLttes
Government
undertook overflights to safeguard WI
own security and that of other States which are threutened by the Sandinista Government. These overflights.
conducted by unarmed, high-flying planes, for the
express and sole purpose of verifying reports of Nicaraguan intervention,
are no threat to regional peace
and stability: quite the contrary. The threat to regional
and world peace lies in the activities that these photographs expose. One can well understand that the
Government
of Nicaragua would prefer that no such
photographs existed. The United States Government
is frankly surprised and puzzled by Nicaragua’s appeal
to the Security Council at this time.

129. Honduran police raided a safe house for the
Mornnzanist Front for the Liberation
of Honduras
(MFLH) on 27 November 1981, in Tegucigalpa; while
the Honduran police were there, a fire-fight broke out,
but the police none the less captured several members
of that group. Remember that this is the Front for the
Liberation of Honduras now. Nicaragua’s generosity
to its neighbours knows no end. The police ultimately
captured several members of that group. The cell of
the MFLH included a Honduran,
a Uruguayan and
several Nicaraguans. The captured told Honduran
authorities that the Nicaraguan Government had provided them with funds for travel expenses, as well as
explosivc5. Captured documents and statements by
others detailed further that the group was formed in
Nicaragua at the instigation of high-level Sandinista
leaders: that the group’s chief of operations resided in
Managua: that members of the group received military
training in Nicaragua and Cuba: and that guerrillas
at one safe house were responsible for transporting
arms and munitions into Honduras from Esteli, Nicaragua. Other command and control services are provided by Nicaragua to its neighbours.

133. As most members of this Council understand.
Commander Ortega’s contentious charges come at il
time when we and others are actively looking for u
basis on which to settle peacefully the differences of
the parties involved. Only lost week the Government
of Nicaragua stated a desire to negotiate. But then.
after two high government officials visited Cuba,
they called for this meeting to air baseless charges in
this most public, important forum.
t;
134. The United States seeks peace in Central
America. We have repeatedly attempted to explore
ways with Nicaraguans in which our Governments
could co-operate in alleviating the tensions in the area.
We have submitted proposals to the Nicaraguan GOVernment. and we have received no response. Instead.
the Government
replied last year, after it came to
power, by sending Daniel Ortegn to the United Nations
--as it has done today-to
deliver an attack on the
United States.

130. Nicnruguan Social Welfare Minister
Antonio
Befied. by the way. told reporters in Lima last week
that some Nicaragutul “volunteers”
had gone to El
Salvador to fight with the guerrillas. Perhaps they
would like us to believe that the presence of the Salvndoran guerrillas’ military command
headquarters
near Managua is also a “volunteer”
effort. In fact,
planning and operations in El Salvador are guided from
that headquarters,
where Nicaraguan
officers are
involved actively in the command and control. The
headquarters co-ordinates logistical support for the
insurgents, including food, medicines, clothing, money
and. most importantly of CWIW, weapons and ammunition. The headquarters in Nicaragua decides on locations to be attacked and co-ordinates supply deliveries.
The guidance flows to guerrilla units widely spread
throughout El Salvador. The pattern is painfully clear:
it functions until this day.

135. As soon as the present United States Administration came to power, Assistant Secretary of State
Thomas Enders went to Managua to try to communicate with the leaders of the Government of Nicaragua to offer a way out of confrontation. to ask them
to restrain their military buildup and cease their intcrventions in neighbouring countries. At that time wt
offered :t specific agenda for discussions. We offcrccl
to consider their concerns and asked them to considet
ours. We also agreed to restrain all public rhetoric
while the proposal was being considered.

131. We very much wish that the Government
of
Nicaragua would cease its efforts to repress its own
people and to overthrow its neighbouring
Govern-

‘J
i

t

136. The response was not long in coming. On IS Scptemhcr. one month later, Humberto Ortega made iI
I2

4

speech in Managua during which he vilified the United
Stutes. On 7 October, Nicaraguan Junta Co-ordinatot
Dnniel Ortega addressed the General Assembly’ here,
attacking the United States for past intervention in
Central America and accusing us of causing all the
world’s problems, virtually throughout history.

dresses our concerns about intervention and militarization. we are prepared to address their concerns.
We do not close the door on the search for propel
relations.“’
The Nicaraguan Government
offes.

137. In recent weeks. our Secretary of State has met
with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mexico in yet
another uttempt to engage the Nicaraguans in a meaningful dialogue. And how has the Nicaraguan Government again responded? By sending Mr. Ortega to
the United Nations, apparently in search of a propaganda victory. apparently in search of an exacerbation of conflict.

has not responded to out

141. On 24 February, President
speech concerning the establishment
Basin Initiative, asserted:

Reagan. in his
of the Caribbean

“We seek to exclude no one [from the bcnefirs of
that Initiative].
Some, however, have turned from
their American neighbours and their heritage. Let
them return to the traditions and common values of
this hemisphere, and we all will welcome them. The
choice is theirs,“’

138. The Nicaraguan Government
has said that it
wants peace: it has stated that it wishes better relations with the United States. But, unfortunately, its
actions do not match its pretensions. If the Nicaraguan
Government
was genuinely interested in alleviating
tensions, would it continue to act as an active conduit for war marc’riel aimed at subverting the Government of El Salvador? Would it have undertaken a
campaign of systematic violence against its own Indian
communities,
displacing some 25,000 Indians from
their ancestral homes on the pretext of security from a
peaceful, democratic neighbour, Honduras? Would it
have doubled the number of Cuban military and security advisers in the past year? Would it have continued seeking to augment its military forces and
arsenal? Would it have declared a state of siege on its
own people, effectively eliminating
the opposition?
Most importantly,
would it continue incessantly to
pour arms into El Salvador, even increasing that flow
of arms. bullets and propaganda just when the people
of El Salvador are given an unprecedented OPPOStunity to express their views?

142. Finally, just a few weeks ago the President of
Mexico offered his good offices in the effort to reduce
tensions between Nicaragua and the United States.
We welcomed that initiative, In a press conference
on I5 March in New York, Secretary Haig reiterated
the five points which, we believe, can serve tls the
basis for a substantial improvement
of relations between the Governments of the United States and Nicaragua. These points had been conveyed earlier to
the Government of Nicaragua: a commitment,
through
mutual high-level reassertion of our Rio Treaty engagements.-’ to non-intervention
and non-aggression:
;I United States political commitment
concerning the
activities of Nicaraguan exiles in this country and the
enforcement of the Neutrality Act in this country: a
regional undertaking not to import heavy offensive
weapons and to reduce the number of foreign military
and security advisers to a reasonably low level: a proposal to the United States Congress for renewed
United States aid to Nicaragua; and actions by the
Nicaraguans to get out of El Salvador-to
wind up
their command and control operations, their logistics
operations, including weapons, ammunition deliveries
and training camps.

139. Given the history of United States relations
with the current Government of Nicaragua, we are
understandably
somewhat sceptical when the Government of Nicaragua declares that it wants peace or
asserts that it wishes better relations with our country, How, we ask, is this professed interest in peace
reconciled
with the statement
of Cornandante
Humberto Ortega when he says that the opposition
will be hanged from lamp-posts, or with the statement
of Cornandante Baillardo Arce when he tells US that
the Nicaraguan Government
will continue to pout
arms into El Salvador no matter what we or anyone
does or says?

143. And now, even as the representatives of the
Mexican and United States Governments
are conthe Government
of Nicsuiting on this initiative.
aragua, fully informed of what is going on, has once
again made a move that can only increase tensions
and not reduce them.
144. Although the United States Government finds
the actions of Nicaragua puzzling-and
we regret
them-we have not interposed any objections to the
Nicwaguan Government’s desire to be heard in this
arena, even though the Government of Nicartrgua. fol
whatever reasons, chose to ignore procedures well
established in both the Charter of the United Nation5
and the Charterofthe Organization of American States.
As members of the Council know, Article 52 of the
Charter of the United Nations encourages efforts to
achieve the peaceful settlement of disputes through

140. None the less, in spite of these harsh responses
on the part of the Government of Nicaragua, the United
States offer to engage in a dialogue has been repeated
many times. It was repeated by Secretary of State
Haig at the General Assembly of OAS. held at St. Lucia
from 2 to I I December 1981, when he said:
“The United States has made proposals to Nicaragua to normalize relations. If Nicaragua ad13

regional arrangements and gives priority to them.
Article 23 of the OAS Charter specifically singles out
the role of the OAS in settling regional disputes before
such disputes are referred to this body.
145. The Government of Nicaragua should be among
the very first to recall the existence, under the OAS,
of the Seventeenth Meeting of Consultation of Foreign
Ministers. which in 1978 and 1979 dealt with events
in Central America threatening to the peace of the
region. Indeed, in 1979 the Nicaraguan Government
termed the resolution of the Seventeenth Meeting of
Consultation as “historic in every respect”. That
meeting was never terminated. The question of Central
America remains before the OAS. Just yesterday, in
the Permanent Council of the OAS, the Minister fat
Foreign Affairs of Honduras made serious proposals
for efforts to bring peace to Central America.
146. The OAS thus not only has jurisdiction ovei
this matter, in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and the OAS Charter;
it is also formally seized of the matter. It is clear
that the OAS is the appropriate and primary forum

Litho

in Unit4

Nations. NW York

00300

for the consideration
il ragI il.

of the matters addressed by Nic-

147. M/e appeal once again. in this public forum. 10
the Government of Nicaragua to join with us and other
neighbouring
Governments
in resolving difference\.
ending interventions,
living
in peace in this hemisphere.

1 Clfficiul Recwcts qf the Gctlw(tl
Assembly.
Plarrfqy Mw/itf,w
I 29th meeting.
z /hit/. , paw 55.
( United
States of America.
L)cptrrtruc*trt

Thirty-sisth

Sc~s.rirrrr.

(!/’ Sftrtc

Ru/kri~a.
Prinling

vol. 82, No. 2058 (Washington. D.C.. U.S. Covcrnmcnt
Office, Jnnuary
1982). p. 6.
4 Ibid.. No. 2061 (Washington.
Office, April 1982). p. 5.

DC..

U.S. Government

Prinling

s Inter-Americen Treaty of Reciprocal Assist:mcc
Nations, Twoty Scrks. vol. 21. No. 324). p. 3.

I Unitcti
