III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

5. Nuclear energy should be used exclusively for
peaceful purposes and only for the benefit of mankind.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

36/101.

Development and strengthening of good-neighbourliness between States

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the determination of the peoples of the
United Nations as expressed in the Charter to practise tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good
neighbours,
Recalling its resolutions 1236 (XII) of 14 December 1957.
1301 (XIII) of 10 December 1958, 2129 (XX) of 21 December 1965 and, in particular, 34/99 of 14 December 1979,
Bearing in. mind that, owing to geographic proximity,
th~re are particularly favourable opportunities for co-oper~tion and mutual advantage between neighbouring countries
m many fields and that the development of such co-operation
may have a positive influence on international relations as
a whole,
C'!nsidering_ that the great changes of a political, economic and social nature as well as the scientific and technological progress which have taken place in the world and
led to ~npre~edented interdependence of nations have given
new d1mens1ons to good-netghbourliness in the conduct of
States and increased the need to develop and strengthen it,
1. Reaffirms that good-neighbourliness conforms with
th~ purposes of the United ~ati?ns and is founded upon the
strict observance of the pnnctples of the Charter of the
United _Nations and of th~ Dec!aration on Principles of
International Law concernmg Fnendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the Unite_d Nations, 86_ as well as upon the rejection of any
acts seekmg to establish zones of influence or domination;
2. Calls upon all States, in the interest of the mainten~ce of internat~onal pe~ce and security, to develop goodneighbourly relations, actmg on the basis of these principles;
3. Co~si~ers that the generalization of the long practice
~d of pnn~tples and rules pertaining to good-neighbourlmess 1s hkely to strengthen friendly relations and
co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter;
4. Reaffirms the need to examine the question of good~eighbourliness in order to strengthen and further develop
tts content, as well as ways and modalities to enhance its
effectiveness;
?· Beli:eves that the results of the examination of goodne1ghbourhness and of the clarification of its elements could
be included, at an appropriate time, in a suitable international document;
6. Requests the Governments that have not communicated their views and suggestions on good-neighbourliness,
as well as on ways and modalities to enhance it, with a view
to preventing conflicts and to increasing confidence among
States, to do so as soon as possible, and invites the Governments that have already communicated such views and
suggestions to supplement them if they deem it necessary;
7. Invites the United Nations organs, bodies and programmes, as well as the specialized agencies, within their
fields of competence, to continue to inform the SecretaryGeneral of the aspects of their activities relevant to the
development of relations of good-neighbourliness between
States;
86

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

77

8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session, on the basis of
the replies of States and of the views expressed during the
thirty-sixth session, as well as of the comments of specialized agencies, a report containing an orderly presentation
of the views and suggestions received concerning the content
of good-neighbourliness. as well as ways and modalities to
enhance its effectiveness;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Development and
strengthening of good-neighbourliness between States".
91st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

36/102.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Strengthening of International Security

The General Assembly.
Having considered the item entitled · 'Review of the implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security",
Noting with concern that the provisions of the Declaration
on the Strengthening of International Security 87 have not
yet been fully implemented,
Profoundly disturbed by the escalation of tension in the
world, the ever more frequent recourse to the threat or use
of force_, interventio~, interference, aggression and foreign
occupation, the contmued stalemate in the solution of crises
in different regions, the continuous escalation of the arms
r~ce and military buil~-up, the pursuance of the policy of
nvalry. the confrontat10n and struggle for the division of
the ~orld into spheres of influence and domination, the
persistence of colonialism, racism and apartheid, and the
lack o! solution of t~e economic problems of developing
countnes. all of which endanger international peace and
secunty.
Deeply concerned that the process of relaxation of international tension has reached a point of deep crisis owing
to the lack of progress in the settlement of international
problems and conflicts and to the stalemate in the process
of disarmament,
S!ressing the. need for the main organs of the United
Na~10ns re~ponsible for the maintenance of peace and secunty, particularly the Security Council. to contribute more
effectively to the promotion of international peace and security by seeking solutions to the unresolved problems and
crises in the world.
Emphasizing that, in its twenty years of existence, the
~ovement of Non-Aligned Countries has significantly contnbuted to the efforts of the United Nations towards the
promo_tion ~f. international peace and security, the democrat1za~10n of mternati_onal relations, the development of inte~atlona\ co-opera_110n and the establishment of a system
of mternat10nal ~elat10ns based on justice, sovereign equality
a~d equal secunty of all States and peoples, in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles and policy of non-alignment.
I. Expresses its deep concern over the aggravation of
focal points of international tension and crisis in the world,
more frequent recourse to force and increasing violations
of the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Reaffirms once more the universal and unconditional
validity of the purposes and principles of the Charter as the
firm basis of relations among all States, irrespective of size,
"Resolution 2734 (XXV)

78

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

geographic location, level of development or political, economic, social or ideological systems;
3. Urges all States to abide strictly, in their international
relations, by their commitment to the Charter and, to that
end:
(a) To refrain from any threat or use of force, intervention, interference, aggression, foreign occupation or
measures of political and economic coercion which violate
the sovereignty, territorial integrity, independence and security of other States or their right freely to dispose of their
natural resources;
(b) To refrain from supporting or encouraging any such
act for any reason whatsoever:
(c) To reject and refuse recognition of situations brought
about by any such act;
4. Calls upon all States to contribute effectively to the
implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security;
5. Urges all States, in particular the permanent members of the Security Council, to take all necessary measures
to prevent the further aggravation of the international situation and the disruption of the process of detente and, to
this end:
(a) To seek the peaceful settlement of disputes and the
elimination of the focal points of crisis and tension;
(b) To start serious, meaningful and effective negotiations on disarmament and on the halting of the arms race.
particularly the nuclear-arms race, on the basis of the recommendation of the General Assembly at its tenth special
session;
(c) To contribute to an urgent solution of international
economic problems and the establishment of the new international economic order;
(d) To accelerate the economic development of developing countries, particularly the least developed ones;
(e) To proceed without any delay to a global consideration of ways and means for a revival of the world economy and for the restructuring of international economic
relations within the framework of the global negotiations;
6. Takes note of the fact that the Security Council has
failed to report to the General Assembly on steps taken to
implement the provisions of paragraphs 13 and 15 of Assembly resolution 35/158 of 12 December 1980;
7. Requests the Security Council to consider ways and
means to ensure the implementation of the provisions of
paragraph 5 above as well as to examine all existing mechanisms and to propose new ones aimed at enhancing the
authority and enforcement capacity of the Council in accordance with the Charter, and to explore also the possibility
of holding periodic meetings of the Council. in conformity
with Article 28 of the Charter, at the ministerial or higher
level in specific cases, so as to enable it to play a more
active role in preventing potential conflicts, and to present
the Council's conclusions to the General Assembly at its
thirty-seventh session;
8. Reiterates the need for the Security Council, parfr:ularly its permanent members, to ensure the effective implementation of its own decisions in compliance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations;
9. Considers that respect for and promotion of human
rights and fundamental freedoms in their civil, political.
economic, social and cultural aspects contribute to the
strengthening of international peace and security;
10. Reaffirms again the legitimacy of the struggle of
peoples under colonial domination, foreign occupiition or
racist regimes and their inalienable right to self-determination and independence, and urges Member States to in-

crease their support for and solidarity with them and their
national liberation movements and to take urgent and effective measures for the speedy completion of the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples and for the final elimination of colonialism, racism and apartheid;
11. Calls upon the Security Council to take appropriate
effective measures to promote the fulfilment of the objective
of the denuclearization of Africa in order to avert the serious
danger which the nuclear capability of South Africa constitutes to the African States, in particular to the front-line
States, as well as to international peace and security;
12. Reiterates its support for the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace88 and expresses the hope
that the Conference on the Indian Ocean, which is an important stage in the realization of the objectives of that
Declaration, will be held not later than in the first half of
1983 and, to this end, calls upon all States to contribute
effectively to the success of that Conference;
13. Calls upon all States participating in the Conference
on Security and Co-operation in Europe, at Madrid, to take
all possible measures and exert every effort in order to
ensure substantial and balanced results of that meeting in
the implementation of the principles and goals established
by the Final Act of the Conference, signed at Helsinki on
I August 1975, as well as the continuity of the multilateral
process initiated by the Conference, which has great significance for the strengthening of peace and security in Europe and in the world;
14. Considers that further efforts are necessary for the
transformation of the Mediterranean into a zone of peace
and co-operation on the basis of the principles of equal
security, sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity,
non-intervention and non-interference, non-violation of international frontiers, non-use of force, peaceful settlement
of disputes and just and viable solutions of the existing
problems and crises in the area on the basis of the Charter
and relevant resolutions of the United Nations, respect for
sovereignty over natural resources and the right of peoples
to make their own decisions independently and without any
outside pressure or intimidation;
15. Calls upon all Governments to submit to this effect,
before the thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly,
their views on the question of the strengthening of security
and co-operation in the region of the Mediterranean and
requests the Secretary-General to submit the report on this
question to the Assembly at its thirty-seventh session;
16. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled ''Review of the implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security".
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

36/103.

Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention and Interference in the Internal Affairs
of States

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2734 (XXV) of 16 December
1970, containing the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security and 2131 (XX) of 21 December 1965,
containing the Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention in the Domestic Affairs of States and the Protection
of Their Independence and Sovereignty,
" Resolution 2832 ( XXVI).
