General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

106

Health Organization by the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances.
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976

31/126.

Emergency assistance for South African
refugee students

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/6 I of 9 November 1976
relating to the item entitled "Policies of apartheid of
the Government of South Africa",
Noting, in particular, that paragraph 12 of the abovementioned resolution calls upon Member States and
the specialized agencies, through emergency joint projects and financial assistance, to help Lesotho and other
countries bordering South Africa to ensure the provision
of educational facilities to the rapidly growing number
of refugee students from South Africa,
Concerned about the continuing influx of refugees,
including in particular large numbers of South African
students fleeing to the bordering States of Botswana,
Lesotho and Swaziland, thus imposing a heavy burden
on the limited resources and employment opportunities
of these countries,
1. Reaffirms that humanitarian assistance by the international community to all those persecuted under repressive and discriminatory legislation in South Africa,
Namibia and Southern Rhodesia is appropriate and
essential;

2. Recognizes the urgent need to organize an effective programme of international assistance to help in
dealing with the recent South African student refugee
problem in countries bordering South Africa;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, as a matter of
urgency, to consult with the Governments of Botswana,
Lesotho and Swaziland and the liberation movements
concerned with a view to taking immediate steps to
organize and provide appropriate emergency financial
and other forms of assistance for the care, subsistence
and education of these refugee students;
4. Urges all States to respond generously to any
appeals which the Secretary-General might make for
assistance for these refugees;
5. Calls upon the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations
Development Programme, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United
Nations Trust Fund for South Africa, the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa and other United Nations bodies and organs,
as may be appropriate, to co-operate fully with the
Secretary-General in the implementation of the programme of assistance;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the situation under review and to report to the General
Assembly as and when necessary.

102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976

31/127.

Measures to improve the situation and
ensure the human rights and dignity of
all migrant workers

The General Assembly,
Recalling the terms of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights 49 and of the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,00
Considering the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations of 1961 51 and the Vienna Convention on
Consular Relations of 1963, 52
Considering also the Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975,53 and the Recommendation concerning Migrant Workers, 1975,H
adopted by the General Conference of the International
Labour Organisation,
Recalling its resolutions 2920 (XXVII) of 15 November 1972, 3224 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974
and 3449 (XXX) of 9 December 1975 concerning
migrant workers, and Economic and Social Council
resolution 1749 (LIV) of 16 May 1973, in which
the Council affirmed the need for the United Nations
to consider the situation of migrant workers in an interrelated manner and in relation to general factors which
have a bearing on human rights and human dignity,
Aware that the problem of migrant workers continues
to be of major importance to many States, despite the
existence of international instruments and despite efforts
exerted by certain States, including the adoption of
bilateral agreements,
Believing that this problem is becoming more serious
in certain regions for political, economic, social and
cultural reasons,
Seriously concerned at the de facto discrimination
frequently suffered by alien workers in some countries
despite the legislative and other efforts exerted to
prevent and punish it,
Noting with satisfaction the work done in the field
of migrant workers by the specialized agencies, particularly the International Labour Organisation, and by
other United Nations organs, such as the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection
of Minorities,
I. Calls upon all States, taking into account the provisions of the relevant instruments adopted by the International Labour Organisation and of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination, to take measures to prevent
and put an end to all discrimination against migrant
workers and to ensure the implementation of such
measures;
2. Invites all States:
(a)
To extend to migrant workers having regular
status in their territories treatment equal to that enjoyed
by their own nationals with regard to the protection
of human rights and to the provisions of their labour
legislation and their social legislation;
·19 Resolution

217 A (III).
r,o Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
,,I United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 500, No. 7310, p. 95.
r, 2 Jbid., vol. 596, No. 8638, p. 261.
r,:l International Labour Office, Official Bulletin, vol. L VIII,
1975, Series A, No. 1, Convention No. 143.
04 Ibid., Recommendation No. 151.
