United Nations

A/RES/71/188

General Assembly

Distr.: General
2 February 2017

Seventy-first session
Agenda item 68 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 2016
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/71/484/Add.2)]

71/188. Human rights in the administration of justice
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1
and the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and
the Optional Protocols thereto, 2 the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the Optional Protocol thereto, 3
the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance, 4 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, 5 the Convention on the Rights of the Child 6 and the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 7 as well as all other relevant
international treaties,
Calling attention to the numerous international standards in the field of the
administration of justice,
Recalling all the resolutions of the General Assembly, the Human Rights
Council, the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social Council
that are relevant to the subject of human rights in the administration of justic e,
including General Assembly resolution 69/172 of 18 December 2014 and Human
Rights Council resolution 30/7 of 1 October 2015,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on strengthening and
coordinating United Nations rule of law activities, 8
Welcoming the adoption of the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for
the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules), 9
_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex; and United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1642, No. 14668.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 1465 and 2375, No. 24841.
4
Resolution 61/177, annex.
5
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
6
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
7
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
8
A/71/169.
9
Resolution 70/175, annex.
2

16-21994 (E)

*1621994*

Please recycle

A/RES/71/188

Human rights in the administration of justice

Reaffirming the importance of international standards and norms in crime
prevention and criminal justice, including in relation to drug -related crimes, as
recognized by Member States in the outcome document of the thirtieth special
session of the General Assembly, entitled “Our joint commitment to effectively
addressing and countering the world drug problem”, 10
Welcoming the work of all special procedures of the Human Rights Council
that address human rights in the administration of justice in the discharge of their
mandates,
Taking note of the work of all human rights treaty body mechanisms on human
rights in the administration of justice, inter alia, of general comments No. 21 on the
humane treatment of persons deprived of their liberty, 11 No. 32 on the right to
equality before courts and tribunals and to a fair trial 12 and No. 35 on liberty and
security of person, 13 adopted by the Human Rights Committee, and general comments
No. 10 on children’s rights in juvenile justice 14 and No. 13 on the right of the child
to freedom from all forms of violence, 15 adopted by the Committee on the Rights of
the Child,
Noting with appreciation the important work in the field of the administration
of justice of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations of the Secretariat and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) as well as the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Noting with appreciation also the thematic report of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children entitled “Safeguarding the
Rights of Girls in the Criminal Justice System: Preventing Violence, Stigmatization
and Deprivation of Liberty”, the report of the Special Rapporteur on minority issues
concerning minorities in the criminal justice system 16 and the interim report of the
Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment, 17
Noting with satisfaction the work of the Interagency Panel on Juvenile Justice
and of its members,
Encouraging continued regional and cross-regional efforts, the sharing of best
practices and the provision of technical assistance in the field of juvenile justice,
and noting in this regard the World Congress on Juvenile Justice, held in Geneva
from 26 to 30 January 2015,

_______________
10

Resolution S-30/1, annex.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/47/40),
annex VI.B.
12
Ibid., Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/62/40), vol. I, annex VI.
13
CCPR/C/GC/35.
14
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 41 (A/63/41), annex IV.
15
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 41 (A/67/41), annex V.
16
A/70/212.
17
A/71/298.
11

2/8

Human rights in the administration of justice

A/RES/71/188

Convinced that the independence and impartiality of the judiciary and the
integrity of the judicial system as well as an independent legal profession are
essential prerequisites for the protection of human rights, the rule of law, good
governance and democracy and for ensuring that there is no discrimination in the
administration of justice and should therefore be respected in all circumstances,
Recalling that every State should provide an effective framework of remedies
to redress human rights grievances or violations,
Emphasizing that the right to access to justice for all forms an important basis
for strengthening the rule of law through the administration of justice,
Welcoming the inclusion in Sustainable Development Goal 16, 18 on the promotion
of just, peaceful and inclusive societies, of the target to promote the rule of law at the
national and international levels and to ensure equal access to justice for all,
Mindful of the importance of ensuring respect for the rule of law and human
rights in the administration of justice as a crucial contribution to building peace and
justice and ending impunity,
Recognizing the importance of the principle that, except for those lawful
limitations that are demonstrably necessitated by the fact of incarceration, persons
deprived of their liberty shall retain their non -derogable human rights and all other
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Concerned about the negative impact of overincarceration and overcrowding
on the enjoyment of human rights, and acknowledging that overincarceration
constitutes one of the major underlying causes of overcrowding,
Recalling that the social rehabilitation and reintegration of persons deprived of
their liberty shall be among the essential aims of the criminal justice system,
ensuring, as far as possible, that offenders are able to lead a law -abiding and selfsupporting life upon their return to society,
Recognizing the need for Governments to take measures, within the justice
system, particularly the criminal justice system, to prevent discrimination, inter alia,
against persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities
and to increase their effective participation within the sys tem,
Aware of the need for special vigilance with regard to the specific situation of
children, juveniles and women in the administration of justice, in particular while
they are deprived of their liberty, and their vulnerability to various forms of
violence, abuse, injustice and humiliation,
Reaffirming that children who are victims and witnesses of crime and violence
are particularly vulnerable and require special protection, assistance and support
appropriate to their age, level of maturity and needs, in order to prevent further
hardship and trauma that may result from their participation in the criminal justice
process,
Recognizing the specific situation and needs of children formerly associated
with armed forces or armed groups when accused of crimes under international law
allegedly committed while they were associated with armed forces or armed groups,

_______________
18

See resolution 70/1.

3/8

A/RES/71/188

Human rights in the administration of justice

Reaffirming that the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration
in all actions concerning the child in the administration of justice, including in
relation to pretrial measures, as well as being an important consideration in all
matters concerning the child related to sentencing of his or her parents, or, where
applicable, legal guardians or primary caregivers,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on human rights in the administration of justice; 19
2.
Also takes note with appreciation of the reports of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights on the protection of human rights of
juveniles deprived of their liberty, 20 on access to justice for children 21 and on the
human rights implications of overincarceration and overcrowding 22 and the joint
report of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Violence against Children on prevention of and responses to
violence against children within the juvenile justice system, 23 submitted to the
Human Rights Council;
3.
Reaffirms the importance of the full and effective implementation of all
United Nations standards on human rights in the administration of justice, and
invites States to assess their national legislation and practice against those
standards;
4.
Invites States to make use of technical assistance offered by the relevant
United Nations entities and programmes in order to strengthen n ational capacities
and infrastructures in the field of the administration of justice;
5.
Appeals to Governments to include, in their national development plans,
the effective administration of justice and equal access to justice as an integral part
of the development process, with a view to promoting and protecting human rights,
and to allocate adequate resources for the provision of legal aid services, and invites
the international community to respond favourably to requests for financial and
technical assistance for the enhancement and strengthening of the administration of
justice;
6.
Stresses the special need for national capacity-building in the field of the
administration of justice, in particular through reform of the judiciary, the police and
the penal system, as well as juvenile justice reform, and through the encouragement
of independence, accountability and transparency in the judiciary, in order to
establish and maintain stable societies and the rule of law in post -conflict situations,
and welcomes the role of the Office of the High Commissioner in supporting the
establishment and functioning of transitional justice mechanisms in post -conflict
situations;
7.
Reaffirms that no one should be unlawfully or arbitrarily deprived of his
or her liberty, and notes the principles of necessity and proportionality in this
regard;

_______________
19

A/71/405.
A/HRC/21/26.
21
A/HRC/25/35 and Add.1 and A/HRC/27/25.
22
A/HRC/30/19.
23
A/HRC/21/25.
20

4/8

Human rights in the administration of justice

A/RES/71/188

8.
Calls upon States to apply individual criminal responsibility and to
refrain from detaining persons based solely on their family ties with an alleged
offender;
9.
Also calls upon States to ensure that anyone who is deprived of his or her
liberty through arrest or detention has prompt access to a competent court with the
effective power to determine the lawfulness of the detention and to order release if
the detention or imprisonment is determined not to be lawful and prompt access to
legal counsel, in accordance with their international obligations and commitments;
10. Calls upon all States to consider establishing, maintaining or enhancing
independent national mechanisms with the mandate to monitor all places of
detention, including by making unannounced visits, and to hold private interviews
without witnesses with all persons deprived of liberty, inter alia, in line with the
United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treat ment of Prisoners (the Nelson
Mandela Rules); 9
11. Affirms that States must ensure that any measure taken to combat
terrorism, including in the administration of justice, complies with their obligations
under international law, in particular international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law;
12. Recalls the absolute prohibition of torture in international law, and calls
upon States to address and prevent the detention conditions, treatment and
punishment of persons deprived of their liberty that amount to cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment;
13. Calls upon States to investigate promptly, effectively and impartially all
alleged human rights violations suffered by persons deprived of their liberty, in
particular cases involving death, torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment, to provide effective remedy to the victims, in accordance with their
international obligations and commitments and to ensure that detention
administrations fully cooperate with the investigating authority and preserve all
evidence;
14. Urges States to endeavour to reduce, where appropriate, pretrial
detention, which should be a measure of last resort and for as short a period as
possible, inter alia, by adopting legislative and administrative measures and policies
on its preconditions, limitations, duration and alternatives and by taking measures
aimed at the implementation of existing legislation, as well as by ensuring access to
justice and legal advice and assistance;
15. Encourages States to address overcrowding in detention facilities by
taking effective measures, including through enhancing the availability and use of
alternatives to pretrial detention and custodial sentences, bearing in mind the United
Nations Standard Minimum Rules for Non-custodial Measures (the Tokyo Rules) 24
and the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and
Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules), 25 access to
legal aid, mechanisms for crime prevention, early release and rehabilitation
programmes and the efficiency as well as the capacity of the criminal justice system

_______________
24
25

Resolution 45/110, annex.
Resolution 65/229, annex.

5/8

A/RES/71/188

Human rights in the administration of justice

and its facilities, bearing in mind the United Nations Principles and Guidelines on
Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems; 26
16. Continues to encourage States to pay due attention to the Bangkok Rules
when developing and implementing relevant legislation, procedures, policies and
action plans, and invites relevant special procedure mandate holders, the Office of
the High Commissioner, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and all
other relevant organizations to take those rules into consideration in their activities;
17. Encourages States to review penal policies that can contribute to
overincarceration and overcrowding, in particular regarding so -called “zerotolerance policies”, such as the application of mandatory pretrial detention and
mandatory minimum sentences especially for minor and/or non-violent crimes;
18. Recognizes that every child and juvenile alleged as, accused of or
recognized as having infringed the law, particularly those who are deprived of their
liberty, as well as child victims and witnesses of crimes, should be tre ated in a
manner consistent with his or her rights, dignity and needs, in accordance with
international law, bearing in mind relevant international standards on human rights
in the administration of justice, taking into account also the age, gender, social
circumstances and development needs of such children, and calls upon States parties
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child 6 and States parties to the Optional
Protocols to the Convention 27 to abide strictly by their principles and respective
provisions;
19. Reiterates the importance of the United Nations Model Strategies and
Practical Measures on the Elimination of Violence against Children in the Field of
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, 28 and urges States to consider applying
them, as appropriate, in the design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of
laws, policies, programmes, budgets and mechanisms aimed at elimi nating violence
against children in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice;
20. Recalls its resolution 69/157 of 18 December 2014, in which it invited
the Secretary-General to commission an in-depth global study on children deprived
of liberty, to be funded through voluntary contributions, and in this regard
encourages Member States, United Nations agencies, funds, programmes and
offices, as well as other relevant stakeholders, to support the elabo ration of the
study;
21. Notes the regional conference on oversight, inspection and monitoring of
places where children are deprived of liberty in the framework of the criminal
justice system organized in Buenos Aires on 19 and 20 May 2016 by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children and the
United Nations Children’s Fund, and the important recommendations that have been
put forward in this regard;
22. Encourages States that have not yet integrated children’s issues into their
overall rule of law efforts to do so and to develop and implement a comprehensive
and coordinated juvenile justice policy to prevent and address juvenile delinquency
and to address risks and causes for children’s contact with the juvenile and/or
criminal justice system, as well as with a view to promoting, inter alia, the use of
_______________
26

Resolution 67/187, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531; and resolution 66/138, annex.
28
Resolution 69/194, annex.
27

6/8

Human rights in the administration of justice

A/RES/71/188

alternative measures, such as diversion and restorative justice, and complying with
the principle that deprivation of liberty of children should be used only as a measure
of last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time, as well as to avoid,
wherever possible, the use of pretrial detention for children;
23. Stresses the importance of including reintegration strategies for former
child offenders in juvenile justice policies, in particular through the provision of
gender-sensitive education and life skills programmes, as well as treatment and
services for substance abuse and mental health needs, with a view to their assuming
a constructive role in society;
24. Urges States to take all necessary and effective measures, including legal
reform where appropriate, to prevent and respond to all forms of violence against
children within the justice system, including within the informal justice system,
where it exists;
25. Also urges States to ensure that, under their legislation and practice,
neither capital punishment nor life imprisonment without the possibility of release
nor corporal punishment is imposed for offences committed by persons under
18 years of age, and encourages States to consider repealing all other forms of life
imprisonment for offences committed by persons under 18 years of age;
26. Encourages States not to set the minimum age of criminal responsibility
at too low an age level, bearing in mind the emotional, mental and intelle ctual
maturity of the child, and in this respect notes the recommendation of the
Committee on the Rights of the Child to increase the lower minimum age of
criminal responsibility to the age of 12 years as the absolute minimum age, and to
continue to increase it to a higher age level; 12
27. Also encourages States to gather relevant information, including through
data collection and research, concerning children within their criminal justice
systems so as to improve their administration of justice, while being mindful of the
children’s right to privacy, with full respect for relevant international human rights
instruments, and bearing in mind applicable international standards on human rights
in the administration of justice;
28. Stresses the importance of paying greater attention to the impact on
children of imprisonment or other sentences imposed upon their parents, while
noting with interest the convening of and reports on all relevant meetings and panel
discussions on these issues held by the Human Rights Council; 29
29. Invites Governments to provide for tailored and interdisciplinary human
rights training, including anti-racist, multicultural, gender-sensitive and child rights
training, to all judges, lawyers, prosecutors, social workers, immigration and police
officers and other professionals concerned, including personnel deployed in
international field presences;
30. Invites States, upon their request, to benefit from technical advice and
assistance provided by the relevant United Nations entities and programmes in order
to strengthen national capacities and infrastructures in the field of the administration
of justice;
31. Invites the Office of the High Commissioner and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime to reinforce their technical assistance to States, upon
_______________
29

A/HRC/21/31 and A/HRC/25/33.

7/8

A/RES/71/188

Human rights in the administration of justice

request and in accordance with their respective mandates, to strengthen the national
capacity-building of States in the field of the administration of justice, in particular
in post-conflict situations, and in this context to strengthen cooperation with
relevant United Nations entities;
32. Underlines the importance of rebuilding and strengthening structures for
the administration of justice and of respecting the rule of law and human rights,
including in post-conflict situations, as a crucial contribution to building peace and
justice and ending impunity, and in this respect requests the Secretary-General to
further streamline and strengthen system-wide coordination and coherence of
programmes and activities of the relevant parts of the United Nations system,
including through the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group chaired by the
Deputy Secretary-General, the Rule of Law Unit in the Executive Office of the
Secretary-General and the joint global focal point for the police, justice and
corrections areas in the rule of law in post-conflict and other crisis situations;
33. Invites States, in the context of the universal periodic review mechanism
and in their reports under international human rights treaties, to consider addressing
the promotion and protection of human rights in the administration of justice;
34. Invites relevant special procedure mandate holders of the Human Rights
Council, as well as relevant treaty bodies, to give special attention to questions
relating to the effective protection of human rights in the administra tion of justice,
and to provide, wherever appropriate, specific recommendations in this regard,
including proposals for advisory services and technical assistance measures;
35. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-third session a report on the latest developments, challenges and good
practices in human rights in the administration of justice, including on efforts to
ensure equal access to justice for all through the independent, impartial and
effective administration of justice, and on the activities undertaken by the United
Nations system as a whole;
36. Decides to continue its consideration of the question of human rights in
the administration of justice at its seventy-third session under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”.
65th plenary meeting
19 December 2016

8/8
