S/2018/609

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 June 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (covering
the period from 17 February to 3 June 2018)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2406
(2018), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) until 15 March 2019, and in accordance with prior
resolutions in which the Council requested me to report on the implementation of the
mandate every 90 days. It covers political and security developments from
17 February to 3 June 2018, the humanitarian situation and progress in the
implementation of the Mission mandate.

II. Political and economic developments
2.
During the reporting period, efforts to revitalize the 2015 Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan continued, while the
national dialogue proceeded with its consultations and the Sudan People ’s Liberation
Movement (SPLM) moved forward with its reunification process, although both
suffered from a lack of inclusivity.
Peace process
3.
Following the adjournment of the second session of the high-level revitalization
forum of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) on 16 February,
IGAD utilized the subsequent three-month period in the lead-up to the resumption of
the forum on 17 May to engage the parties in shuttle diplomacy in order to provide
impetus to the peace process and bridge their divergent positions on governance and
security issues. In this respect, the IGAD Council of Ministers and the IGAD Special
Envoy held consultations with the Transitional Government of National Unity in Juba,
the former First Vice-President, Riek Machar, in Pretoria and with other parties and
entities in Addis Ababa.
4.
During a briefing to the Transitional National Legislative Assembly in Juba on
5 March, the Government indicated that, in the event of a failure to reach an
agreement, it would consider exercising its “sovereign decision” and extend the
transitional period. In tandem, on 1 March, the nine opposition groups participating
in the forum announced the formation of the South Sudan Opposition Alliance and,
on 27 March, with the SPLM “Former Detainees”, further requested to be consulted
as one entity during the IGAD consultations.

18-09253 (E)

190618

*1809253*

S/2018/609

5.
On 26 March, the IGAD Council of Ministers issued a communiqué in which it
decided to adopt targeted sanctions against individuals responsible for violations of
the cessation of hostilities agreement, and referred to the African Union Peace and
Security Council for appropriate punitive measures. IGAD also recommended that
Riek Machar be allowed to move from South Africa to another country not bordering
South Sudan. On 26 March, the pro-Machar Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement/Army (SPLM/A) in Opposition submitted an open letter to the new Prime
Minister of Ethiopia, Abiy Ahmed Ali, in which it requested the unconditional release
of Riek Machar and his participation in the revitalization foru m.
6.
Shortly thereafter, a delegation from the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union visited South Sudan, from 15 to 19 April. On 26 April, in a
communiqué, the Council called on the South Sudanese parties to participate in the
forum in good faith and make the necessary compromises to achieve peace and
security. The Council also endeavoured to utilize the various tools and mechanisms
to ensure the commitment of the parties by requesting the African Union Commission,
in consultation with IGAD, to develop and submit proposals on punitive measures
which could be applied against all those who continue to obstruct efforts towards the
restoration of peace and security in South Sudan.
7.
On 30 April, prior to the forum, the Ministry of Justice presented to Parliament
a draft constitutional amendment bill, which provided for the incorporation of the
Agreement into the 2011 Transitional Constitution of South Sudan. Concurrently, on
3 and 4 May, the ruling SPLM held a two-day meeting of its National Liberation
Council, the opening day of which was attended by the President of Uganda, Yoweri
Museveni, and the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Egypt. The meeting was not attended
by the pro-Machar SPLM in Opposition or the SPLM “Former Detainees” outside the
country. The meeting concluded with a resolution endorsing a revised implementation
plan for SPLM reunification and calling on reinstated party officials to attend the next
meeting of the council, which it was proposed be held within 45 days. The First Vice President, Taban Deng Gai, also announced, in a press release on 7 May, the formal
dissolution of his faction and its reintegration into SPLM.
8.
Following further shuttle diplomacy and proximity talks on 11 and 12 May, the
revitalization forum was held in Addis Ababa from 17 to 23 May, as a continuation
of its second phase. The South Sudan Council of Churches facilitated sessions of
intra-South Sudanese dialogue to help the parties to bridge their differences on the 10
outstanding governance and security issues identified as critical to revitalize the
Agreement. In a signed statement drafted by the Council of Churches on 21 May, the
parties recommitted to the implementation of the cessation of hostilities agreement
and agreed to implement a quota of 35 per cent for the participation of women at all
levels of government and to continue the consultations on governance and security
issues. However, in view of the lack of substantial progress in reaching a compromise
by the parties, IGAD introduced bridging proposals on 21 May on the outstanding
issues. On 22 May, the parties submitted their reactions to the IGAD bridging
proposals, maintaining their entrenched and divergent positions, in particular on
responsibility-sharing, the structure and composition of states, the number and
allocations of seats in the legislature and on transitional security arrangements.
9.
On 31 May, the IGAD Council of Ministers convened an extraordinary session,
at which it considered progress made and outlined the way forward in the IGAD -led
peace process. The Council recommended that IGAD consider convening an
extraordinary summit and a face-to-face meeting between the President of South
Sudan, Salva Kiir and Riek Machar on the margins of the African Union Summit in
early July, authorized one more round of consultations with the parties to build
consensus on the bridging proposals and directed the IGAD facilitation team to
develop a full revitalized text of the Agreement. The Council also decided to submit
2/17

18-09253

S/2018/609

punitive measures against violators of the cessation of hostilities agreement for
approval of the IGAD Assembly of Heads of State and Government. On the same day,
the Security Council decided to extend the South Sudan sanctions regime pending a
review of the parties’ adherence to the cessation of hostilities agreement and progress
towards a viable political settlement by 30 June (see Council resolution 2418 (2018)).
Other national political developments
10. The subnational “grassroots” consultations phase on the national dialogue
concluded. In March, a subcommittee travelled to Ethiopia and the Sudan to consult
South Sudanese refugees and diaspora. During April and early May, the national
dialogue steering committee held plenary meetings in Juba to review subcommittee
reports about the consultations. As indicated in the subcommittee reports, and
observed by UNMISS, the grassroots consultations gathered a wide range of views
from the public about the causes of conflict in South Sudan and the possible solutions.
Nonetheless, consultations were affected by shortcomings in geographic coverage and
participation and some concerns about security. On 15 March, in a media interview,
the co-chair of the Dialogue, Angelo Beda, acknowledged the opp osition’s boycott of
the dialogue and the challenge that it posed. By late May, the steering committee had
approved and adopted all 15 subcommittee reports. The steering committee
announced a two-month recess until mid-August in order to prepare for the planned
regional conferences.
11. During the reporting period, a number of senior government and public
appointments were announced. On 12 March, President Kiir appointed Salvatore
Garang Mabiordit as Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. On
2 May, President Kiir appointed General Gabriel Jok Riak as Chief of Defence Forces
of SPLA, succeeding General James Ajongo, who died on 20 April. Jok Riak is among
the individuals on the sanctions list pursuant to Security Council resolution 2206
(2015) and is also the subject of targeted sanctions by the European Union and the
United States.
Economic developments
12. The performance of the economy remained poor during the reporting period.
Currency depreciation was rapid and accompanied by high inflation. Consumer price
inflation in the year to March was measured at 161 per cent. Although the Central
Bank maintained a fixed official rate of around 137 South Sudanese pounds to the
United States dollar, the currency depreciated on the market from around 230 pounds
per dollar in February to 300 pounds per dollar in May. Oil production, at around
120,000 to 130,000 barrels per day, remains consistent with the average over the past
four years. Despite buoyant international oil prices, overall fiscal performance did
not improve, raising concerns about the management of the additional oil revenue.
Public sector workers continue to face prolonged delays in receiving salaries, in some
cases reportedly extending to five months, and levels o f spending on public services
and infrastructure remain very low.
13. On 21 March, the United States Department of Commerce announced that it was
adding to its entity list the names of 15 entities involved in the South Sudan oil sector.
The listing imposes additional licensing requirements for United States exports,
re-exports or transfers to the companies listed.

18-09253

3/17

S/2018/609

III. Security situation
14. During the reporting period, conflict intensified in parts of Unity and Central
Equatoria, with evidence of government and aligned forces seeking to dislodge
opposition forces ahead of the rainy season.
Greater Upper Nile region
15. The security situation in the greater Upper Nile region remained volatile, with
fighting reported between Government alongside aligned forces and pro-Machar
SPLA in Opposition. In Unity, clashes occurred primarily in central and southern
parts, with fighting reported on 17 February in Buaw, Koch County, and from midApril in the greater Koch area, and in Rubkona and Guit counties. Thereafter, SPLA
and aligned forces reportedly carried out significant attacks in Mayendit and Leer
counties from 21 to 29 April, including fighting that reached the opposition position
at Thonyor and surrounding villages near Leer town. As fighting continued to move
south, on 1 May, armed youth reported to be under the command of a government
official and supported by two SPLA tanks shelled the swampy areas south -east of the
Adok port from Meer village and looted cattle, killed an unknown number of civilia ns
and committed human rights violations. Fighting between the warring parties resumed
throughout the first week of May, with reports that SPLA forces attacked opposition
positions in Rubkway, Mayendit County, and Mirmir, Koch County. On 10 May, youth
from Bieh, Koch County, allegedly armed by SPLA forces, reportedly attacked
Rubkway, Thaker, and Dablual in Mayendit County. Meanwhile, the situation
throughout Leer County further deteriorated on 11 May, with reports of fighting in
Thonyor, Touch Riak, Kok, Pilling, Meer, Adok and Yang.
16. In Jonglei, Government and pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition forces reportedly
clashed in the greater Wa‘at and Akobo areas. On 1 April, Government forces
allegedly attacked the opposition in Yuai, resulting in the deaths of four civilians and
a number of soldiers on both sides. On 18 and 19 April, clashes occurred in Motot ,
Pieri, Wa‘at and Pulchuol; the opposition subsequently claimed that Government
forces had captured Motot and Pieri and killed four civilians, reportedly including an
infant, burned tukuls and looted supplies. Five SPLA soldiers were also reportedly
killed and significant civilian displacement from Nyerol and Uror was reported.
Clashes resumed on 21 April in Motot, Paia and Pieri, with three civilians allegedly
killed.
17. In Upper Nile, Government forces and pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition
reportedly clashed in the Dhording Nasir and Kodok areas. On 12 and 25 March, proMachar SPLA in Opposition allegedly clashed with pro-Taban Deng Gai SPLA in
Opposition in Kalaganj and, on 25 March, SPLA and pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition
reportedly clashed in Kek, Manyo County. On 21 March, the pro-Machar SPLA in
Opposition Commander confirmed that they had attacked SPLA in Nasir but withdrew
under heavy fire south of the Sobat River, followed by clashes on 25 March at
Dhording and Wichtut, in the immediate vicinity of the SPLA base in Nasir, and on
31 March in Nyatot and Kedbek, east of Nasir. On 1 April, SPLA allegedly attacked
an opposition position in Atar, Canal (Khorfulus). Reports of fighting continued in
May, with Government and opposition forces reportedly clashing on 5, 14 and 16 May
in Pagak and on 17 May in Midiri.
Greater Equatoria region
18. The situation in greater Equatoria remained tense, with reports of clashes
between SPLA and pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition. On 26 February, the two warring
parties reportedly clashed in Minyori, Yei area, resulting in the killing of an

4/17

18-09253

S/2018/609

opposition commander. Further clashes were reported on 7 March in Mitika , Lasu,
and in Kili, Mukaya County, where opposition forces reportedly looted and burned
down houses. Clashes in Morobo, on 15 March, allegedly resulted in the killing of
one SPLA soldier. On 25 and 26 March and reportedly until 1 April, fighting broke
out in the Kajo Kaji area over the recapturing of Morsak and Sokare.
19. In Eastern Equatoria, ambushes and robberies continued along the Juba -ToritKapoeta road. The government of Torit dispatched organized forces on 20 March to
secure the road. In Western Equatoria, armed groups continued to be observed along
the border with the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Additionally, clashes were
reported between armed forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and a group
of armed Mbororo cattle keepers on 24 March, which allegedly resulted in the killing
of one Congolese soldier. On 20 April, Government forces from Maridi reportedly
clashed with the opposition in Mapoi, south-east of Tambura town, allegedly resulting
in the deaths of 11 soldiers from both sides.
Greater Bahr el-Ghazal region
20. In Western Bahr el-Ghazal, the situation remained tense, with reports of clashes
and civilian displacement. On 26 February, during a visit to Bagari, 29 national staff
members of two international non-governmental organizations and one staff member
of a local non-governmental organization were detained and released the following
day by the pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition on the pretext that it had not received
prior notification of the visit. The security situation reported ly further deteriorated as
opposition forces clashed with the joint forces of SPLA and the Justice and Equality
Movement in the Sopo and Deim Zubeir areas on 5 April, resulting in civilian
displacement. On 12 and 13 May, SPLA forces attacked the opposition base in Dulu,
approximately 35 kilometres south-west of Raja, resulting in four fatalities among
opposition members, including a senior opposition commander.
Intercommunal conflict
21. Intercommunal violence continued in Warrap, Lakes, Unity and Jonglei, while
in the Lakes, Gok and Western Lakes areas, civilian disarmament coincided with a
decrease in communal conflict, notably between the Rup and Kuei Dinka sections.
While some attributed the decrease to armed civilians retreating deeper into rural
areas to avoid the disarmament, others warned that failure to disarm communities
would create opportunities for armed actors to conduct cattle raids and attacks.
22. In several parts of Lakes, such as Long-Ameth, Panawac Boma and Rumbek
East, the Government’s disarmament force reportedly clashed with youth refusing to
disarm on 22 March, resulting in the death of one member of the disarmament force
and subsequent retaliation, in which residents were allegedly beaten, tukuls burned,
a number of youth arrested and one youth killed. Similar tensions were in Pacong and
in Awerial counties. In another development, from 23 to 26 March, the disarmament
force reportedly attacked Mayom Paayam, Malek County and Manyiel cattle camp,
near Rumbek town, in an attempt to relocate the Pakam section of the Dinka Agar
from the land historically owned by the Ruop section of the Dinka Agar.
23. On 23 March, UNMISS observed the escalation of tensions following the
mobilization of armed youth of the Dinka Gok Panyar section in Tiaptiap, north of
Rumbek town. In Warrap, in Tonj, intercommunal conflict continued between the
Thiik and Jalwau communities in Ngap-Agok and Wun Lit, and among clans in Wanh
Alel County, on 23 and 24 February, reportedly resulting in the deaths of 10 Thiik and
10 Jalwau members, with a further 40 injured. On 4 March, renewed clashes reported
between the Agar community and the Kongor section of the Jalwau in Tonj East led
to 22 deaths. Bul Nuer from Mayom attacked the Luo from Tonj on the border in
18-09253

5/17

S/2018/609

April, resulting in 15 deaths and triggering reprisal attacks, and tensions between the
Bul Nuer and the Misseriya pastoralists also remained high from February to April,
but subsided following the withdrawal of the Misseriya back to the Sudan with the
onset of the rainy season. In Jonglei, on 19 February, two Lou Nuer communities
reportedly clashed in Akobo and four people were killed, while the Murle Lango and
Kurenen age sets fought in Monchak and Likuangole, and later in Kelero on
25 February, resulting in several casualties and injuries.

IV. Humanitarian situation
24. Indicators of the humanitarian situation in South Sudan paint a bleak picture.
Refugee registration figures and estimates for internal displacement indicate that a
total of around 4.2 million people (one in three South Sudanese) have been displaced
by conflict since 2013. Of these, some 2.5 million (the majority women and children)
are living in neighbouring countries, while 1.8 million are internally displaced.
25. The conflict has limited the population’s safe access to arable land, disrupted
livelihoods and left significant segments of the population highly dependent on
humanitarian assistance, all contributing to high food levels of insecurity. Latest
analysis estimates that, in the absence of sustained assistance and access, around
7.1 million people in the country could become severely food insecure in the coming
months. Aid organizations forecast that, in 2018, around 1.1 million children under
the age of five will suffer from malnourishment, with nearly 300,000 suffering severe
malnutrition, at a heightened risk of death. The period of greatest risk will be the lean
season, between May and July.
26. South Sudan remains one of the world’s most challenging places to deliver
humanitarian assistance. Harassment, detention, injury, kidnappings and the killing
of aid workers have continued, despite the parties’ expressed commitment in the
December 2017 cessation of hostilities agreement to uphold international
humanitarian law. Six aid workers were killed between February and mid -May. In
February, two aid workers were killed in Koch County, Unity, during fighting. In
April, there were an additional three fatalities among aid workers, following renewed
fighting in multiple locations in Unity. One aid worker was killed by armed men while
in a clearly marked non-governmental organization vehicle, undertaking
humanitarian activities. Another was shot and killed while fleeing from crossfire
during intercommunal clashes outside a non-governmental organization health
facility; and another was shot and killed while returning to check on a health clinic
that had been looted. In May, a staff member of a local non-governmental organization
was caught in crossfire while working at a health clinic. These losses brought the total
number of aid workers killed since the current conflict began in December 2013 to
101.
27. The reporting period also saw an increase in incidents in which opposition
armed forces and groups detained aid workers. In March, SPLA in Opposition forces
in Morobo County, Central Equatoria, detained seven national non-governmental
organization aid workers for 20 days. On 25 April, a humanitarian convoy in Yei ,
Central Equatoria, was interrupted by SPLA in Opposition forces, and 10 South
Sudanese aid workers employed by the United Nations and non -governmental
organizations were detained for five days before being released. On 14 May, eight
non-governmental organization workers were detained by SPLA in Opposition forces
in the vicinity of Yangiri, Western Equatoria, and released four days later.
28. During the reporting period, aid operations were variously hindered and
disrupted by bureaucratic interference by authorities, ad hoc requests for fees and
accreditation requirements, illegal taxation, extortion, threats, intimidation and
6/17

18-09253

S/2018/609

harassment of aid workers. In February, 110 humanitarian access incidents were
reported, 40 of which involved violence against human itarian personnel. In March,
70 humanitarian access incidents were reported, 42 of which involved violence
against aid workers or assets. In April, the figures were 80 and 32, respectively. Of
such incidents in February, March and April, 47 per cent, 39 per cent and 44 per cent,
respectively, were attributed to State security forces and services. In April and May,
fighting in Unity caused the temporary relocation of more than 50 aid workers,
disrupting the delivery of lifesaving services to tens of thousand s of people.
29. Despite the difficulties and risks, humanitarian organizations continued to
deliver life-saving assistance and protection. By the end of March, humanitarian
organizations in South Sudan had provided assistance to nearly 3 million people of
the 6 million targeted in 2018. They included 2.8 million people who received food
assistance; more than 600,000 who were provided with access to clean water; some
100,000 people assisted with vital non-food items; nearly 230,000 children and
women provided with emergency nutritional assistance; some 390,000 children
supported with access to education; more than 510,000 people who received health
care services and 463,985 children vaccinated against measles; and more than
500,000 people who received specialized protection services.
30. As at 31 May, the 2018 humanitarian response plan had received some
$406.2 million against the $1.72 billion sought under the plan.

V. Implementation of the Mission’s mandated tasks
31. From 16 to 19 April 2018, the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Bintou Keita, travelled to South Sudan to discuss the modalities for the
implementation of the recommendations from the independent review of UN MISS
conducted from November 2017 to January 2018 (see S/2018/143) and of the new
UNMISS mandate with government officials, civil society representatives and the
senior leadership of the Mission and the country team. During her visit, she met with
the First Vice-President and cabinet ministers and called upon the Government to
cooperate with the Mission, honour its commitment to implement the cessation of
hostilities agreement, participate constructively in the revitalization forum and ensure
that local reconciliation initiatives, including the national dialogue process, were
complementary platforms to the efforts of IGAD. On 18 April, Ms. Keita also
participated in a senior leadership dialogue with the Government and other national
and international partners to strengthen and scale up interventions to prevent and
respond to conflict-related sexual- and gender-based violence. She subsequently
visited Ethiopia, where she met with the senior leadership of the SPLM/A in
Opposition and discussed with IGAD leaders United Natio ns support for the peace
process.

A.

Protection of civilians
32. In line with the mandate, UNMISS has been working with United Nations
country team partners to align protection activities under a system -wide approach. At
present, UNMISS follows a three-tiered approach to the protection of civilians. Under
the first tier, protection through dialogue and political engagement, through the good
offices of my Special Representative, the Mission engaged national authorities and
stakeholders. Through those engagements, the Mission re-emphasized the primary
responsibility of the South Sudanese authorities to protect civilians and sought the
collaboration of the latter and other partners to implement activities to protect
civilians. Following an escalation in violence in southern Unity, on 1 May my Special

18-09253

7/17

S/2018/609

Representative travelled to Leer town and Dablual, Mayendit County, to meet with
the warring parties, urging both sides to show restraint and uphold their responsibility
to protect civilians from armed conflict. The Mission delivered 27 workshops at the
subnational level, on social cohesion, reconciliation and conflict management, with
5,710 participants (1,796 women), including from UNMISS protection sites.
33. Under the second tier, protection from physical violence, as at 31 May, the
Mission was protecting 203,723 internally displaced persons at five UNMISS
protection of civilians sites. This included 116,725 in Bentiu, 39,405 in Juba, 24, 417
in Malakal, 2,296 in Bor and 20,880 in Wau. A temporary protection area in Leer,
Unity, provided refuge to 2,000 displaced persons.
34. A total of 791 crimes and security incidents were recorded at the sites during
the reporting period, with the highest incidence reported in Bentiu (367), followed by
Juba (171), Wau (140), Malakal (84) and Bor (29). The most common security
incidents recorded were assault (152), followed by fighting (81) and theft (79).
UNMISS conducted 115 search operations at protection sites, resulting in the
confiscation of prohibited items such as weapons, ammunition, illicit drugs and stolen
United Nations property. To reinforce the civilian character of the sites, UNMISS
continued regular meetings with community representatives at the Juba , Wau,
Malakal and Bentiu sites to improve co-existence, security and safety. UNMISS
developed a standard operating procedure for screening new arrivals at the sites. The
Mission also promulgated guidelines on the detention of persons posing a security
threat at or to the sites. A total of 126 persons suspected of being responsible for
serious security incidents at the sites were detained in the UNMISS holding facilities
in Bentiu, Juba and Malakal during the period from 17 February to 31 May 2018.
35. UNMISS established a framework to improve coordination and informationsharing with national authorities, including a protocol for responding to requests for
cooperation in the identification and apprehension of suspected fugitives believed to
be residing at protection sites. To promote accountability, UNMISS develo ped a pilot
project for the referral, for national investigation and prosecution, of serious cases of
crimes committed at the protection sites. In the initial phase of the pilot project, the
Directorate of Public Prosecution accepted six cases for investig ation of alleged
sexual violence at the Malakal and Bentiu sites. Additional cases are under review by
the Directorate. UNMISS is working with the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and stakeholders towards the establishment of a specialized unit
of national police, prosecutors and judges to focus on conflict -related crimes against
women and children, including sexual and gender-based violence.
36. UNMISS continued to focus on deterring and mitigating violence against
civilians beyond its protection sites. During the reporting period, a total of 12,025
patrols (short and long duration, dynamic air, riverine and foot) were conducted,
including 131 patrols to support the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism. These included regular patrols outside the protection of
civilians’ sites in Juba, Bentiu, Bor, Malakal and Wau. In areas of Upper Nile, patrol
locations included Kaka, Maiwut, Nasir, Pagak, Aburoc, Kodok, Tonga and the west
bank of the Nile River. UNMISS also established an austere operating base in Kodok
to enable a permanent presence to create a conducive and safe environment for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance and voluntary return. Confidence -building and
integrated patrols were maintained through Unity, with a focus on Adok, Leer,
Panyijiar, Mayendit, Koch, Mayom and Buaw, with an additional platoon deployed at
Leer. Dynamic air patrols were conducted in Buaw, Koch, Rubkuai and Thonyor,
seeking to deter attacks on civilians. In Wau, Western Bahr el -Ghazal, UNMISS
deployed additional forces to support the decongestion of the Wau protection of
civilians sites and consolidated its presence in Yei, Central Equatoria with the
deployment of one company. UNMISS continued its presence via regular integrated
8/17

18-09253

S/2018/609

long-duration dynamic air patrols in SPLM/A in Opposition-held areas of Akobo
(Jonglei), and Kodok (Upper Nile), to support the delivery of humanitarian aid and
enhance understanding of the local situation. The Mission also conducted patrols to
Yirol and Maper (Lakes), Panyagor-Poktar and Pochala (Jonglei), Raja and the Wau
triangle area (Western Bahr el-Ghazal), and Tambura (Western Equatoria).
37. Under the third tier, establishment of a protective environment, UNMISS
engaged with authorities and civil society to create a more conducive environment
for the return of displaced populations. This included the decongestion of the Wau
protection sites through the creation of conditions for the voluntary return of
internally displaced persons by increasing patrols outside the site, strengthening the
capacity of the South Sudan National Police Service and other rule of law institutions
and fostering dialogue between displaced populations and the Government to help
build confidence. UNMISS continued to enhance security t hrough quick-impact
projects, building security-related infrastructure in potential areas of return, including
Aweil, Wau and Warrap. These initiatives strengthened the Mission’s engagement
with security authorities to safeguard returnees.
38. The Mission also continued to engage with women on the prevention o f sexualand gender-based violence, including conflict-related sexual violence, and on
enhancing women’s participation in the peace process. UNMISS held a number of
round-table discussions and related events, which culminated in the South Sudan
Open Days Dialogue on Women, Peace and Security, attended by 150 women leaders
of civil society, from 13 to 15 March. The Mission provided training and developed
a manual on the investigation and prosecution of sexual and gender-based violence.
A working group on the implementation of a communiqué signed between the United
Nations and the Government in October 2014 finalized a plan of action for
Government security forces and United Nations and humanitarian part ners in order to
prevent, mitigate and respond to conflict-related sexual violence.

B.

Monitoring and investigating human rights
39. Violations and abuses of human rights and breaches of international
humanitarian law, including the killing and wounding of civilians, sexual violence,
forced displacement, looting and destruction of civilian property, ill -treatment and
harassment, arbitrary arrests and prolonged detention without trial increased
markedly relative to the previous reporting period. During the reporting period,
UNMISS verified the killing of 383 civilians (of whom 94 women and 32 children)
and 84 injuries (of whom 18 women and 6 children) as a direct result of the conflict.
From 21 April, Government forces and armed youth launched offe nsives in
opposition-controlled areas in Leer and Mayendit counties in Unity. UNMISS
deployed a rapid investigation team to the area which documented what appeared to
be deliberate attacks against civilians, including the elderly, people with disabilities
and children. At least 112 women and girls were allegedly raped, including a four year-old child. During the reporting period, UNMISS documented 56 incidents of
conflict-related sexual violence nationwide, affecting a total of 278 women and girls,
including 24 children, and one man. Twenty-six incidents were attributed to SPLA
and aligned forces with Taban Deng Gai in the Leer and Mayendit military offensive.
Twenty-two incidents were attributed to SPLA, six to the pro -Machar SPLA in
Opposition, one to the South Sudan National Police Service, and one to Lou Nuer
militia. Insecurity and denial of access continue to hamper United Nations
investigations. From 17 February to 31 May, 18 incidents of access denial, 12 of
which were attributed to SPLA and six to pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition forces,
were documented.

18-09253

9/17

S/2018/609

40. The Mission documented and verified (or confirmed) human rights violations
perpetrated by Government security forces involved in civilian disarmament
processes in Eastern Equatoria, Lakes and Warrap, including the killing and wounding
of civilians, attacks against humanitarian aid workers, forced displacement, looting,
destruction and extortion of civilian property, arbitrary arrest, detention and ill treatment of civilians who resisted or were perceived to be opposing disarmament.
Government disarmament forces reportedly: killed two youths, burned civilian houses
and arbitrarily arrested nine youths in Long-Ameth village, Western Lakes, on
19 February; attacked civilians, destroyed civilian property a nd displaced
approximately 8,000 civilians in the area north-east of Rumbek Town on 21 March.
41. Conditions of detention and prison facilities do not meet minimum international
standards, with cases of prolonged, arbitrary and proxy detention remaining an issue
of concern. On 11 April, the National Security Service detained, for reasons that are
unclear, seven Aweil officials, including three members of the State Legislative
Assembly, whose legislative immunity was reportedly lifted during an extraordinary
sitting of the Assembly. On 22 February, UNMISS followed up on the case of arbitrary
arrest by the official disarmament force in Eastern Equatoria, including the prolonged
detention without trial, physical assault and ill-treatment of eight civilians at Torit
Prison on suspicion of killing four people and wounding two others in Ibahure
Village, Lopa County in Eastern Equatoria. Incidents were documented of arbitrary
arrest, proxy detention and prolonged detention without trial and human rights
violations in the administration of justice affecting minors under the age of criminal
responsibility. On 16 March, 12 minors were detained without charge at Bor Police
Station, including three children as young as 10 years old. UNMISS advocacy resulted
in their release on 19 March.
42. Continued lack of observance of fair trial standards and due process, including
cases involving the death penalty, remains a serious concern. On 23 February, the
High Court issued a judgment against William John Endley, a South African national,
sentencing him to death for insurgency, banditry, sabotage and espionage, terrorism
and attempts to overthrow a constitutionally established Government, under section
67 of the South Sudan Criminal Procedure Act. The defendant filed an appeal bef ore
the Court of Appeal (Greater Equatoria) on 7 March, arguing failure to consider article
9 of the cessation of hostilities agreement, to comply with the right to legal
representation and to subpoena defence witnesses. The appeal case for James Gatdet
Dak, the former Press Secretary to the leader of SPLM/A in Opposition, Riek Machar,
has been pending since 12 February, when the High Court sentenced him to death. A
date for the verdict has yet to be set in the trial of 11 SPLA soldiers charged with
various crimes and human rights violations at the Terrain Hotel compound in July
2016, which has been pending since 9 February.
43. On transitional justice, the memorandum of understanding between the African
Union and South Sudan on the establishment of a hybrid court for South Sudan has
yet to be signed, five months after it was endorsed by the Council of Ministers of
South Sudan. In anticipation of the signing of the memorandum of understanding, the
African Union Commission has initiated a process for the recru itment of members of
a project task team to operationalize the hybrid court.
44. Government institutions continued to restrict the freedoms of expression, media
and association. For example, on 27 February, Jonglei authorities issued a ministerial
order dissolving all youth associations for allegedly engaging in activities likely to
lead to the breakdown of public order. UNMISS expressed concerns over the legality
and proportionality of such a measure. On 1 March, the professional body of media
editors and managers, the National Editors’ Forum, launched a set of editorial
guidelines for the South Sudanese media, intended to foster high standards of
journalism. On 3 May, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
10/17

18-09253

S/2018/609

Organization (UNESCO) and the Union of Journalists of South Sudan organized a
forum to mark World Press Freedom Day, to discuss the role of the media in holding
state institutions accountable to the public.
45. During the reporting period, UNMISS conducted 47 human rights capacity building and sensitization activities, benefiting a total of 3,303 participants (of whom
1,597 were women). Of the sessions, 39 sessions included public awareness -raising
of human rights and accountability, for 2,620 participants (of whom 1,304 were
women) drawn from civil society organizations and other stakeholders. The other
eight sessions engaged 683 members of the organized forces (of whom 288 were
women). These included a training-of-trainers workshop on human rights for 20 South
Sudanese police officers (of whom five were women), conducted with UNDP. As part
of internal mainstreaming of human rights, UNMISS also facilitated sessions on the
human rights mandate for 680 UNMISS uniformed personnel, including 157 women.
46. During the reporting period, the United Nations country task force on
monitoring and reporting on children in armed conflict documented 135 incidents of
grave violations, of which 75 were verified, affecting at least 2,541 children (of whom
1,220 were girls). Almost half (49 per cent) of the verified incidents occurred in the
greater Upper Nile region. Reports indicated that SPLA was responsible for 44 per
cent of the verified incidents and the pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition for 42 per cent.
47. UNMISS and the United Nations Children’s Fund continued to support the
National Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission in the age
assessment screening of children associated with armed forces and groups. On
17 April, a batch of 248 children (including 111 girls) were officially release d from
SPLA forces aligned with Taban Deng Gai and from the South Sudan National
Liberation Movement in Western Equatoria. On 17 May, 210 children (including 3
girls) were released by armed groups in Pibor, Jonglei. Coupled with an earlier release
in Yambio in February, this brings the number of children released from armed groups
in South Sudan this year to 806. UNMISS also facilitated 102 training and
sensitization sessions on child protection for 6,826 participants (2,645 of whom were
women), drawn from Government-organized forces, public authorities, community
members and UNMISS personnel. It also provided child protection training to 522
SPLA personnel (30 of whom were women).

C.

Creating the conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance
48. UNMISS continued to provide force protection for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance where it is sought. During the reporting period, the Mission conducted
protection and humanitarian field assessment missions to both Government - and
opposition-controlled areas across the country. Among locations covered by these
missions were Aburoc and Kodok in Upper Nile, Bul East, Leer, Mayom, Thoyong
and Tomor in Unity, and Tonj East and West in Warrap. Following reports in April
that cattle raiding had been preventing non-governmental organizations from
delivering aid in Tonj and Warrap, UNMISS advocated with the state authorities to
secure roads to enable safe delivery of humanitarian assistance. The Mission has
continued to rehabilitate and improve sections of roads and bridges for both the
benefit of the local economy and the delivery of humanitarian aid. In March,
UNMISS, with the World Food Programme (WFP) and the Ministry of Roads and
Bridges, began repair work on a 400-km stretch of road from Juba to Rumbek, through
Yirol, a route which is important for the transport of humanitarian assistance as well
as for economic activity.

18-09253

11/17

S/2018/609

49. The Mine Action Service fulfilled requests for survey and clearance by the
International Organization for Migration, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and WFP to support the resettlement of displaced people
and return to areas previously affected by the conflict, and to clear areas for use as
food distribution sites. The Mine Action Service participated in two humanitarian
missions to Mundri, in Central Equatoria, and Raja, in Western Bahr el-Ghazal,
carrying out removal and disposal of explosive hazards. During the reporting period,
36 mine action teams were deployed across the country, a total of 15,955,162 m 2 was
surveyed and released and a further 5,540 explosive hazards and 65,096 small arms
and rounds of ammunition were removed and destroyed. The Mine Action Service
surveyed and cleared the operating base established in Kodok, Upper Nile. On
7 March, an accident at a demolition site in Melut, Upper Nile, killed one deminer
and injured a second and is currently under investigation.

D.

Supporting the implementation of the Agreement and the
peace process
50. My Special Representative has continued to use his good offices in support of
the peace process in South Sudan, and, in particular, the high -level revitalization
forum. This has included meeting with President Museveni in April, ahead of the
meeting of the National Liberation Council and the revitalization forum talks,
meetings with senior officials in regional states in May and direct engagement with
President Kiir to urge the Government’s continued and constructive participation in
ongoing peace efforts and implementation of the agreement on the cessation of
hostilities signed in December 2017. The Special Representative also regularly
engaged the diplomatic community and other partners to mobilize and coordinate
support to the peace process. On 22 March, the Mission held a workshop in Juba for
political parties on the subject of the forum, peace and reconciliation. From 10 to
13 April, the Mission held a public consultation on the forum, attended by
approximately 400 people from civil society organizations, including faith-based,
women’s and youth groups. In coordination with the United Nations country team,
the Mission has been engaging with the leaders and steering committee of the national
dialogue, advocating for concrete measures to be taken to make the dialogue inclusive
and credible.
51. UNMISS continued to provide logistical support and force protection for the
Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism in its
operations to implement its monitoring and verification mandate. The Missio n has
disseminated information to local audiences on the cessation of hostilities agreement,
including summary booklets in six languages, flash cards, posters and billboards.
52. The Mission continued to support and prioritize women’s representation and
active participation in the peace process. During the reporting period, UNMISS
disseminated to the Government, members of parliament, political parties, civil
society organizations and universities the outcome document from a workshop that it
supported, with women politicians, on women’s participation in peace processes. The
Mission also contributed to a training course, held from 17 to 19 May, for women
parliamentarians and members of the national dialogue steering committee, which
aimed to enhance women’s participation in subsequent phases of the dialogue.
53. UNMISS has continued to provide support for a civil society working group on
transitional justice, which during the reporting period conducted further consultations
on the legislation for establishing the Commission for Truth, Reconciliation and
Healing, as proposed in the Agreement. These consultations were conducted between
15 and 29 March in refugee camps in neighbouring countries and were intended to

12/17

18-09253

S/2018/609

complement in-country consultations that are to be conducted by a committee
established by the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. The consultations
with refugees took place in Gambela, Ethiopia, in Jabal Awlya, Sudan, and Kakuma ,
Kenya.

VI. Mission staffing, the status of deployments and conduct
and discipline
54. As at 3 June 2018, the number of UNMISS civilian personnel stood at 2,676,
including 884 international staff members (229 women, 26 per cent), 1,397 national
staff members (197 women, 14 per cent) and 396 United Nations Volun teers (123
women, 31 per cent).
55. The police strength as at 3 June stood at 1,654 (out of an authorized 2,101
officers), comprising 625 individual police officers (125 women, 20 per cent), 956
personnel in formed police units (145 women, 15 per cent) and 73 corrections officers
(20 women, 27 per cent).
56. As at 3 June, the UNMISS troop strength stood at 13,767 military personnel,
comprising 184 military liaison officers (20 women, 11 per cent), 376 military staff
officers (52 women, 14 per cent) and 13,207 military contingent personnel (409
women, 3 per cent).
57. Of the authorized 4,000 regional protection force troops, 2,297 have been
inducted to date, including 29 out of the 38-person headquarters element and 13 of
the 20 planned military liaison officers. Full complements of the Bangladesh
Engineering Unit, the Nepalese High Readiness Company and the Chinese and
Rwandan infantry battalions have been deployed. The main body of the Ethiopian
infantry battalion is scheduled to arrive in Juba between 10 and 26 June.
58. UNMISS continues to implement and strengthen its conduct and discipline
measures, with enhanced emphasis on protection from sexual exploitation and abuse
initiatives. Apart from conducting internal awareness-raising activities, UNMISS
focused extensively on strengthening victim assistance mechanisms. A
comprehensive risk assessment exercise was conducted in all UNMISS locations
where there are protection of civilians sites, namely Juba, Bor, Malakal, Bentiu and
Wau, to identify particular risks and recommend appropriate remedial measures.
59. A tailored training-of-trainers programme on preventing sexual exploitation and
abuse was delivered for military personnel. Collaboration is ongoing with the task
force on preventing sexual exploitation and abuse. This includes establishing
community-based complaint mechanisms throughout South Sudan. UNMISS has
recorded and referred three allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse, and one
allegation of sexual harassment, to the Office of Internal Ove rsight Services (OIOS)
for investigation. OIOS, which operates independently and reports to the General
Assembly, has now finalized its investigation into the allegation of sexual exploitation
involving police personnel belonging to a formed police unit in Wau. It is established
in the report that members of the unit were involved in transactional sex, on which
the United Nations has a zero-tolerance policy. Consistent with existing regulations,
the police officers found guilty of misconduct were repatriate d on disciplinary
grounds and are banned from serving in the United Nations. The OIOS report has also
been shared with the Government to support its own investigation.

18-09253

13/17

S/2018/609

VII. Violations of the status-of-forces agreement, international
humanitarian law and security of United Nations personnel
60. During the reporting period, 72 incidents of violation of the status -of-forces
agreement were recorded by UNMISS, some involving multiple violations.
61. In total, 38 incidents involving movement restrictions attributed to the
Government that affected UNMISS operations were recorded during the reporting
period. Of particular concern is the number of restrictions affecting the movement of
UNMISS personnel monitoring and reporting on the human rights situation. Six n ew
cases of arrest and detention of UNMISS personnel were also reported, including one
involving a staff member working at Radio Miraya. In one case, the staff member was
also physically assaulted. In four cases, the arrested staff members were released af ter
a few hours, in two cases after one day. The whereabouts of two staff members
arrested in 2014 remain unknown. The Government has not provided UNMISS with
access to them or information about their condition, despite regular requests.
62. Violations of the obligation to facilitate the entry of UNMISS personnel into
South Sudan continue to occur. The practice of collecting fees for visa cancellation
upon application for visa extension by UNMISS staff members was brought to the
attention of the Government, which adopted prompt measures to discontinue the
practice. Aside from these incidents, there were seven recorded cases of UNMISS
personnel and contractors being threatened, harassed or assaulted and eight recorded
cases of UNMISS property being seized or impounded, sometimes in combination
with other incidents. An UNMISS vehicle impounded in Juba on 25 January by the
National Police Service has not been returned, despite repeated requests.
63. A total of 30 incidents involving interference with UNMISS activities by the
pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition were recorded. Some 11 cases were recorded in
Central Equatoria, eight in Unity, two in Jonglei, eight in Upper Nile and one in
Western Equatoria. Eight of these incidents also resulted in interference with
UNMISS-mandated activities related to monitoring and reporting on the human rights
situation. UNMISS continues to notify the Government about violations through a
monthly record of incidents and in-person meetings with relevant officials.
64. To prevent and mitigate threats to United Nations personnel, premises and
assets, the Mission continues to implement security risk management measures,
including enhancing the physical protection of United Nations premises, the use of
alert and staff tracking systems and closer cooperation, information-sharing and
liaison with Government security agencies. The Mission is encouraging United
Nations agencies, funds, and programmes to engage consistently with national,
regional and local stakeholders to facilitate access in high-risk areas. The Mission is
also using its multimedia communications and outreach channels to build public
understanding of the Mission’s mandate and the role of peacekeepers in building
peace and protecting civilians in South Sudan.

VIII. Observations and recommendations
65. I commend the efforts being made by IGAD, the African Union and the
international community with regard to the revitalization forum. I welcome the efforts
to narrow the gaps between the parties and to bring about progress in talks. I urge the
parties to engage with the mediators in good faith and demonstrate the political will
to settle this conflict once and for all. I also welcome the stated intent of IGAD and
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union to take targeted sanctions against
violators of the cessation of hostilities agreement signed in December 2017. There

14/17

18-09253

S/2018/609

must be consequences for the flagrant violations of the agreement and a tangible cost
for continuing the violence. In this regard, I call on IGAD to expedite the timely
publication of reported violations documented by the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism and take action against the individuals
who continue to obstruct the peace process, in accordance with the decision of its
Council of Ministers of 31 May.
66. It is evident that holding elections in the current political, security and
humanitarian environment is unrealistic and would be detrimental to the stabilization
of the country. In this respect, I encourage the region and the wider international
community to align and coordinate their efforts to support the goal of a lasting and
inclusive political settlement and display genuine unity of purpose in support of the
peace process.
67. Within South Sudan, the public consultations conducted as part of the national
dialogue process have gathered views about the causes of violent conflict in the
country and possible solutions. Noting the fundamental challenge represented by the
opposition’s boycott of the dialogue and shortcomings in the participation of
internally displaced persons and refugees, I urge the leaders of the dialogue to
intensify their efforts to engage with opposition leaders and citizens, inside and
outside the country, to ensure inclusivity, credibilit y and transparency in the process.
At the same time, I encourage those leading and participating in the national dialogue,
the revitalization forum and the SPLM reunification process, to ensure that these
initiatives are mutually complementary. I also call on the Government to respect the
need for the dialogue to be fully inclusive and free from political interference if it is
to contribute effectively to the peace process.
68. In parallel with the political priorities, the deterioration of the humanitarian and
economic situation in South Sudan is cause for grave concern and demands immediate
attention and action. The United Nations country team and partners continue to strive
to alleviate the situation. However, the extent of obstructions to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance, and the number of attacks on humanitarian aid workers (with
101 killed since the start of the conflict in December 2013), are totally unacceptable.
I therefore call on all parties to refrain in all circumstances from actions that may
hamper the delivery of assistance.
69. In March the Security Council renewed the mandate of UNMISS until March
2019, thereby authorizing UNMISS to use all necessary means to perform the tasks
specified in the mandate. In response to the escalation of military operations during
the reporting period, the Mission has enhanced its efforts to reach areas critical to
addressing protection concerns, for example by establishing a new operating base in
Kodok and reinforcing our presence of the Mission in Leer, and to verify reported
human rights violations, including through the speedy deployment of a rapid
investigation team in southern Unity. Further to what has been observed by UNMISS,
I note the report of the Commission on Human Rights in South Sudan, publish ed on
23 February (A/HRC/37/71). I strongly condemn the horrific gross human rights
abuses being committed against civilians, especially the endemic acts of sexual
violence targeting women and girls. I impress upon the Government and opposition
that they must put an end to heinous violations and take firm action to advance
accountability and transitional justice mechanisms. This impunity has to end.
70. In concluding, I would like to reiterate my appreciation to UNMISS military,
police and civilian personnel. Under the leadership of my Special Representative,
David Shearer, they work courageously to protect civilians in vulnerable situations,
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance, safeguard human rights and support
the peace process. I particularly thank the troop- and police-contributing countries
that have provided much-needed uniformed personnel and assets to the Mission. I
18-09253

15/17

S/2018/609

further commend the United Nations country team and non-governmental
organization partners for their tremendous courage and sacrifice in providing vital
humanitarian assistance to the population, in arduous and sometimes dangerous
conditions. I also thank my Special Envoy, Nicholas Haysom, for his support to the
peace process at the regional level. Lastly, I commend the Chair of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, the former President of Botswana, Festus
Mogae, and the African Union High Representative for South Sudan, the former
President of Mali, Alpha Oumar Konaré, for their commitment to addressing the
plight of the civilian population of South Sudan in partnership with the United
Nations. I also wish to express my sincere appreciation for the active engagement of
the Chair of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki, in the collective effort for
peace in South Sudan.

16/17

18-09253

18-09253

S/2018/609

17/17
