United Nations

A/RES/59/178

General Assembly

Distr.: General
3 March 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 104

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2004
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/59/502)]

59/178. Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights
and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to
self-determination
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 58/162 of 22 December 2003, and taking note of
Commission on Human Rights resolution 2004/5 of 8 April 2004, 1
Recalling also all of its relevant resolutions, in which, inter alia, it
condemned any State that permitted or tolerated the recruitment, financing,
training, assembly, transit and use of mercenaries with the objective of
overthrowing the Governments of States Members of the United Nations,
especially those of developing countries, or of fighting against national liberation
movements, and recalling further the relevant resolutions and international
instruments adopted by the General Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic
and Social Council and the Organization of African Unity, inter alia, the
Organization of African Unity Convention for the elimination of mercenarism in
Africa, 2 as well as the African Union, 3
Reaffirming the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations concerning the strict observance of the principles of sovereign
equality, political independence, the territorial integrity of States, the
self-determination of peoples, the non-use of force or of the threat of use of force
in international relations and non-interference in affairs within the domestic
jurisdiction of States,
Reaffirming also that, by virtue of the principle of self-determination, all
peoples have the right freely to determine their political status and to pursue their
economic, social and cultural development, and that every State has the duty to
respect this right in accordance with the provisions of the Charter,

_______________
1

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
2
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1490, No. 25573.
3
On 8 July 2002, the Organization of African Unity ceased to exist and, in its place, the African Union
came into force on 9 July 2002.

04-48694

A/RES/59/178

Reaffirming further the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, 4
Alarmed and concerned at the danger that the activities of mercenaries
constitute to peace and security in developing countries, in particular in Africa and
in small States,
Deeply concerned at the loss of life, the substantial damage to property and the
negative effects on the policy and economies of affected countries resulting from
criminal mercenary activities,
Extremely alarmed and concerned about recent mercenary activities in Africa
and the threat they pose to the integrity of and respect for the constitutional order of
those countries,
Convinced that, notwithstanding the way in which they are used or the form
that they take to acquire some semblance of legitimacy, mercenaries or
mercenary-related activities are a threat to peace, security and the self-determination
of peoples and an obstacle to the enjoyment of human rights by peoples,
Takes note of the brief report prepared by the Office of the United
1.
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on the question of the use of
mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the
right of peoples to self-determination; 5
2.
Welcomes the appointment of Shaista Shameem as Special Rapporteur of
the Commission on Human Rights on the use of mercenaries as a means of
impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination, and encourages
her to continue and further advance the valuable work done and the important
contributions made by Enrique Bernales Ballesteros in the sixteen years of his
mandate;
Reaffirms that the use of mercenaries and their recruitment, financing and
3.
training are causes for grave concern to all States and violate the purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations;
Recognizes that armed conflict, terrorism, arms trafficking and covert
4.
operations by third Powers, inter alia, encourage the demand for mercenaries on the
global market;
Urges all States to take the necessary steps and to exercise the utmost
5.
vigilance against the menace posed by the activities of mercenaries and to take
legislative measures to ensure that their territories and other territories under their
control, as well as their nationals, are not used for the recruitment, assembly,
financing, training and transit of mercenaries for the planning of activities designed
to impede the right of peoples to self-determination, to destabilize or overthrow the
Government of any State or to dismember or impair, totally or in part, the territorial
integrity or political unity of sovereign and independent States conducting
themselves in compliance with the right of peoples to self-determination;
Requests all States to exercise the utmost vigilance against any kind of
6.
recruitment, training, hiring or financing of mercenaries by private companies

_______________
4
5

2

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
See A/59/191.

A/RES/59/178

offering international military consultancy and security services, as well as to
impose a specific ban on such companies intervening in armed conflicts or actions
to destabilize constitutional regimes;
Welcomes the entry into force of the International Convention against the
7.
Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries, 6 and calls upon all States
that have not yet done so to consider taking the necessary action to accede to or
ratify the Convention;
Welcomes also the cooperation extended by those countries that have
8.
received visits from the Special Rapporteur and the adoption by some States of
national legislation that restricts the recruitment, assembly, financing, training and
transit of mercenaries;
Condemns recent mercenary activities in Africa, and commends the
9.
African Governments on their collaboration in thwarting those illegal actions, which
posed a threat to the integrity of and respect for the constitutional order of those
countries and the exercise of the right of their peoples to self-determination;
10. Calls upon States to investigate the possibility of mercenary involvement
whenever and wherever criminal acts of a terrorist nature occur and to bring to trial
those found responsible or to consider their extradition, if so requested, in
accordance with domestic law and applicable bilateral or international treaties;
11. Condemns any form of impunity granted to perpetrators of mercenary
activities and to those responsible for the use, recruitment, financing and training of
mercenaries, and urges all States, in accordance with their obligations under
international law, to bring them, without distinction, to justice;
12. Requests the new Special Rapporteur to circulate to States and consult
with them on the new proposal for a legal definition of a mercenary drafted by the
former Special Rapporteur 7 and to report her findings to the Commission on Human
Rights and the General Assembly;
13. Requests the Office of the High Commissioner, as a matter of priority, to
publicize the adverse effects of the activities of mercenaries on the right of peoples
to self-determination and, when requested and where necessary, to render advisory
services to States that are affected by those activities;
14. Also requests the Office of the High Commissioner to convene a third
meeting of experts on traditional and new forms of mercenary activities as a means
of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to
self-determination, respecting the main objectives defined in paragraph 16 of
Commission on Human Rights resolution 2004/5;1
15. Requests the Special Rapporteur to continue to take into account, in the
discharge of her mandate, the fact that mercenary activities continue to occur in
many parts of the world and are taking on new forms, manifestations and
modalities, and, in this regard, requests her to pay particular attention to the impact
of the activities of private companies offering military assistance, consultancy and
security services on the international market on the exercise of the right of peoples
to self-determination;

_______________
6
7

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2163, No. 37789.
See E/CN.4/2004/15, para. 47.

3

A/RES/59/178

16. Urges all States to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur in the
fulfilment of her mandate;
17. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to provide the Special Rapporteur with all the
necessary assistance and support for the fulfilment of her mandate, both
professional and financial, including through the promotion of cooperation between
the Special Rapporteur and other components of the United Nations system that deal
with countering mercenary-related activities;
18. Requests the Special Rapporteur to consult States and intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations in the implementation of the present resolution
and to report, with specific recommendations, to the General Assembly at its sixtieth
session her findings on the use of mercenaries to undermine the right of peoples to
self-determination;
19. Decides to consider at its sixtieth session the question of the use of
mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the
right of peoples to self-determination under the item entitled “Right of peoples to
self-determination”.
74th plenary meeting
20 December 2004

4
