V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Having examined the note by the Secretary-General of
the International Telecommunication Union concerning the
mobilization of voluntary resources for the World Communications Year, 2
Recognizing the fundamental importance of communications infrastructures as an essential element in the economic and social development of all countries,
Convinced that the World Communications Year will
provide the opportunity for all countries to undertake an indepth review and analysis of their policies on communications development and stimulate the accelerated development of communications infrastructures,
1. Endorses the proposal made by the Economic and
Social Council in paragraph 1 of its resolution 1981/60 and
proclaims the year 1983 World Communications Year: Development of Communications Infrastructures, with the International Telecommunication Union serving as the lead
agency for the Year and having responsibility for co-ordinating the interorganizational aspects of the programmes
and activities of other agencies;
2. Requests all States to participate actively in the attainment of the objectives of the World Communications
Year;
3. Invites the competent organizations and agencies of
the United Nations system to co-operate closely with the
Secretary-General of the International Telecommunication
Union, within their respective terms of reference, for the
implementation of the programme for the World Communications Year;
4. Invites non-governmental organizations and users of
communications services to participate actively in the World
Communications Year and to secure the fullest possible coordination of their programmes for the Year, particularly
at the national level;
5. Invites Governments and interested organizations to
make voluntary contributions to the World Communications
Year through the Special Fund for the World Communications Year co-ordinated by the International Telecommunication Union, in order to ensure increased financing
of projects at the national, regional and global levels;
6. Appeals to governmental authorities and appropriate
organizations to make circuits available for reporting on the
activities of the World Communications Year through existing means of information, including radio and television
broadcasts, in collaboration with those authorities;
7. Requests the Secretary-General of the International
Telecommunication Union to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session, through the Economic and
Social Council at its second regular session of 1982, on the
state of preparations for the World Communications Year.
64th plenary meeting
19 November 1981

36/41.

World Tourism Organization

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/157 of 19 December 1977
and 33/122 of 19 December 1978, concerning the World
Tourism Organization,
Recalling also its resolution 34/134 of 14 December
1979, concerning the convening of the World Tourism Conference in September and October 1980 at Manila by the
World Tourism Organization,
Recalling further its resolution 35/56 of 5 December
1980, by which it proclaimed the Third United Nations
2

A/36/585, annex.

99

Development Decade and adopted the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Decade,
Taking note of paragraph (c) of Economic and Social
Council decision 109 (LIX) of 23 July 1975, in which the
Council designated the World Tourism Organization top~ticipate, on a continuing basis, in the work of the Council,
Noting with satisfaction the report of the SecretaryGeneral of the World Tourism Organization on the World
Tourism Conference, 1 prepared in conformity with General
Assembly resolution 34/ 134,
Noting with appreciation the statement made by the Minister of Tourism of the Philippines and President of the
World Tourism Conference before the Second Committee,
on 8 October I 981, 4 on the results of the Conference, as
embodied in the Manila Declaration on World Tourism 5
adopted by the Conference,
Recognizing the new dimension and role of tourism _as
a positive instrument towards the improvement of the quahty
of life for all peoples, as well as a vital force for peace and
international understanding,
I. Welcomes the Manila Declaration on World Tourism,
which provides guidelines for the harmonious, balanced and
equitable development of national and international tourism;
2. Urges States to give due attention to the principles
of the Manila Declaration while formulating and implementing, as appropriate, their tourism policies, plans and
programmes, in accordance with their national priorities and
within the framework of the programme of work of the
World Tourism Organization;
3. Requests the World Tourism Organization to continue its efforts towards the future development and promotion of tourism, especially in the developing countries,
bearing in mind the implementation of the principles and
guidelines contained in the Manila Declaration;
4. Requests international, intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations directly or indirectly interested
in tourism to extend their assistance, in consultation and cooperation with the World Tourism Organization, towards
the implementation of the Manila Declaration;
5. Decides that the World Tourism Organization may
participate, on a continuing basis, in the work of the General
Assembly in areas of concern to that Organization;
6. Requests the Secretary-General of the World Tourism
Organization to submit to the General Assembly at its thirtyeighth session, through the Economic and Social Council,
a report on the progress made in the implementation of the
Manila Declaration.
64th plenary meeting
19 November 1981

36/42.

Mobilization of personal savings

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202 (S-Vl) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development
and international economic co-operation,
Bearing in mind the goals and objectives of the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations
' A/36/236, annex.
Official Records of the General Assemblv, Thirty-sixth Session, Second
Committee, 9th meeting. paras. 11-15.
' A/36/236, annex, appendix I.
4

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

100

Development Decade, contained in the annex to its resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980, in particular paragraph
23, which deals with the mobilization of domestic financial
resources in developing countries,
Convinced of the necessity and importance of intensifying
efforts to mobilize personal savings in developing countries
so as to maximize financial resources available for accelerated development,
Emphasizing that, while developing countries will continue to bear the main responsibility for financing their development, external financial resources, particularly official
development assistance, constitute an indispensable element
of support for the developing countries' own efforts,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the results of the 1980 International Symposium on the
Mobilization of Personal Savings in Developing Countries"
and the suggestions made during the debate;
2. Affirms the need to encourage development of appropriate indigenous financial institutions and to foster governmental and institutional exchanges of ideas and information
in the field of mobilization of personal savings;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Economic and Social Council at its second regular session of
1982 on the results of the Second International Symposium
on the Mobilization of Personal Savings in Developing
Countries, to be held at Kuala Lumpur in March 1982.
64th plenary meeting
/9 November 1981

36/43.

Global Strategy for Health for All by the Year
2000

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/58 of 29 November 1979 concerning health as an integral part of development,
Noting with approval World Health Assembly resolution
WHA 34.36 of 22 May 1981 by which the thirty-fourth
Assembly unanimously adopted the Global Strategy for
Health for All by the Year 2000,
Considering that the Global Strategy fully reflects the
spirit of General Assembly resolution 34/58,
Considering that peace and security are important conditions for the preservation and improvement of the health
of all people and that co-operation among nations on vital
health issues can contribute substantially to peace,
Noting further that the Global Strategy is based upon the
principles of the Declaration of Alma-Ata7 on primary health
care, which implies an integrated approach to the solution
of health care problems and requires the fullest support and
involvement of all economic and social development sectors,
Recognizing that the implementation of the Global Strategy will constitute a valuable contribution to the improvement of over-all socio-economic conditions, and thus to the
fulfilment of the International Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade, 8
l. Endorses the Global Strategy for Health for All by
the Year 2000 as a major contribution of Member States to
the attainment of the world-wide social goal of health for
all by the year 2000 and to the fulfilment of the International
Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade;
6

A/36/239.
See World Health Organization, Health Care: Report of the International Conference on Primary Health Care, Alma-Ata, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, 6-12 September 197H (Geneva, 1978).
8
Resolution 35/56. annex.
7

2. Urges all Member States to ensure the implementation of the Global Strategy as part of their multisectoral
efforts to implement the provisions contained in the International Development Strategy;
3. Also urges all Member States to co-operate with one
another and with the World Health Organization to ensure
that the necessary international action is taken to implement
the Global Strategy as part of the fulfilment of the International Development Strategy;
4. Requests all appropriate organizations and bodies of
the United Nations system-including the United Nations
Children's Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the International Labour Organisation,
the United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United
Nations Fund for Population Activities and the World
Bank-to collaborate fully with the World Health Organization in carrying out the Global Strategy;
5. Requests the Director-General of the World Health
Organization to ensure that measures to implement the
Global Strategy are taken into account in the review and
appraisal of the implementation of the International Development Strategy.
64th plenary meeting
/9 November /98/

36/44.

Technical co-operation among developing
countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 320 I (S-VI) and 3202 (S-Vl) of
I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 ( XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development
and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 35/56 of 5 December I 980,
the annex to which contains the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Del:ade,
Recalling further its resolution 33/134 of 19 December
1978, in which it endorsed the Buenos Aires Plan of Action
for Promoting and Implementing Technical Co-operation
among Developing Countries, 9 and its resolutions 34/117
of 14 December 1979 and 35/202 of 16 December 1980 on
technical co-operation among developing countries,
Having examined the report of the High-level Committee
on the Review of Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries on its second session, held from I to 8 June
1981, JO
Taking note (.)f decisions 81/31, 81 /32 and 81/33 of 26
June 1981 of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Development Programme, 11 relating to technical co-operation among developing countries,
Taking note also of Economic and Social Council resolution 1981/58 of 22 July 1981 relating to the Committee,
I . Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Highlevel Committee on the Review of Technical Co-operation
among Developing Countries on its second session;
9
Report of the United Nations Conference on Technical Co-operation
among Developing Countries, Buenos Aires, 30 August-12 September 1978
(United Nations publication. Sales No. E.78.11.A. I l and corrigendum),
chap. I.
10
Official Records of the General Assemhl_v. Thirt_v-sixth Session. Supplement No. 39 (A/36/39).
11
See Official Rernrds of the Economic and Social Council. 19H/.
Supplement No. I I 1!'JI 981/61/Rev. I). annex I.
