A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/77
12 January 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 71
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/53/584)]
53/77.

General and complete disarmament
A

ESTABLISHMENT OF A NUCLEAR-WEAPON-FREE ZONE IN CENTRAL ASIA
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 52/38 S of 9 December 1997,
Also recalling paragraphs 60, 61, 62 and 64 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of
the General Assembly,1 the provisions of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons2 and
paragraphs 5 and 6 of the decision entitled “Principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament” in the Final Document of the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,3 concerning the establishment of nuclear-weaponfree zones,

1

Resolution S-10/2.

2

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.

3

1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, Final Document, Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I)), annex, decision 2.
99-76045

/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 2

Convinced that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones can contribute to the achievement of
general and complete disarmament,
Emphasizing the importance of internationally recognized agreements on the establishment of nuclearweapon-free zones in various regions of the world and on the strengthening of the non-proliferation
regime,
Considering that the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia,4 on the basis of
arrangements freely arrived at among the States within the region and taking into account the special
characteristics of the region, can enhance the security of the States involved and strengthen global and
regional security and peace,
Recalling the Almaty Declaration of the heads of State of the Central Asian States of 28 February
19975 on the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia, and the statement issued at Tashkent
on 15 September 1997 by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia,6
Welcoming the Communiqué of the Consultative Meeting of Experts of the Central Asian Countries,
the Nuclear-Weapon States and the United Nations held at Bishkek on 9 and 10 July 1998,7 with a view
to elaborating acceptable ways and means for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central
Asia,
Reaffirming the generally recognized role of the United Nations in the establishment of nuclearweapon-free zones,
1. Calls upon all States to support the initiative aimed at the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in Central Asia;
2. Commends the first concrete steps taken by the States of the region in preparing the legal
groundwork for their initiative;
3. Encourages the five Central Asian States to continue their dialogue with the five nuclear-weapon
States on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, within existing resources, to provide assistance to the Central
Asian States in the preparation of the form and elements of an agreement on the establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia;

4

Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.

5

A/52/112, annex.

6

A/52/390, annex.

7

A/53/183, annex.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 3

5. Decides to consider the question of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central
Asia at its fifty-fourth session under the agenda item entitled “General and complete disarmament”.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998
B
ASSISTANCE TO STATES FOR CURBING THE ILLICIT TRAFFIC IN SMALL ARMS
AND COLLECTING THEM

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 46/36 H of 6 December 1991, 47/52 G and J of 9 December 1992, 48/75 H
and J of 16 December 1993, 49/75 G of 15 December 1994, 50/70 H of 12 December 1995, 51/45 L of
10 December 1996 and 52/38 C of 9 December 1997,
Considering that the illicit circulation of massive quantities of small arms throughout the world
impedes development and is a source of increased insecurity,
Considering also that the illicit international transfer of small arms and their accumulation in many
countries constitute a threat to their populations and to national and regional security and are a factor
contributing to the destabilization of States,
Basing itself on the statement of the Secretary-General relating to the request of Mali for United
Nations assistance for the collection of small arms,
Gravely concerned at the extent of the insecurity and banditry linked to the illicit circulation of small
arms in Mali and the other affected States of the Saharo-Sahelian subregion,
Taking note of the first conclusions of the United Nations advisory missions sent to the affected
countries of the subregion by the Secretary-General to study the best way of curbing the illicit circulation
of small arms and ensuring their collection,
Taking note also of the interest shown by the other States of the region in receiving a United Nations
advisory mission,
Noting the actions taken and those recommended at the meetings of the States of the subregion held
at Banjul, Algiers, Bamako, Yamoussoukro and Niamey to establish close regional cooperation with a
view to strengthening security,

/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 4

Bearing in mind the report of the Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa,8
Welcoming the initiative taken by the Economic Community of West African States concerning the
declaration of a moratorium on the importing, exporting and manufacture of light weapons in West Africa,
Welcoming also the decision of the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its
sixty-eighth ordinary session, held at Ouagadougou from 4 to 7 June 1998, concerning the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons,9
Taking note with interest of the work of the Panel of Governmental Experts on Small Arms, in
particular the recommendations contained in paragraphs 79 (a) and (g) of its report,10
Emphasizing the need to advance efforts towards wider cooperation and better coordination in the
struggle against the accumulation, proliferation and widespread use of small arms through the common
understanding of the meeting on small arms, held at Oslo on 13 and 14 July 1998,11 and the Brussels
Call for Action adopted by the International Conference on Sustainable Disarmament for Sustainable
Development, held at Brussels on 12 and 13 October 1998,12
1. Welcomes the initiative taken by Mali concerning the question of the illicit circulation of small
arms and their collection in the affected States of the Saharo-Sahelian subregion;
2. Also welcomes the Declaration of a Moratorium on the Importation, Exportation and Manufacture
of Small Arms and Light Weapons in West Africa, adopted by the heads of State and Government of the
Economic Community of West African States at Abuja on 31 October 1998,13 and urges the international
community to give its support to the implementation of the moratorium;
3. Further welcomes the action taken by the Secretary-General in implementation of this initiative
in the context of General Assembly resolution 40/151 H of 16 December 1985;
4. Thanks the Governments concerned in the subregion for the substantial support that they have
given to the United Nations advisory missions, and welcomes the declared readiness of other States to
receive the United Nations Advisory Mission;

8

A/52/871–S/1998/318; see Official Records of the Security Council, Fifty-third Year, Supplement for
April, May and June 1998, document S/1998/318.

9

A/53/179, annex I, decision CM/Dec.432 (LXVIII).

10

A/52/298, annex.

11

See CD/1556.

12

A/53/681, annex.

13

A/53/763-S/1998/1194, annex; see Official Records of the Security Council, Fifty-third Year, Supplement
for October, November and December 1998, document S/1998/1194.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 5

5. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue his efforts, in the context of the implementation
of resolution 49/75 G and of the recommendations of the United Nations advisory missions, to curb the
illicit circulation of small arms and to collect such arms in the affected States that so request, with the
support of the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa and in close
cooperation with the Organization of African Unity;
6. Notes that, as part of its efforts to halt the flow of small arms into Mali and the Saharo-Sahelian
subregion, the Government of Mali oversaw the destruction, at the “Flame of Peace” ceremony held at
Timbuktu, Mali, on 27 March 1996, of thousands of small arms handed over by ex-combatants of the
armed movements of northern Mali;
7. Encourages the setting up in the countries of the Saharo-Sahelian subregion of national
commissions against the proliferation of small arms, and invites the international community to support
as far as possible the smooth functioning of the national commissions where they have been set up;
8. Takes note of the conclusions of the ministerial consultation on the proposal for a moratorium
on the importing, exporting and manufacture of light weapons in the region, held at Bamako on 26 March
1997, and encourages the States concerned to pursue their consultations on the matter;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to examine the issue and to submit to the General
Assembly at its fifty-fourth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled
“Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and collecting them”.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998
C
PROHIBITION OF THE DUMPING OF RADIOACTIVE WASTES
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind resolutions CM/Res.1153(XLVIII) of 198814 and CM/Res.1225(L) of 1989,15
adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity, concerning the dumping of
nuclear and industrial wastes in Africa,

14

See A/43/398, annex I.

15

See A/44/603, annex I.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 6

Welcoming resolution GC(XXXIV)/RES/530 establishing a Code of Practice on the International
Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste, adopted on 21 September 1990 by the General
Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency at its thirty-fourth regular session,16
Welcoming also resolution GC(XXXVIII)/RES/6, adopted on 23 September 1994 by the General
Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency at its thirty-eighth regular session,17 inviting the
Board of Governors and the Director General of the Agency to commence preparations for a convention
on the safety of radioactive waste management, and noting the progress that has been made in that regard,
Taking note of the commitment by the participants at the Summit on Nuclear Safety and Security,
held in Moscow on 19 and 20 April 1996, to ban the dumping at sea of radioactive wastes,18
Considering its resolution 2602 C (XXIV) of 16 December 1969, in which it requested the
Conference of the Committee on Disarmament,19 inter alia, to consider effective methods of control
against the use of radiological methods of warfare,
Recalling resolution CM/Res.1356 (LIV) of 1991, adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity,20 on the Bamako Convention on the Ban on the Import of Hazardous
Wastes into Africa and on the Control of Their Transboundary Movements within Africa,
Aware of the potential hazards underlying any use of radioactive wastes that would constitute
radiological warfare and its implications for regional and international security, in particular for the
security of developing countries,
Recalling all its resolutions on the matter since its forty-third session in 1988, including its resolution
51/45 J of 10 December 1996,
Desirous of promoting the implementation of paragraph 76 of the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session of the General Assembly,1 the first special session devoted to disarmament,
1. Takes note of the part of the report of the Conference on Disarmament relating to a future
convention on the prohibition of radiological weapons;21

16

See International Atomic Energy Agency, Resolutions and Other Decisions of the General Conference,
Thirty-fourth Regular Session, 17–21 September 1990 (GC(XXXIV)/RESOLUTIONS (1990)).

17

Ibid., Thirty-eighth Regular Session, 19–23 September 1994 (GC(XXXVIII)/RES/DEC (1994)).

18

A/51/131, annex I, para. 20.

19

The Conference of the Committee on Disarmament became the Committee on Disarmament as from the
tenth special session of the General Assembly. The Committee on Disarmament was redesignated the
Conference on Disarmament as from 7 February 1984.
20

See A/46/390, annex I.

21

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/53/27), chap. III.E.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 7

2. Expresses grave concern regarding any use of nuclear wastes that would constitute radiological
warfare and have grave implications for the national security of all States;
3. Calls upon all States to take appropriate measures with a view to preventing any dumping of
nuclear or radioactive wastes that would infringe upon the sovereignty of States;
4. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to take into account, in the negotiations for a
convention on the prohibition of radiological weapons, radioactive wastes as part of the scope of such a
convention;
5. Also requests the Conference on Disarmament to intensify efforts towards an early conclusion
of such a convention and to include in its report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session the
progress recorded in the negotiations on this subject;
6. Takes note of resolution CM/Res.1356 (LIV) of 1991, adopted by the Council of Ministers of
the Organization of African Unity,20 on the Bamako Convention on the Ban on the Import of Hazardous
Wastes into Africa and on the Control of Their Transboundary Movements within Africa;
7. Expresses the hope that the effective implementation of the International Atomic Energy Agency
Code of Practice on the International Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste will enhance the
protection of all States from the dumping of radioactive wastes on their territories;
8. Welcomes the adoption at Vienna on 5 September 1997 of the Joint Convention on the Safety
of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management, as recommended by the
participants in the Summit on Nuclear Safety and Security, held in Moscow on 19 and 20 April 1996, and
the signing of the Joint Convention by a number of States beginning on 29 September 1997, and appeals
to all States to sign and subsequently ratify, accept or approve the Convention, so that it may enter into
force as soon as possible;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled
“Prohibition of the dumping of radioactive wastes”.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998
D
MONGOLIA’S INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AND NUCLEAR-WEAPON-FREE STATUS
The General Assembly,
Recalling the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,

/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 8

Recalling also the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,22
Welcoming the decision of Mongolia to declare its territory a nuclear-weapon-free zone,
Taking note with satisfaction of the separate statements made by the nuclear-weapon States in
connection with Mongolia’s declaration of its territory a nuclear-weapon-free zone,
Bearing in mind the Final Document of the Twelfth Conference of Heads of State or Government
of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Durban, South Africa, from 29 August to 3 September 1998,23 in
which the Conference welcomed and supported Mongolia’s policy to institutionalize its single State
nuclear-weapon-free status,
Proceeding from the fact that nuclear-weapon-free status is one of the means of ensuring the national
security of States,
Bearing in mind its resolution 49/31 of 9 December 1994 on the protection and security of small
States,
Welcoming Mongolia’s active and positive role in developing peaceful, friendly and mutually
beneficial relations with the States of the region and other States,
Convinced that the internationally recognized status of Mongolia will contribute to enhancing stability
and confidence-building in the region as well as promote Mongolia’s security by strengthening its
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, the inviolability of its borders and the preservation of
its ecological balance,
1.

Welcomes the declaration by Mongolia of its nuclear-weapon-free status;

2. Endorses and supports Mongolia’s good-neighbourly and balanced relationship with its
neighbours as an important element of strengthening regional peace, security and stability;
3. Invites Member States, including the five nuclear-weapon States, to cooperate with Mongolia in
taking the necessary measures to consolidate and strengthen Mongolia’s independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity, the inviolability of its borders, its economic security, its ecological balance and its
nuclear-weapon-free status, as well as its independent foreign policy;
4. Appeals to the member States of the Asia and Pacific region to support Mongolia’s efforts to
join the relevant regional security and economic arrangements;

22

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

23

A/53/667–S/1998/1071, annex I; see Official Records of the Security Council, Fifty-third Year,
Supplement for October, November and December 1998, document S/1998/1071.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 9

5. Requests the Secretary-General and relevant United Nations bodies to provide the necessary
assistance to Mongolia, within existing resources, to take the necessary measures mentioned in paragraph
3 above;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session an item entitled “Mongolia’s
international security and nuclear-weapon-free status”.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998
E
SMALL ARMS
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 52/38 J of 9 December 1997,
Convinced of the need for a comprehensive approach to promote, at the global and regional levels,
the control and reduction of small arms and light weapons in a balanced and non-discriminatory manner
as a contribution to international peace and security,
Reaffirming the inherent right to individual or collective self-defence recognized in Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations, which implies that States also have the right to acquire arms with which
to defend themselves,
Reaffirming also the right of self-determination of all peoples, in particular peoples under colonial
or other forms of alien domination or foreign occupation, and the importance of the effective realization
of this right, as enunciated, inter alia, in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted by
the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,24
Reaffirming further the urgent need for practical disarmament in the context of the conflicts the
United Nations is actually dealing with and of the weapons that are actually killing people in the hundreds
of thousands,
Reiterating its call upon Member States to implement the recommendations contained in the report
of the Secretary-General on small arms, which was prepared with the assistance of the Panel of
Governmental Experts on Small Arms,10 to the extent possible and where necessary in cooperation with
appropriate international and regional organizations and/or through international and regional cooperation
among police, intelligence, customs and border control services,

24

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 10

Reiterating its request to the Secretary-General to implement the relevant recommendations as soon
as possible within available financial resources and in cooperation with appropriate international and
regional organizations where necessary, as well as its encouragement to Member States and the SecretaryGeneral to carry out recommendations for post-conflict situations, including demobilization of former
combatants and disposal and destruction of weapons,
Noting that the Secretary-General is, with the assistance of a group of governmental experts
nominated by him on the basis of equitable geographical representation, preparing, for submission to the
General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session, a report on (a) the progress made in the implementation of
the recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General on small arms10 endorsed by the
Assembly in its resolution 52/38 J and (b) further actions recommended to be taken,
Noting also that the group of technical experts appointed by the Secretary-General to study the
problems of ammunition and explosives in all their aspects has held its first meeting,
Noting further the replies to date to the request of the Secretary-General to Member States for their
views on his report on small arms and on the steps that they have taken to implement its
recommendations, in particular, on the recommendation concerning the convening of an international
conference on the illicit arms trade in all its aspects,
Taking note with interest of the work in progress for the elaboration of an international convention
against organized transnational crime, including a protocol to combat illicit manufacturing of and
trafficking in firearms, their parts and components and ammunition, in the framework of the Commission
on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and of other related efforts by the Commission and the Centre
for International Crime Prevention of the Secretariat,
Underlining the importance of increasing coordination regarding the issue of small arms and light
weapons, including illicit manufacturing and trafficking therein, both among the relevant bodies of the
United Nations and within the Secretariat, and welcoming in this context the decision of the SecretaryGeneral to establish the mechanism for Coordinating Action on Small Arms,
1. Decides to convene an international conference on the illicit arms trade in all its aspects no later
than 2001;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report containing his recommendations to be
submitted to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session, with a view to a decision by the Assembly
at its fifty-fourth session on the objective, scope, agenda, dates, venue of and preparatory committee for
an international conference on the illicit arms trade in all its aspects;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General, in preparing his report in accordance with paragraph 2 of
the present resolution:
(a) To seek the views of all Member States on the objective, scope, agenda, dates and venue of and
preparatory work for an international conference on the illicit arms trade in all its aspects and to take into
account these views as well as the views already expressed by them in their replies to the request of the
Secretary-General for their views in accordance with paragraph 4 of General Assembly resolution 52/38
J;
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 11

(b) To take into account his report on small arms,10 as well as relevant recommendations to be made
in his report prepared with the assistance of the Group of Governmental Experts on Small Arms, which
will be submitted to the General Assembly in accordance with paragraph 5 of Assembly resolution
52/38 J;
4. Welcomes the offer by the Government of Switzerland to host in Geneva, no later than 2001,
an international conference on the illicit arms trade in all its aspects;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in order to assist in preventing the illicit trafficking in and illicit
circulation of small arms and light weapons, to initiate a study as soon as possible, within available
financial resources and with any other assistance provided by Member States in a position to do so, on
the feasibility of restricting the manufacture and trade of such weapons to the manufacturers and dealers
authorized by States;
6.
arms”.

Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled “Small
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998
F
REDUCING NUCLEAR DANGER

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that the use of nuclear weapons poses the most serious threat to mankind and to the
survival of civilization,
Reaffirming that any use or threat of use of nuclear weapons would constitute a violation of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Convinced that the proliferation of nuclear weapons in all its aspects would seriously enhance the
danger of nuclear war,
Convinced also that nuclear disarmament and the complete elimination of nuclear weapons are
essential to remove the danger of nuclear war,
Considering that until nuclear weapons cease to exist, it is imperative on the part of the nuclearweapon States to adopt measures that assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use
of nuclear weapons,
Considering also that the hair-trigger alert of nuclear weapons carries unacceptable risks of
unintentional or accidental use of nuclear weapons, which will have catastrophic consequences for all
mankind,

/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 12

Conscious that limited steps relating to detargeting have been taken by the nuclear-weapon States to
address this concern and that further steps are necessary to contribute to the improvement in the
international climate for negotiations leading to the elimination of nuclear weapons,
Mindful that reduction of tensions brought about by a change in nuclear doctrines would positively
impact on international peace and security and improve the conditions for the further reduction and the
elimination of nuclear weapons,
Reiterating the highest priority accorded to nuclear disarmament in the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session of the General Assembly1 and by the international community,
Recalling that the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the Legality of the Threat
or Use of Nuclear Weapons25 states that there exists an obligation for all States to pursue in good faith
and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and
effective international control,
1. Calls for a review of nuclear doctrines and in this context, immediate and urgent steps to reduce
the risks of unintentional and accidental use of nuclear weapons;
2. Requests the five nuclear-weapon States to undertake measures towards the implementation of
paragraph 1 of the present resolution;
3. Calls upon Member States to take the necessary measures to prevent the proliferation of nuclear
weapons in all its aspects and to promote nuclear disarmament, with the ultimate objective of eliminating
nuclear weapons;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session an item entitled “Reducing
nuclear danger”.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998
G
NUCLEAR TESTING
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that the cessation of all nuclear testing will contribute to the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons in all its aspects, to the process of nuclear disarmament leading to the ultimate objective of the
complete elimination of nuclear weapons and therefore to the further enhancement of international peace
and security,

25

A/51/218, annex.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 13

Reaffirming also its commitment to and the crucial importance of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons2 and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty26 to the international regime on
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and as essential foundations for the pursuit of nuclear
disarmament,
Convinced that all States that have not yet done so should adhere to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons and sign and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty without
delay and without conditions,
Sharing the alarm expressed internationally, regionally and nationally, at recent nuclear tests,
Recalling Security Council resolution 1172 (1998), adopted unanimously on 6 June 1998,
1.
Asia;

Expresses grave concern over and strongly deplores the recent nuclear tests conducted in South

2. Notes that the States concerned have declared moratoriums on further testing and have said that
they are willing to enter into legal commitments not to conduct any further nuclear tests, and reiterates
the need for such legal commitments to be expressed in legal form by signing and ratifying the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998
H
REGIONAL DISARMAMENT
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the establishment of internationally recognized nuclear-weapon-free zones, with due
regard to the specific characteristics of each region and on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at by
the States of the region concerned, can play an important role in promoting regional and global peace and
security,
Welcoming the treaties of Tlatelolco,27 Rarotonga,28 Bangkok,29 and Pelindaba,30 as well as the
Almaty Declaration,5 on the creation of nuclear-weapon-free zones and similar initiatives in the respective
regions, in accordance with established principles,
26

See resolution 50/245.

27

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068.

28

See The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 10: 1985 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.86.IX.7), appendix VII.
29

Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone.

30

A/50/426, annex.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 14

Noting the sovereign resolve of the States of Central and Eastern Europe to contribute to, and benefit
from, the new European security architecture based, inter alia, upon the principles of good-neighbourly
relations, as well as cooperation with and accession to the Euro-Atlantic structures,
Welcoming that, as a result of the historic events of the past few years leading to enhancement of the
atmosphere of trust, mutual respect and partnership among European States, the nuclear weapons were
withdrawn from the territories of Belarus, Kazakhstan and Ukraine and that currently there are no nuclear
weapons stationed in the territories of the Central and Eastern European States,
Taking note of the statement of Ministerial North Atlantic Council Meeting, of 10 December 1996,
and confirmed by the heads of State or Government of the countries members of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization in the Founding Act on Mutual Relations, Cooperation and Security between the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Russian Federation,31 signed in Paris on 27 May 1997, that
countries members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization have no intention, no plan and no reason
to deploy nuclear weapons on the territory of new members,
Welcoming efforts to enhance stability and security in Central and Eastern Europe through building
a new regional security architecture based on cooperation and shared values and without creating new
dividing lines,
1. Urges all concerned States to exert efforts to continue making it possible to have no intention,
no plan and no reason to deploy nuclear weapons on the territory of the non-nuclear States of the region
of Central and Eastern Europe;
2. Calls upon all States of Central and Eastern Europe and other States concerned to continue to
abide by their nuclear non-proliferation obligations under existing multilateral and bilateral agreements;
3. Decides to consider the implementation of the present resolution at its fifty-fifth session under
the item entitled “General and complete disarmament”.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998

31

A/52/161–S/1997/413, appendix; see Official Records of the Security Council, Fifty-second Year,
Supplement for April, May and June 1997, document S/1997/413.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 15

I
THE CONFERENCE ON DISARMAMENT DECISION TO ESTABLISH, UNDER ITEM 1 OF ITS AGENDA ENTITLED
“CESSATION OF THE NUCLEAR ARMS RACE AND NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT”, AN AD HOC COMMITTEE TO
NEGOTIATE, ON THE BASIS OF THE REPORT OF THE SPECIAL COORDINATOR (CD/1299) AND THE MANDATE
CONTAINED THEREIN, A NON-DISCRIMINATORY, MULTILATERAL AND INTERNATIONALLY AND EFFECTIVELY
VERIFIABLE TREATY BANNING THE PRODUCTION OF FISSILE MATERIAL FOR NUCLEAR WEAPONS OR OTHER
NUCLEAR EXPLOSIVE DEVICES

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 48/75 L of 16 December 1993,
Convinced that a non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty
banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices would
be a significant contribution to nuclear non-proliferation in all its aspects,
Noting the report of the Conference on Disarmament, in which, inter alia, the Conference records that
in proceeding to take a decision on this matter, that decision is without prejudice to any further decisions
on the establishment of further subsidiary bodies under agenda item 1 and that intensive consultations will
be pursued to seek the views of the members of the Conference on Disarmament on appropriate methods
and approaches for dealing with agenda item 1, taking into consideration all proposals and views in that
respect,32
1. Welcomes the decision by the Conference on Disarmament32 to establish, under item 1 of its
agenda entitled “Cessation of the nuclear arms race and nuclear disarmament”, an ad hoc committee which
shall negotiate, on the basis of the report of the Special Coordinator33 and the mandate contained therein,
a non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the
production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices;
2. Notes with satisfaction that this ad hoc committee has already engaged in the first step in the
substantive negotiations;
3. Encourages the Conference on Disarmament to re-establish its ad hoc committee at the beginning
of its 1999 session.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998

32

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/53/27),
para. 10.

33

CD/1299.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 16

J
OBSERVANCE OF ENVIRONMENTAL NORMS IN THE DRAFTING AND IMPLEMENTATION OF AGREEMENTS
ON DISARMAMENT AND ARMS CONTROL

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 50/70 M of 12 December 1995, 51/45 E of 10 December 1996 and 52/38
E of 9 December 1997,
Emphasizing the importance of the observance of environmental norms in the preparation and
implementation of disarmament and arms limitation agreements,
Recognizing that it is necessary to take duly into account the agreements adopted at the United
Nations Conference on Environment and Development, as well as prior relevant agreements, in the drafting
and implementation of agreements on disarmament and arms limitation,
Mindful of the detrimental environmental effects of the use of nuclear weapons,
1.

Reaffirms its resolution 52/38 E in all its aspects;

2. Also reaffirms that international disarmament forums should take fully into account the relevant
environmental norms in negotiating treaties and agreements on disarmament and arms limitation and that
all States, through their actions, should fully contribute to ensuring compliance with the aforementioned
norms in the implementation of treaties and conventions to which they are parties;
3. Calls upon States to adopt unilateral, bilateral, regional and multilateral measures so as to
contribute to ensuring the application of scientific and technological progress in the framework of
international security, disarmament and other related spheres, without detriment to the environment or to
its effective contribution to attaining sustainable development;
4. Welcomes the information provided by Member States on the implementation of the measures
they have adopted to promote the objectives envisaged in the present resolution;34
5. Invites all Member States to communicate to the Secretary-General information on the measures
they have adopted to promote the objectives envisaged in the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to submit a report containing this information to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth
session;

34

A/53/158 and Add.1 and 2.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 17

6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled
“Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and implementation of agreements on disarmament
and arms control”.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998
K
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN DISARMAMENT AND DEVELOPMENT
The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly1 concerning the relationship between disarmament and development,
Recalling also the adoption on 11 September 1987 of the Final Document of the International
Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development,35
Recalling further its resolutions 49/75 J of 15 December 1994, 50/70 G of 12 December 1995,
51/45 D of 10 December 1996 and 52/38 D of 9 December 1997,
Bearing in mind the Final Document of the Twelfth Conference of Heads of State or Government
of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Durban, South Africa, from 29 August to 3 September 1998,23
Stressing the growing importance of the symbiotic relationship between disarmament and development
in current international relations,
1. Acknowledges the report of the Secretary-General36 and actions taken in accordance with the
Final Document of the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and
Development;35
2. Urges the international community to devote part of the resources made available by the
implementation of disarmament and arms limitation agreements to economic and social development, with
a view to reducing the ever widening gap between developed and developing countries;
3. Invites all Member States to communicate to the Secretary-General, by 15 April 1999, their
views and proposals for the implementation of the action programme adopted at the International
Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development,37 as well as any other views
and proposals with a view to achieving the goals of the action programme, within the framework of
current international relations;

35

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.87.IX.8.

36

A/53/206.

37

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.87.IX.8, para. 35.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 18

4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take action, through appropriate organs and within
available resources, for the implementation of the action programme adopted at the International
Conference;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth
session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled
“Relationship between disarmament and development”.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998
L
MEASURES TO UPHOLD THE AUTHORITY OF THE 1925 GENEVA PROTOCOL
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject, in particular resolution 51/45 P of 10 December
1996,
Determined to act with a view to achieving effective progress towards general and complete
disarmament under strict and effective international control,
Recalling the long-standing determination of the international community to achieve the effective
prohibition of the development, production, stockpiling and use of chemical and biological weapons as
well as the continuing support for measures to uphold the authority of the Protocol for the Prohibition of
the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare,
signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925,38 as expressed by consensus in many previous resolutions,
Welcoming the end of the cold war, the ensuing easing of international tension and the strengthening
of trust between States,
Welcoming also the initiatives by some States parties to withdraw their reservations to the 1925
Geneva Protocol,
1. Renews its previous call to all States to observe strictly the principles and objectives of the
Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of
Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925,38 and reaffirms the vital necessity
of upholding its provisions;
2. Calls upon those States that continue to maintain reservations to the 1925 Geneva Protocol to
withdraw those reservations;

38

League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV (1929), No. 2138.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 19

3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session a
report on the implementation of the present resolution.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998
M
CONSOLIDATION OF PEACE THROUGH PRACTICAL DISARMAMENT MEASURES
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/45 N of 10 December 1996 and 52/38 G of 9 December 1997,
Convinced that a comprehensive and integrated approach towards certain practical disarmament
measures, such as, inter alia, arms control, particularly with regard to small arms and light weapons,
confidence-building measures, demobilization and reintegration of former combatants, demining and
conversion, often is a prerequisite to maintaining and consolidating peace and security and thus provides
a basis for effective rehabilitation and social and economic development in areas that have suffered from
conflict,
Noting with satisfaction that the international community is more than ever aware of the importance
of such practical disarmament measures, especially with regard to the growing problems arising from the
excessive and destabilizing accumulation and proliferation of small arms and light weapons, which pose
a threat to peace and security and reduce the prospects for economic development in many regions,
particularly in post-conflict situations,
Stressing that further efforts are needed in order to develop and effectively implement programmes
of practical disarmament in affected areas,
Recalling the deliberations on guidelines on conventional arms control/limitation and disarmament,
with particular emphasis on consolidation of peace in the context of General Assembly resolution 51/45
N, in the Disarmament Commission and the report of the Panel of Governmental Experts on Small Arms10
and its relevance in the context of the present resolution and of the ongoing work in the Disarmament
Commission,
1. Stresses the particular relevance of the deliberations in the 1998 substantive session of the
Disarmament Commission on guidelines on conventional arms control/limitation and disarmament, with
particular emphasis on consolidation of peace in the context of General Assembly resolution 51/45 N, as
a useful basis for further deliberations, and encourages the Disarmament Commission to continue its
efforts aimed at the adoption of such guidelines in 1999;
2. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on consolidation of peace through practical
disarmament measures,39 submitted pursuant to resolution 51/45 N, and once again encourages Member

39

A/52/289.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 20

States, as well as regional arrangements and agencies, to lend their support to the implementation of
recommendations contained therein;
3. Invites the group of interested States that was formed in New York in March 1998 to continue
to analyse lessons learned from previous disarmament and peace-building projects, as well as to promote
new practical disarmament measures to consolidate peace, especially as undertaken or designed by affected
States themselves;
4. Encourages Member States, including the group of interested States, to lend their support to the
Secretary-General in responding to requests by Member States to collect and destroy small arms and light
weapons in post-conflict situations;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled
“Consolidation of peace through practical disarmament measures”.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998
N
CONVENTION ON THE PROHIBITION OF THE USE, STOCKPILING, PRODUCTION AND TRANSFER
OF ANTI-PERSONNEL MINES AND ON THEIR DESTRUCTION
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 52/38 A of 9 December 1997,
Reaffirming its determination to put an end to the suffering and casualties caused by anti-personnel
mines, which kill or maim hundreds of people every week, mostly innocent and defenceless civilians and
especially children, obstruct economic development and reconstruction, inhibit the repatriation of refugees
and internally displaced persons, and have other severe consequences for years after emplacement,
Believing it necessary to do the utmost to contribute in an efficient and coordinated manner to facing
the challenge of removing anti-personnel mines placed throughout the world, and to assure their
destruction,
Wishing to do the utmost in assuring assistance for the care and rehabilitation, including the social
and economic reintegration, of mine victims,
Recalling the conclusion of negotiations on 18 September 1997 at Oslo on the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their
Destruction40 and the opening for signature of the Convention at Ottawa, on 3 and 4 December 1997,
and thereafter at Headquarters in New York until its entry into force,

40

See CD/1478.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 21

Welcoming the addition of new States signatories to the Convention since its opening for signature,
the rapid ratification by many signatories and the early achievement of the fortieth ratification of the
Convention on 16 September 1998, which, according to the provisions of article 17 of the Convention,
will result in the entry into force of the Convention on 1 March 1999,
Emphasizing the desirability of attracting the adherence of all States to the Convention, and
determined to work strenuously towards the promotion of its universalization,
1. Invites all States that have not yet done so to sign or, after entry into force, to accede to the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines
and on Their Destruction;40
2. Urges all States that have not yet done so to ratify the Convention without delay subsequent to
their signature;
3. Renews its call upon all States to contribute towards the full realization and effective
implementation of the Convention to advance the care and rehabilitation, and the social and economic
reintegration of mine victims, and mine awareness programmes, and the removal of anti-personnel mines
placed throughout the world and the assurance of their destruction;
4. Welcomes the generous offer by the Government of Mozambique to act as host for the First
Meeting of the States Parties;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with article 11, paragraph 2, of the Convention,
to undertake the preparations necessary to convene the First Meeting of the States Parties, to take place
in Maputo during the week of 3 May 1999;
6. Invites all States parties to the First Meeting of the States Parties and, in accordance with article
11, paragraph 4, of the Convention, States not parties to the Convention, as well as the United Nations,
other relevant international organizations or institutions, regional organizations, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and relevant non-governmental organizations to attend the Meeting as
observers in accordance with the agreed rules of procedure.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998
O
REGIONAL DISARMAMENT
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 45/58 P of 4 December 1990, 46/36 I of 6 December 1991, 47/52 J of
9 December 1992, 48/75 I of 16 December 1993, 49/75 N of 15 December 1994, 50/70 K of 12 December
1995, 51/45 K of 10 December 1996 and 52/38 P of 9 December 1997 on regional disarmament,

/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 22

Believing that the efforts of the international community to move towards the ideal of general and
complete disarmament are guided by the inherent human desire for genuine peace and security, the
elimination of the danger of war and the release of economic, intellectual and other resources for peaceful
pursuits,
Affirming the abiding commitment of all States to the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations in the conduct of their international relations,
Noting that essential guidelines for progress towards general and complete disarmament were adopted
at the tenth special session of the General Assembly,1
Taking note of the guidelines and recommendations for regional approaches to disarmament within
the context of global security adopted by the Disarmament Commission at its 1993 substantive session,41
Welcoming the prospects of genuine progress in the field of disarmament engendered in recent years
as a result of negotiations between the two super-Powers,
Taking note of the recent proposals for disarmament at the regional and subregional levels,
Recognizing the importance of confidence-building measures for regional and international peace and
security,
Convinced that endeavours by countries to promote regional disarmament, taking into account the
specific characteristics of each region and in accordance with the principle of undiminished security at the
lowest level of armaments, would enhance the security of all States and would thus contribute to
international peace and security by reducing the risk of regional conflicts,
1. Stresses that sustained efforts are needed, within the framework of the Conference on
Disarmament and under the umbrella of the United Nations, to make progress on the entire range of
disarmament issues;
2. Affirms that global and regional approaches to disarmament complement each other and should
therefore be pursued simultaneously to promote regional and international peace and security;
3. Calls upon States to conclude agreements, wherever possible, for nuclear non-proliferation,
disarmament and confidence-building measures at the regional and subregional levels;
4. Welcomes the initiatives towards disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and security undertaken
by some countries at the regional and subregional levels;
5. Supports and encourages efforts aimed at promoting confidence-building measures at the
regional and subregional levels in order to ease regional tensions and to further disarmament and nuclear
non-proliferation measures at the regional and subregional levels;

41

Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/48/42), annex II.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 23

6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled “Regional
disarmament”.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998
P
CONVENTIONAL ARMS CONTROL AT THE REGIONAL AND SUBREGIONAL LEVELS
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/75 J of 16 December 1993, 49/75 O of 15 December 1994, 50/70 L of
12 December 1995, 51/45 Q of 10 December 1996 and 52/38 Q of 9 December 1997,
Recognizing the crucial role of conventional arms control in promoting regional and international
peace and security,
Convinced that conventional arms control needs to be pursued primarily in the regional and
subregional contexts since most threats to peace and security in the post-cold-war era arise mainly among
States located in the same region or subregion,
Aware that the preservation of a balance in the defence capabilities of States at the lowest level of
armaments would contribute to peace and stability and should be a prime objective of conventional arms
control,
Desirous of promoting agreements to strengthen regional peace and security at the lowest possible
level of armaments and military forces,
Noting with particular interest the initiatives taken in this regard in different regions of the world,
in particular the commencement of consultations among a number of Latin American countries and the
proposals for conventional arms control made in the context of South Asia, and recognizing, in the context
of this subject, the relevance and value of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe,42 which
is a cornerstone of European security,
Believing that militarily significant States and States with larger military capabilities have a special
responsibility in promoting such agreements for regional security,
Believing also that an important objective of conventional arms control in regions of tension should
be to prevent the possibility of military attack launched by surprise and to avoid aggression,
1. Decides to give urgent consideration to the issues involved in conventional arms control at the
regional and subregional levels;

42

CD/1064.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 24

2. Requests the Conference on Disarmament, as a first step, to consider the formulation of
principles that can serve as a framework for regional agreements on conventional arms control, and looks
forward to a report of the Conference on this subject;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled
“Conventional arms control at the regional and subregional levels”.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998
Q
NUCLEAR-WEAPON-FREE SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE AND ADJACENT AREAS
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/45 B of 10 December 1996 and 52/38 N of 9 December 1997,
Determined to continue to contribute to the prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons in all
its aspects and to the process of general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international
control, in particular in the field of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, with a view
to strengthening international peace and security, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling the provisions on nuclear-weapon-free zones of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly,1 the first special session devoted to disarmament, as well as of the
decision on principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament of the 1995 Review
and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,3
Stressing the importance of the treaties of Tlatelolco,27 Rarotonga,28 Bangkok,29 and Pelindaba,30
establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones, as well as the Antarctic Treaty,43 to, inter alia, the ultimate
objective of achieving a world entirely free of nuclear weapons, and underlining also the value of
enhancing cooperation among the nuclear-weapon-free zone treaty members by means of mechanisms such
as joint meetings of States parties, signatories and observers to those treaties,
Recalling the applicable principles and rules of international law relating to the freedom of the high
seas and the rights of passage through maritime space, including those of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea,44
1. Welcomes the continuing contribution that the Antarctic Treaty43 and the treaties of Tlatelolco,27
Rarotonga,28 Bangkok29 and Pelindaba30 are making towards freeing the southern hemisphere and adjacent
areas covered by those treaties from nuclear weapons;

43

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 402, No. 5778.

44

Official Records of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, vol. XVII (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.84.V.3), document A/CONF.62/122.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 25

2. Calls for the ratification of the treaties of Tlatelolco, Rarotonga, Bangkok and Pelindaba by all
regional States, and calls upon all concerned States to continue to work together in order to facilitate
adherence to the protocols to nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties by all relevant States that have not yet
done so;
3. Welcomes the steps taken to conclude further nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties on the basis of
arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the region concerned, and calls upon all States to
consider all relevant proposals, including those reflected in the resolutions of the General Assembly on
the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in the Middle East and South Asia;
4. Reiterates the important role of nuclear-weapon-free zones in strengthening the nuclear
non-proliferation regime and in extending the areas of the world that are nuclear-weapon-free, and, with
particular reference to the responsibilities of the nuclear-weapon States, calls upon all States to support
the process of nuclear disarmament, with the ultimate goal of eliminating all nuclear weapons;
5. Calls upon the States parties and signatories to the treaties of Tlatelolco, Rarotonga, Bangkok
and Pelindaba, in order to pursue the common goals envisaged in those treaties and to promote the
nuclear-weapon-free status of the southern hemisphere and adjacent areas, to explore and implement
further ways and means of cooperation among themselves and their treaty agencies;
6. Encourages the competent authorities of nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties to provide assistance
to the States parties and signatories to such treaties so as to facilitate the accomplishment of these goals;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled “Nuclearweapon-free southern hemisphere and adjacent areas”.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998
R
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONVENTION ON THE PROHIBITION OF THE DEVELOPMENT,
PRODUCTION, STOCKPILING AND USE OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS AND ON THEIR DESTRUCTION
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject of chemical and bacteriological (biological) weapons,
in particular resolution 52/38 T of 9 December 1997, adopted without a vote, in which it welcomed the
entry into force of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use
of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction,45

45

Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/47/27),
appendix I.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 26

Determined to achieve the effective prohibition of the development, production, acquisition, transfer,
stockpiling and use of chemical weapons and their destruction,
Noting with satisfaction that since the adoption of resolution 52/38 T, fourteen additional States have
ratified the Convention, bringing the total number of States parties to the Convention to one hundred and
twenty,
1. Notes with appreciation the ongoing work of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons to achieve the objective and purpose of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction, to ensure the full
implementation of its provisions, including those for international verification of compliance with it, and
to provide a forum for consultation and cooperation among States parties;
2. Stresses the importance of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in verifying
compliance with the provisions of the Convention as well as in promoting the timely and efficient
accomplishment of all its objectives;
3. Stresses also the vital importance of full and effective implementation of, and compliance with,
all provisions of the Convention;
4. Urges all States parties to the Convention to meet in full and on time their obligations under the
Convention and to support the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in its
implementation activities;
5. Emphasizes the necessity of universal adherence to the Convention, and calls upon all States that
have not yet done so to become States parties to the Convention without delay;
6. Stresses the importance to the Convention that all possessors of chemical weapons, chemical
weapons production facilities or chemical weapons development facilities, including previously declared
possessor States, should be among the States parties to the Convention, and welcomes progress to that end;
7. Welcomes the emerging cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and efforts towards the prompt conclusion of a relationship agreement
between the United Nations and the Organization, in accordance with the provisions of the Convention;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled
“Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and
Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction”.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998

/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 27

S
TRANSPARENCY IN ARMAMENTS
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, Member States have
undertaken to promote the establishment and maintenance of international peace and security with the least
diversion for armaments of the world’s human and economic resources,
Considering the urgent need to accelerate efforts towards general and complete disarmament with a
view to maintaining regional and international peace and security in a world free from the scourge of war
and the burden of all types of armaments,
Considering also that openness and transparency relating to all types of armaments would contribute
greatly to confidence-building and security among States,
Recognizing that an enhanced level of transparency relating to both conventional weapons and
weapons of mass destruction and transfers of equipment and technologies directly related to the
development and manufacture of such weapons, as well as to high technology with military applications,
would promote stability, strengthen regional and international peace and security, and accelerate efforts
towards general and complete disarmament,
Recognizing also that the United Nations Register of Conventional Arms,46 in its current form,
constitutes an important first step towards the promotion of transparency in military matters,
Convinced that the principle of transparency should also apply to all weapons of mass destruction,
in particular nuclear weapons, and to transfers of equipment and technology directly related to the
development and manufacture of such weapons, as well as to high technology with military applications,
Aware of the need to foster international efforts in this direction through, inter alia, the constant
review of the operation of the Register with a view to its further development,
Stressing the need to achieve universality of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons,2 and of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use
of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction45 and the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their
Destruction,47 with a view to realizing the goal of the total elimination of all weapons of mass
destruction,
Recalling its earlier resolutions on transparency in armaments,

46

See resolution 46/36 L.

47

Resolution 2826 (XXVI), annex.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 28

1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on transparency in armaments;48

2. Recalls the reports of the Group of Governmental Experts on the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms, which convened in 1994 and 1997 to consider the continuing operation of the
Register46 and its further development, and the views expressed and proposals presented therein;
3. Recognizes the importance of achieving greater progress in the further development of the
Register in order that it may truly enhance confidence-building and security among States and accelerate
efforts towards attainment of the goal of general and complete disarmament, and to that end urges Member
States to submit their views to the Secretary-General concerning the following matters with a view to their
consideration by the Group of Governmental Experts, which is to be convened in 2000:
(a) The early expansion of the scope of the Register;
(b) The elaboration of practical means for the further development of the Register in order to
increase transparency related to weapons of mass destruction, in particular nuclear weapons, and to
transfers of equipment and technology directly related to the development and manufacture of such
weapons;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled
“Transparency in armaments”.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998
T
ILLICIT TRAFFIC IN SMALL ARMS
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 49/75 G of 15 December 1994, concerning the illicit circulation of small arms,
and its resolution 51/45 F of 10 December 1996 on measures to curb the illicit transfer and use of
conventional arms,
Bearing in mind its resolution 52/38 J of 9 December 1997 on small arms,
Expressing its appreciation for the reports of the Secretary-General submitted in pursuance of
resolution 51/45 F49 and resolution 52/38 C,50

48

A/53/334 and Corr.1 and Add.1.

49

A/52/229.

50

A/53/207.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 29

Also expressing its appreciation for the report of the Secretary-General of 13 April 1998 on the
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa,8 and in this
context takes note of the ongoing consideration by the Security Council of the issue of illicit arms flows
to and in Africa,
Welcoming the initiatives by States members of the Economic Community of West African States
to conclude their agreement on a moratorium on the importing, exporting and manufacture of light
weapons,
Welcoming also the entry into force of the Inter-American Convention against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related Materials,51
Welcoming further the decision on the proliferation of small arms and light weapons taken by the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its sixty-eighth ordinary session, held at
Ouagadougou from 4 to 7 June 1998,9
Welcoming the adoption of the European Union programme for preventing and combating illicit
trafficking in conventional arms and the initiatives undertaken in its implementation,
Stressing the importance of ongoing efforts to elaborate an international convention against
transnational organized crime, including a protocol to combat the illicit manufacturing of and trafficking
in firearms, their parts and components and ammunition, in the framework of the Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice,
Welcoming the announcement of the Secretary-General on 14 August 1998 designating the
Department for Disarmament Affairs as the focal point to coordinate all action on small arms within the
United Nations system,
Underlining the importance of increased cooperation and coordination both among the relevant
intergovernmental bodies of the United Nations, and within the Secretariat, in particular with regard to the
activities of the Centre for International Crime Prevention, the Department for Disarmament Affairs and
the mechanism for Coordinating Action on Small Arms in ongoing initiatives related to illicit trafficking
in small arms,
Recognizing the human suffering caused by illicit trafficking in small arms and that Governments bear
the responsibility to intensify their efforts by developing an understanding of the issues and practical ways
of addressing the problem,
Bearing in mind the interface between violence, criminality, drug trafficking, terrorism and illicit
trafficking in small arms,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to hold broad-based consultations, within available financial
resources and with any other assistance provided by Member States in a position to do so, taking into

51

A/53/78, annex.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 30

account the ongoing work of the Group of Governmental Experts on Small Arms, with all Member States,
interested regional and subregional organizations, international agencies, and experts in the field on:
(a) The magnitude and scope of the phenomenon of illicit trafficking in small arms;
(b) Possible measures to combat illicit trafficking in and illicit circulation of small arms, including
those suited to indigenous regional approaches;
(c) The role of the United Nations in collecting, collating, sharing and disseminating information
on illicit trafficking in small arms;
2. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session
on the outcome of his consultations;
3. Invites Member States in a position to do so to provide the necessary assistance, bilaterally,
regionally and through multilateral channels, such as the United Nations, in support of the implementation
of measures associated with combating illicit trafficking in and illicit circulation of small arms;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session an item entitled “Illicit
traffic in small arms”.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998
U
NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT WITH A VIEW TO THE ULTIMATE ELIMINATION
OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/75 H of 15 December 1994, 50/70 C of 12 December 1995, 51/45 G of
10 December 1996 and 52/38 K of 9 December 1997,
Bearing in mind the recent nuclear tests which pose a challenge to international efforts to strengthen
the global regime of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons,
Looking forward to the early entry into force of the Treaty on Further Reduction and Limitation of
Strategic Offensive Arms (START II),52 and welcoming the joint statement on parameters for the future
reduction of nuclear forces, issued by the Presidents of the United States of America and the Russian
Federation,53

52

The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 18: 1993 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.94.IX.1), appendix II.
53

A/53/371–S/1998/848, annex; see Official Records of the Security Council, Fifty-third Year, Supplement
for July, August and September 1998, document S/1998/848.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 31

Welcoming the efforts of other nuclear-weapon States to reduce their nuclear arsenals, most recently
that of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Welcoming also the accession by Brazil to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,2
Reaffirming the conviction that further advancement in nuclear disarmament will contribute to
consolidating the international regime for nuclear non-proliferation, ensuring international peace and
security,
Welcoming the decision of the Conference on Disarmament to establish an ad hoc committee32 which
shall negotiate on the basis of the report of the Special Coordinator of 199533 and the mandate contained
therein, a non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the
production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices,
1. Reaffirms the importance of achieving the universality of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons,2 and calls upon States not parties to the Treaty to accede to it without delay and without
conditions;
2. Reaffirms also the importance for all States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons to fulfil their obligations under the Treaty;
3. Calls for the determined pursuit by the nuclear-weapon States of systematic and progressive
efforts to reduce nuclear weapons globally, with the ultimate goal of eliminating those weapons, and by
all States of general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control;
4. Recognizes that, in order to achieve the ultimate goal of eliminating nuclear weapons, it is
important and necessary to pursue such actions as:
(a) The early signature and ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty26 by all States
with a view to its early entry into force, and cessation of nuclear tests pending its entry into force;
(b) The early conclusion of negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament, on a non-discriminatory,
multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile material
for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, on the basis of the report of the Special
Coordinator and the mandate contained therein;
(c) Multilateral discussions on possible future steps on nuclear disarmament and nuclear nonproliferation;
(d) The early entry into force of the Treaty on Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic
Offensive Arms (START II)52 and the early commencement and conclusion of negotiations for START
III by the Russian Federation and the United States of America;
(e) Further efforts by the five nuclear-weapon States to reduce their nuclear arsenals unilaterally and
through their negotiations;

/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 32

5. Invites the nuclear-weapon States to keep the States Members of the United Nations duly
informed of the progress or efforts made towards nuclear disarmament;
6. Welcomes the ongoing efforts in the dismantlement of nuclear weapons, and notes the importance
of the safe and effective management of the resultant fissile materials;
7. Calls upon all States to redouble their efforts to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, inter alia, nuclear weapons, confirming and strengthening if necessary their policies not to
export equipment, materials or technology that could contribute to the proliferation of those weapons;
8. Calls upon all States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to make
their best efforts for the success of the next Review Conference, which will be held in 2000;
9. Encourages continued serious discussions on nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament
in appropriate forums.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998
V
TRANSPARENCY IN ARMAMENTS
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 46/36 L of 9 December 1991, 47/52 L of 15 December 1992, 48/75 E of
16 December 1993, 49/75 C of 15 December 1994, 50/70 D of 12 December 1995, 51/45 H of
10 December 1996 and 52/38 R of 9 December 1997 entitled “Transparency in armaments”,
Continuing to take the view that an enhanced level of transparency in armaments contributes greatly
to confidence-building and security among States and that the establishment of the United Nations Register
of Conventional Arms46 constitutes an important step forward in the promotion of transparency in military
matters,
Welcoming the consolidated report of the Secretary-General on the Register, which includes the
returns of Member States for 1997,48
Welcoming also the response of Member States to the request contained in paragraphs 9 and 10 of
resolution 46/36 L to provide data on their imports and exports of arms, as well as available background
information regarding their military holdings, procurement through national production and relevant
policies,
Stressing that the continuing operation of the Register and its further development should be reviewed
in order to secure a Register that is capable of attracting the widest possible participation,
1. Reaffirms its determination to ensure the effective operation of the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms,46 as provided for in paragraphs 7 to 10 of resolution 46/36 L;
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 33

2. Calls upon Member States, with a view to achieving universal participation, to provide the
Secretary-General by 31 May annually with the requested data and information for the Register, including
nil reports if appropriate, on the basis of resolutions 46/36 L and 47/52 L and the recommendations
contained in paragraph 64 of the 1997 report of the Secretary-General on the continuing operation of the
Register and its further development;54
3. Invites Member States in a position to do so, pending further development of the Register, to
provide additional information on procurement from national production and military holdings and to make
use of the “Remarks” column in the standardized reporting form to provide additional information such
as types and models;
4. Reaffirms its decision, with a view to further development of the Register, to keep the scope of
and participation in the Register under review, and, to that end, recalls:
(a) Its request to Member States to provide the Secretary-General with their views on the continuing
operation of the Register and its further development and on transparency measures related to weapons
of mass destruction;
(b) Its request to the Secretary-General, with the assistance of a group of governmental experts to
be convened in 2000, on the basis of equitable geographical representation, to prepare a report on the
continuing operation of the Register and its further development, taking into account the work of the
Conference on Disarmament, the views expressed by Member States and his reports on the continuing
operation of the Register and its further development,55 with a view to a decision at its fifty-fifth session;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that sufficient resources are made available for the
Secretariat to operate and maintain the Register;
6. Invites the Conference on Disarmament to consider continuing its work undertaken in the field
of transparency in armaments;
7. Reiterates its call upon all Member States to cooperate at the regional and subregional levels,
taking fully into account the specific conditions prevailing in the region or subregion, with a view to
enhancing and coordinating international efforts aimed at increased openness and transparency in
armaments;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session on
progress made in implementing the present resolution;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled
“Transparency in armaments”.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998

54

A/52/316.

55

A/49/316 and A/52/316.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 34

W
FOLLOW-UP TO THE ADVISORY OPINION OF THE INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE
ON THE LEGALITY OF THE THREAT OR USE OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/75 K of 15 December 1994, 51/45 M of 10 December 1996 and 52/38 O
of 9 December 1997,
Convinced that the continuing existence of nuclear weapons poses a threat to all humanity and that
their use would have catastrophic consequences for all life on Earth, and recognizing that the only defence
against a nuclear catastrophe is the total elimination of nuclear weapons and the certainty that they will
never be produced again,
Reaffirming the commitment of the international community to the goal of the total elimination of
nuclear weapons and the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free world,
Mindful of the solemn obligations of States parties, undertaken in article VI of the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons,2 particularly to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures
relating to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament,
Recalling the principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament adopted at the
1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons,3 and in particular the objective of determined pursuit by the nuclear-weapon States of systematic
and progressive efforts to reduce nuclear weapons globally, with the ultimate goal of eliminating those
weapons,
Recalling also the adoption of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty in its resolution 50/245
of 10 September 1996, and expressing its satisfaction at the increasing number of States that have signed
and ratified the Treaty,
Recognizing with satisfaction that the Antarctic Treaty43 and the treaties of Tlatelolco,27 Rarotonga,28
Bangkok29 and Pelindaba30 are gradually freeing the entire southern hemisphere and adjacent areas covered
by those treaties from nuclear weapons,
Noting the efforts by the States possessing the largest inventories of nuclear weapons to reduce their
stockpiles of such weapons through bilateral and unilateral agreements or arrangements, and calling for
the intensification of such efforts to accelerate the significant reduction of nuclear-weapon arsenals,
Recognizing the need for a multilaterally negotiated and legally binding instrument to assure nonnuclear-weapon States against the threat or use of nuclear weapons,
Reaffirming the central role of the Conference on Disarmament as the single multilateral disarmament
negotiating forum, and regretting the lack of progress in disarmament negotiations, particularly nuclear
disarmament, in the Conference on Disarmament during its 1998 session,

/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 35

Emphasizing the need for the Conference on Disarmament to commence negotiations on a phased
programme for the complete elimination of nuclear weapons with a specified framework of time,
Desiring to achieve the objective of a legally binding prohibition of the development, production,
testing, deployment, stockpiling, threat or use of nuclear weapons and their destruction under effective
international control,
Recalling the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the Legality of the Threat or
Use of Nuclear Weapons, issued on 8 July 1996,25
Taking note of the relevant portions of the note by the Secretary-General 56 relating to the
implementation of resolution 52/38 O,
1. Underlines once again the unanimous conclusion of the International Court of Justice that there
exists an obligation to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear
disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international control;
2. Calls once again upon all States to fulfil immediately that obligation by commencing multilateral
negotiations in 1999 leading to an early conclusion of a nuclear weapons convention prohibiting the
development, production, testing, deployment, stockpiling, transfer, threat or use of nuclear weapons and
providing for their elimination;
3. Requests all States to inform the Secretary-General of the efforts and measures they have taken
on the implementation of the present resolution and nuclear disarmament, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to apprise the General Assembly of that information at its fifty-fourth session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled “Followup to the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the Legality of the Threat or Use of
Nuclear Weapons”.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998
X
NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 49/75 E of 15 December 1994 on a step-by-step reduction of the nuclear
threat, and its resolutions 50/70 P of 12 December 1995, 51/45 O of 10 December 1996 and 52/38 L of
9 December 1997 on nuclear disarmament,
Reaffirming the commitment of the international community to the goal of the total elimination of
nuclear weapons and the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free world,

56

A/53/208 and Add.1.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 36

Bearing in mind that the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction of 197247 and
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical
Weapons and on Their Destruction of 199345 have already established legal regimes on the complete
prohibition of biological and chemical weapons, respectively, and determined to achieve a nuclear weapons
convention on the prohibition of the development, testing, production, stockpiling, loan, transfer, use and
threat of use of nuclear weapons and on their destruction, and to conclude such an international convention
at an early date,
Recognizing that there now exist conditions for the establishment of a world free of nuclear weapons,
Bearing in mind paragraph 50 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly,1 the first special session devoted to disarmament, calling for the urgent negotiation of
agreements for the cessation of the qualitative improvement and development of nuclear-weapon systems,
and for a comprehensive and phased programme with agreed time-frames, wherever feasible, for the
progressive and balanced reduction of nuclear weapons and their means of delivery, leading to their
ultimate and complete elimination at the earliest possible time,
Reiterating the highest priority accorded to nuclear disarmament in the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session of the General Assembly and by the international community,
Recognizing that the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty26 and any proposed treaty on fissile
material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices must constitute disarmament measures,
and not only non-proliferation measures, and that these measures, together with an international legal
instrument on the joint undertaking of no first use of nuclear weapons by the nuclear-weapon States and
on adequate security assurances of non-use and non-threat of use of such weapons for non-nuclear-weapon
States, respectively, and an international convention prohibiting the use of nuclear weapons, should be
integral measures in a programme leading to the total elimination of nuclear weapons with a specified
framework of time,
Welcoming the entry into force of the Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive
Arms,57 to which Belarus, Kazakhstan, the Russian Federation, Ukraine and the United States of America
are States parties,
Welcoming also the conclusion of the Treaty on Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic
Offensive Arms52 by the Russian Federation and the United States of America and the ratification of that
Treaty by the United States of America, and looking forward to the full implementation of the START
I57 and START II52 Treaties by the States parties, and to further concrete steps for nuclear disarmament
by all the nuclear-weapon States,
Noting with appreciation the unilateral measures by the nuclear-weapon States for nuclear arms
limitation, and encouraging them to undertake further such measures,

57

The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 16:
No. E.92.IX.1), appendix II.

1991 (United Nations publication, Sales

/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 37

Recognizing the complementarity of bilateral and multilateral negotiations on nuclear disarmament,
and that bilateral negotiations can never replace multilateral negotiations in this respect,
Noting the support expressed in the Conference on Disarmament and in the General Assembly for
the elaboration of an international convention to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat
of use of nuclear weapons, and the multilateral efforts in the Conference on Disarmament to reach
agreement on such an international convention at an early date,
Recalling the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the Legality of the Threat or
Use of Nuclear Weapons, issued on 8 July 1996,25 and welcoming the unanimous reaffirmation by all
Judges of the Court that there exists an obligation for all States to pursue in good faith and bring to a
conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective
international control,
Mindful of paragraph 114 and other relevant recommendations in the Final Document of the Twelfth
Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Durban, South Africa,
from 29 August to 3 September 1998,23 calling upon the Conference on Disarmament to establish, on a
priority basis, an ad hoc committee to commence negotiations in 1998 on a phased programme of nuclear
disarmament and for the eventual elimination of nuclear weapons with a specified framework of time,
Bearing in mind the proposal of twenty-eight delegations to the Conference on Disarmament that are
members of the Group of 21 for a programme of action for the elimination of nuclear weapons,58 and
expressing its conviction that this proposal will be an important input and will contribute to negotiations
on this question in the Conference,
Commending the initiative by twenty-six delegations to the Conference on Disarmament that are
members of the Group of 2159 proposing a comprehensive mandate for an ad hoc committee on nuclear
disarmament, which includes negotiations for, as a first step, a universal and legally binding multilateral
agreement committing all States to the objective of the total elimination of nuclear weapons, an agreement
on further steps required in a phased programme with time-frames leading to the total elimination of these
weapons and a convention on the prohibition of the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons and
other nuclear explosive devices taking into account the report of the Special Coordinator on that item33
and the views relating to the scope of the treaty,
Taking note of the joint declaration issued on 9 June 1998 by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Brazil, Egypt, Ireland, Mexico, New Zealand, Slovenia, South Africa and Sweden, entitled “Towards a
nuclear-weapon-free world: the need for a new agenda”,60 supported and responded to by a number of
States including some members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
1. Recognizes that, in view of recent political developments, the time is now opportune for all the
nuclear-weapon States to undertake effective disarmament measures with a view to the total elimination
of these weapons with a specified framework of time;
58

A/C.1/51/12, annex.

59

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/52/27), para. 30.

60

A/53/138, annex.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 38

2. Recognizes also that there is a genuine need to de-emphasize the role of nuclear weapons and
to review and revise nuclear doctrines accordingly;
3. Urges the nuclear-weapon States to stop immediately the qualitative improvement, development,
production and stockpiling of nuclear warheads and their delivery systems;
4. Also urges the nuclear-weapon States, as an interim measure, to de-alert and deactivate
immediately their nuclear weapons;
5. Calls for the conclusion, as a first step, of a universal and legally binding multilateral agreement
committing all States to the objective of the total elimination of nuclear weapons;
6. Reiterates its call upon the nuclear-weapon States to undertake the step-by-step reduction of the
nuclear threat and to carry out effective nuclear disarmament measures with a view to the total elimination
of these weapons with a specified framework of time;
7. Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States, pending the achievement of a total ban on nuclear
weapons through a nuclear-weapons convention, to agree on an internationally and legally binding
instrument of the joint undertaking not to be the first to use nuclear weapons, and calls upon all States
to conclude an internationally and legally binding instrument on security assurances of non-use and threat
of use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapon States;
8. Welcomes the establishment in the Conference on Disarmament of the Ad Hoc Committee on
the prohibition of the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons and other nuclear explosive
devices and urges a speedy conclusion of a universal and non-discriminatory convention thereon, and also
welcomes the establishment of the Ad Hoc Committee on effective international arrangements to assure
non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons and urges the pursuit of
efforts in this regard as a matter of priority;
9. Expresses its concern at the continuing opposition by some nuclear-weapon States to the
establishment of an ad hoc committee on nuclear disarmament in the Conference on Disarmament, as
called for in General Assembly resolution 52/38 L;
10. Reiterates its call upon the Conference on Disarmament to establish, on a priority basis, an ad
hoc committee on nuclear disarmament to commence negotiations early in 1999 on a phased programme
of nuclear disarmament and for the eventual elimination of nuclear weapons with a specified framework
of time through a nuclear weapons convention;
11. Urges the Conference on Disarmament to take into account in this regard the proposal of the
twenty-eight delegations for a programme of action for the elimination of nuclear weapons,58 as well as
the mandate for the ad hoc committee on nuclear disarmament, proposed by the twenty-six delegations;59
12. Calls for the convening of an international conference on nuclear disarmament at an early date
with the objective of arriving at an agreement on a phased programme of nuclear disarmament and for the
eventual elimination of nuclear weapons with a specified framework of time through a nuclear weapons
convention;

/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 39

13. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session a
report on the implementation of the present resolution;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled “Nuclear
disarmament”.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998
Y
TOWARDS A NUCLEAR-WEAPON-FREE WORLD: THE NEED FOR A NEW AGENDA
The General Assembly,
Alarmed by the threat to the very survival of mankind posed by the existence of nuclear weapons,
Concerned at the prospect of the indefinite possession of nuclear weapons,
Concerned also at the continued retention of the nuclear-weapons option by those three States that
are nuclear-weapons capable and that have not acceded to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons,2
Believing that the proposition that nuclear weapons can be retained in perpetuity and never used
accidentally or by decision defies credibility, and that the only complete defence is the elimination of
nuclear weapons and the assurance that they will never be produced again,
Concerned that the nuclear-weapon States have not fulfilled speedily and totally their commitment
to the elimination of their nuclear weapons,
Concerned also that those three States that are nuclear-weapons capable and that have not acceded
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons have failed to renounce their nuclear-weapons
option,
Bearing in mind that the overwhelming majority of States entered into legally binding commitments
not to receive, manufacture or otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, and
that these undertakings have been made in the context of the corresponding legally binding commitments
by the nuclear-weapon States to the pursuit of nuclear disarmament,
Recalling the unanimous conclusion of the International Court of Justice in its 1996 advisory opinion
that there exists an obligation to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to
nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international control,
Stressing that the international community must not enter the third millennium with the prospect that
the possession of nuclear weapons will be considered legitimate for the indefinite future, and convinced

/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 40

that the present juncture provides a unique opportunity to proceed to prohibit and eradicate them for all
time,
Recognizing that the total elimination of nuclear weapons will require measures to be taken firstly
by those nuclear-weapon States that have the largest arsenals, and stressing that these States must be
joined in a seamless process by those nuclear-weapon States with lesser arsenals in the near future,
Welcoming the achievements to date and the future promise of the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks
process and the possibility it offers for development as a plurilateral mechanism including all the nuclearweapon States, for the practical dismantling and destruction of nuclear armaments undertaken in pursuit
of the elimination of nuclear weapons,
Believing that there are a number of practical steps that the nuclear-weapon States can and should take
immediately before the actual elimination of nuclear arsenals and the development of requisite verification
regimes take place, and, in this connection, noting certain recent unilateral and other steps,
Welcoming the agreement recently reached in the Conference on Disarmament on the establishment
of an Ad Hoc Committee under item 1 of its agenda entitled “Cessation of the nuclear arms race and
nuclear disarmament”, to negotiate, on the basis of the report of the Special Coordinator33 and the mandate
contained therein, a non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty
banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, and
considering that such a treaty must further underpin the process towards the total elimination of nuclear
weapons,
Emphasizing that, for the total elimination of nuclear weapons to be achieved, effective international
cooperation to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons is vital and must be enhanced through, inter
alia, the extension of international controls over all fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices,
Emphasizing also the importance of existing nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties and of the signature
and ratification of the relevant protocols to these treaties,
Noting the joint ministerial declaration of 9 June 199860 and its call for a new international agenda
to achieve a nuclear-weapon-free world, through the pursuit, in parallel, of a series of mutually reinforcing
measures at the bilateral, plurilateral and multilateral levels,
1. Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to demonstrate an unequivocal commitment to the speedy
and total elimination of their respective nuclear weapons and, without delay, to pursue in good faith and
bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to the elimination of these weapons, thereby fulfilling their
obligations under article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;2
2. Calls upon the United States of America and the Russian Federation to bring the Treaty on
Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms (START II)52 into force without further
delay and immediately thereafter to proceed with negotiations on START III with a view to its early
conclusion;

/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 41

3. Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to undertake the necessary steps towards the seamless
integration of all five nuclear-weapon States into the process leading to the total elimination of nuclear
weapons;
4. Also calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to pursue vigorously the reduction of reliance on nonstrategic nuclear weapons and negotiations on their elimination as an integral part of their overall nuclear
disarmament activities;
5. Further calls upon the nuclear-weapon States, as an interim measure, to proceed to the dealerting of their nuclear weapons and, in turn, to the removal of nuclear warheads from delivery vehicles;
6. Urges the nuclear-weapon States to examine further interim measures, including measures to
enhance strategic stability and accordingly to review strategic doctrines;
7. Calls upon those three States that are nuclear-weapon capable and that have not yet acceded to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to reverse clearly and urgently the pursuit of all
nuclear weapons development or deployment and to refrain from any action which could undermine
regional and international peace and security and the efforts of the international community towards
nuclear disarmament and the prevention of nuclear weapons proliferation;
8. Calls upon those States that have not yet done so to adhere unconditionally and without delay
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to take all the necessary measures which
flow from adherence to this instrument;
9. Also calls upon those States that have not yet done so to conclude full-scope safeguards
agreements with the International Atomic Energy Agency and to conclude additional protocols to their
safeguards agreements on the basis of the Model Protocol approved by the Board of Governors of the
Agency on 15 May 1997;61
10. Further calls upon those States that have not yet done so to sign and ratify, unconditionally and
without delay, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty26 and, pending the entry into force of the
Treaty, to observe a moratorium on nuclear tests;
11. Calls upon those States that have not yet done so to adhere to the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material62 and to work towards its further strengthening;
12. Calls upon the Conference on Disarmament to pursue its negotiations in the Ad Hoc Committee
established under item 1 of its agenda entitled “Cessation of the nuclear arms race and nuclear
disarmament”, on the basis of the report of the Special Coordinator33 and the mandate contained therein,
of a non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the
production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, taking into
consideration both nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament objectives, and to conclude these

61

See IAEA/GOV/2914, attachment 1.

62

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1456, No. 24631.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 42

negotiations without delay, and, pending the entry into force of the treaty, urges States to observe a
moratorium on the production of fissile materials for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices;
13. Also calls upon the Conference on Disarmament to establish an appropriate subsidiary body to
deal with nuclear disarmament and, to that end, to pursue as a matter of priority its intensive consultations
on appropriate methods and approaches with a view to reaching such a decision without delay;
14. Considers that an international conference on nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation,
which would effectively complement efforts being undertaken in other settings, could facilitate the
consolidation of a new agenda for a nuclear-weapon-free world;
15. Recalls the importance of the decisions and resolution adopted at the 1995 Review and Extension
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,63 and underlines
the importance of implementing fully the decision on strengthening the review process for the Treaty;
16. Affirms that the development of verification arrangements will be necessary for the maintenance
of a world free from nuclear weapons, and requests the International Atomic Energy Agency, together with
any other relevant international organizations and bodies, to explore the elements of such a system;
17. Calls for the conclusion of an internationally legally binding instrument to effectively assure nonnuclear-weapon States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons against the use
or threat of use of nuclear weapons;
18. Stresses that the pursuit, extension and establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones, on the basis
of arrangements freely arrived at, especially in regions of tension, such as the Middle East and South Asia,
represent a significant contribution to the goal of a nuclear-weapon-free world;
19. Affirms that a nuclear-weapon-free world will ultimately require the underpinnings of a universal
and multilaterally negotiated legally binding instrument or a framework encompassing a mutually
reinforcing set of instruments;
20. Requests the Secretary-General, within existing resources, to compile a report on the
implementation of the present resolution;
21. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session an item entitled “Towards
a nuclear-weapon-free world: the need for a new agenda”, and to review the implementation of the present
resolution.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998

63

1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I)), annex.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 43

Z
BILATERAL NUCLEAR ARMS NEGOTIATIONS AND NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous relevant resolutions,
Recognizing the fundamental changes that have taken place with respect to international security,
which have permitted agreements on deep reductions in the nuclear armaments of the States possessing
the largest inventories of such weapons,
Mindful that it is the responsibility and obligation of all States to contribute to the process of the
relaxation of international tension and to the strengthening of international peace and security and, in this
connection, to adopt and implement measures towards the attainment of general and complete disarmament
under strict and effective international control,
Appreciating a number of positive developments in the field of nuclear disarmament, in particular the
Treaty between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America on the
Elimination of Their Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles,64 and the treaties on the reduction
and limitation of strategic arms,
Appreciating also the indefinite extension of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons,2 and acknowledging the importance of the determined pursuit by the nuclear-weapon States of
systematic and progressive efforts to reduce nuclear weapons globally, with the ultimate goal of
eliminating those weapons, and by all States of general and complete disarmament under strict and
effective international control,
Welcoming the steps that have already been taken by the Russian Federation and the United States
of America to begin the process of reducing the number of nuclear weapons and removing such weapons
from a deployed status, and bilateral agreements on detargeting strategic nuclear missiles,
Noting the positive climate of relations between the States of the former Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and the United States of America, which permits them to intensify their cooperative efforts to
ensure the safety, security, and environmentally sound destruction of nuclear weapons,
Recalling the Moscow Summit Declaration on Nuclear Safety and Security of April 1996,65
Urging early action to complete the ratification of the Treaty on Further Reduction and Limitation
of Strategic Offensive Arms52 and further intensification of efforts to accelerate the implementation of
agreements and unilateral decisions relating to nuclear arms reduction,
64

The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 12:1987 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.88.IX.2), appendix VII.

65

A/51/131, annex I.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 44

Appreciating the joint statement on future reductions in nuclear forces and the joint statement
outlining the elements of an agreement for higher-velocity theatre missile defence systems, both issued
on 21 March 1997 by the Russian Federation and the United States of America,66 as well as their joint
statement of 10 May 1995 in connection with the Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile
Systems,67
Welcoming the joint statement issued at Helsinki on 21 March 1997,66 in which the Presidents of the
Russian Federation and the United States of America reached an understanding that, after the entry into
force of START II, their two countries would immediately commence negotiations on a START III
agreement, which would include the establishment, by 31 December 2007, of lower aggregate levels of
2,000 to 2,500 deployed warheads,
Noting with satisfaction the Protocol to START II, the Joint Agreed Statement, and the Letters on
Early Deactivation, agreed to by the Russian Federation and the United States of America in New York
on 26 September 1997, which are intended to be taken as further concrete steps to reduce the nuclear
danger and strengthen international stability and nuclear safety,
Welcoming the signing on 26 September 1997 by Belarus, Kazakhstan, the Russian Federation,
Ukraine and the United States of America of a number of significant agreements that contribute to
ensuring the viability of the Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems,
Welcoming the significant reductions made by some of the other nuclear-weapon States, and
encouraging all nuclear-weapon States to consider appropriate measures relating to nuclear disarmament,
1. Welcomes the entry into force of the Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic
Offensive Arms, signed in Moscow on 31 July 1991 by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the
United States of America,57 including the Protocol to that Treaty signed at Lisbon on 23 May 1992 by the
parties thereto, and the exchange of documents of ratification between Belarus, Kazakhstan, the Russian
Federation, Ukraine and the United States of America on 5 December 1994 at Budapest;
2. Also welcomes the signing of the Treaty between the Russian Federation and the United States
of America on Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms in Moscow on 3 January
1993,52 and urges the parties to take the steps necessary to bring that Treaty into force at the earliest
possible date;
3. Expresses its satisfaction at the reductions of strategic offensive arms being carried out in
accordance with the 1991 Treaty as well as the advice and consent of the Senate of the United States of
America to the 1993 Treaty in January 1996, and expresses its hope that it will soon be possible for the
Russian Federation to take corresponding steps to ratify that Treaty and for the United States Senate and
the State Duma of the Russian Federation to approve the Protocol to the 1993 Treaty and other documents
signed on 26 September 1997, so that START II can enter into force;

66

See CD/1460.

67

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 944, No. 13446.
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 45

4. Expresses further satisfaction at the continuing implementation of the Treaty between the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America on the Elimination of Their IntermediateRange and Shorter-Range Missiles,64 in particular at the completion by the parties of the destruction of
all their declared missiles subject to elimination under the Treaty;
5. Welcomes the removal of all nuclear weapons from the territory of Kazakhstan as from 1 June
1995, from the territory of Ukraine as from 1 June 1996, and from the territory of Belarus as from
30 November 1996;
6. Encourages Belarus, Kazakhstan, the Russian Federation, Ukraine and the United States of
America to continue their cooperative efforts aimed at eliminating strategic offensive arms on the basis
of existing agreements, and welcomes the contributions that other States are making to such cooperation
as well;
7. Welcomes the participation in the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons2 of
Belarus, Kazakhstan and Ukraine as non-nuclear-weapon States, which thereby provided notable
enhancement of the non-proliferation regime;
8. Welcomes the initiative signed by Presidents Yeltsin and Clinton on 2 September 1998, contained
in the joint statement on the exchange of information on missile launches and early warning, to exchange
information on the ballistic missiles and space launch vehicles derived from each side’s missile launch
warning system, including the possible establishment of a centre for the exchange of missile launch data
operated by the Russian Federation and the United States of America and separate from their respective
national centres, and takes note of the initiative to examine bilaterally the possibility of establishing a
multilateral ballistic missile and space launch vehicle pre-launch notification regime in which other States
could voluntarily participate;
9. Welcomes the September 1998 pledge by the Russian Federation and the United States of
America to remove by stages approximately fifty metric tons of plutonium from each of their nuclear
weapons programmes, and to convert this material so that it can never be used in nuclear weapons;
10. Urges the Russian Federation and the United States of America to commence negotiations on
a START III agreement immediately after ratification by the Russian Federation of START II, thereby
fulfilling the commitments they undertook in the joint statement issued in Moscow on 2 September 1998;
11. Encourages and supports the Russian Federation and the United States of America in their
efforts aimed at reducing and eliminating their nuclear weapons on the basis of existing agreements and
to continue to give those efforts the highest priority in order to contribute to the ultimate goal of
eliminating those weapons;
12. Invites the Russian Federation and the United States of America to keep other States Members
of the United Nations duly informed of progress in their discussions and in the implementation of their
strategic offensive arms agreements and unilateral decisions.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998

/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 46

AA
CONVENING OF THE FOURTH SPECIAL SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
DEVOTED TO DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/75 I of 15 December 1994, 50/70 F of 12 December 1995, 51/45 C of
10 December 1996 and 52/38 F of 9 December 1997,
Recalling also that, there has been a consensus to do so in each case, three special sessions of the
General Assembly devoted to disarmament were held in 1978, 1982 and 1988, respectively,
Bearing in mind the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,1 adopted
by consensus at the first special session devoted to disarmament, which included the Declaration,
Programme of Action and Machinery for disarmament,
Bearing in mind also the objective of general and complete disarmament under effective international
control,
Welcoming the recent positive changes in the international landscape, characterized by the end of the
cold war, the relaxation of tensions at the global level and the emergence of a new spirit governing
relations among nations,
Taking note of paragraph 145 of the Final Document of the Twelfth Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Durban, South Africa, from 29 August to 3 September
1998,23 which supported the convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament, which would offer an opportunity to review from a perspective more in tune with the current
international situation the most critical aspects of the process of disarmament and to mobilize the
international community and public opinion in favour of the elimination of nuclear and other weapons of
mass destruction and of the control and reduction of conventional weapons,
Taking note also of the report of the 1998 substantive session of the Disarmament Commission on
the item entitled “Fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament”,68
Desiring to build upon the substantive exchange of views on the fourth special session of the General
Assembly devoted to disarmament during the 1998 substantive session of the Disarmament Commission,
Reiterating its conviction that a special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament can
set the future course of action in the field of disarmament, arms control and related international security
matters,
Emphasizing the importance of multilateralism in the process of disarmament, arms control and
related international security matters,

68

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/53/42).
/...

A/RES/53/77
Page 47

Noting that, with the recent accomplishments made by the international community in the field of
weapons of mass destruction as well as conventional arms, the following years would be opportune for
the international community to start the process of reviewing the state of affairs in the entire field of
disarmament and arms control in the post-cold-war era,
1. Decides, subject to the emergence of a consensus on its objectives and agenda, to convene the
fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament;
2. Endorses the report of the Disarmament Commission on its 1998 substantive session,68 and
recommends that an item entitled “Fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament” be included in the agenda of the Commission at its 1999 session, which should promote
agreement on the agenda and timing of the special session;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled
“Convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament” and, subject
to the outcome of the deliberations at the 1999 substantive session of the Disarmament Commission, to
set an exact date for and to decide on organizational matters relating to the convening of the special
session.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998
