S/2002/1345

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 December 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 9 December 2002 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 29 November
2002, which I received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-73440 (E)

161202

*0273440*

S/2002/1345

Annex
Letter dated 29 November 2002 from the Secretary-General of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization to the Secretary-General
With reference to the forthcoming completion of the Amber Fox mission in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 1 on 15 December 2002 and the need for a
follow-up mission, I have the pleasure to inform you of the latest North Atlantic
Council decisions.
The Council agreed that Operation Amber Fox has been a success, and that
thereafter there is a requirement for an international military presence in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
The Council noted the European Union’s expressed readiness to take over
military operations in the country under appropriate conditions. It agreed that there
will be a NATO presence in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia from 16
December 2002, which will include a capability to provide support to international
monitors. It also agreed that the Council will review the modalities of this
continuing presence in February 2003.
The Council further agreed, without prejudice to future European Union
decisions, that NATO will continue to assist the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia with defence and security reform.
The NATO strategic political objectives for the post-15 December presence
are:
– to minimize the risk of further destabilization
– to demonstrate support for the current political process and legitimate
institutions in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
– to contribute to the establishment and maintenance of an environment
conducive to democratic governance, multi-ethnicity, stability, the rule of law
and economic regeneration.
A clear distinction will be made between the operational and advisory
elements of the future NATO presence.
The operational elements will:
– have the capability to liaise with the authorities in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and other international organizations on the ground,
particularly in the former crisis areas
– contribute, within means and capabilities, support for the international
monitors, while acknowledging that the Government of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia has primary responsibility in this regard
– provide appropriate visibility to contribute to confidence.
The advisory elements will:
– contribute to assisting the Government of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia in taking ownership of security throughout the country
__________________
1 Turkey recognizes the Republic of Macedonia with its constitutional name.

2

S/2002/1345

– be further developed on the basis of an assessment of achievements to date and
the outstanding requirements of the former Yugoslav Republic or Macedonia
– be coordinated with ongoing bilateral and multilateral activities.
The Council approved an operational plan developed by our military
authorities in accordance with the above guidelines (see enclosure).
In summary, we are proposing a presence that would be composed of the
existing NATO Senior Military Representative and his headquarters, plus liaison and
monitoring teams along with the appropriate command and control capability and
force protection assets. All NATO elements will operate under the command of the
Senior Military Representative. In an emergency, forces based outside the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia would provide support.
The Council reconfirmed that any NATO presence in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia after 15 December 2002, other than the existing Senior
Military Representative, will be subject to authorization by the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia authorities.
I will continue to keep you informed of future developments.
(Signed) George Robertson

3

S/2002/1345

Enclosure
Supreme Allied Commander Southern Europe, operation plan
10418, Allied Harmony
1.

Situation
a.
Scope. This operational plan provides military strategic direction for the
conduct of NATO military engagement in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia from the end of Operation Amber Fox on 15 December 2002. It will be
undertaken following a request to NATO from the host Government and North
Atlantic Council decisions.
b.

Strategic political objectives. The NATO strategic political objectives

(1)

To minimize the risk of further destabilization.

are:

(2) To demonstrate support for the current political process and legitimate
institutions in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
(3) To contribute to the establishment and maintenance of an environment
conducive to democratic governance, multi-ethnicity, stability, the rule of law
and economic regeneration.

2.

Mission
When directed by the North Atlantic Council, the Supreme Allied Commander
Southern Europe will authorize the Commander-in-Chief of the Allied Forces
Southern Europe, as the Joint Force Commander, to conduct operational and
advisory tasks and other supportive activities in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia in order to contribute to the overall international community aim of
stability in the country and the region.

3.

Execution
a.

Assumptions

(1)

There will be a legal basis for any future NATO military engagement.

(2) The conditions and limitations under which NATO personnel will operate
will be accepted and understood by all concerned bodies or parties.
(3) Any future NATO engagement will continue to include a civilian
element.
(4) Some nations will maintain national support elements in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and will sustain and move forces via road
and rail lines of communication through the country and Skopje airport. The
lines of communication will remain a critical requirement for the time being.
(5) Forces and resources, including funding, will be provided as required. As
this is being mounted by NATO at the request of the host Government, it will
be a NATO only activity.

4

S/2002/1345

b.

Strategic military intent

(1) Strategic military objectives. The next phase of NATO engagement in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia will not be based on support to
international community monitors, but will relate to the broader objective of
contributing to the overall international community aim of stability in the
country and the region. The overall strategic effect required has a number of
strands and objectives: first, to inspire confidence in the population, especially
in the former crisis areas and promote further reconciliation, reintegration and
the full adoption of the Framework Agreement. Second, to keep levels of
tension low. Third, to discourage a resurgence of ethnically motivated violence
or inappropriate action. Fourth, to show solidarity with, and support for, the
country, its new democratically elected Government and its multi-ethnic
population. Fifth, to reconstruct security structures to institutionalize stability
through improvement and ownership by the host Government and, sixth, to
demonstrate NATO engagement and its full support for the efforts of other
international community organizations.
(2) Operations design. Key elements of the operations design will be a
cohesive, coherent command, control, communications and intelligence
structure, building upon the Senior Military Representative and NATO
headquarters Skopje, and the ability to collect, produce and share information
and intelligence. This must be linked with the employment of responsive,
mobile elements for visible military engagement in the former crisis areas and
the provision of accurate and timely situational awareness. Such elements must
also have the ability to keep in touch with what is happening at ground level,
the empathy to identify change and the visibility and credibility to reassure and
deter through observation and profile. Being in the right place at the right time
will be critical, as will the ability to harness the support of others to discourage
inappropriate action and to report it for rectification. Mechanisms will be
required to advise and coordinate with host Government authorities and
neighbouring NATO-led forces on border security. On receipt of further
political direction, the NATO advisory team within the Senior Military
Representative’s staff should be enhanced and directed to provide military-tomilitary advice on defence and security sector reforms. NATO forces are to be
impartial throughout. All of these activities are to be conducted in close
consultation and coordination with the NATO civilian presence in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and other international community agencies
active in the country. Should the tactical situation require the provision of
emergency support to international community monitors, where the host
Government, which has responsibility in this area, is unable to assist, reserves
may be committed from Kosovo by the Joint Force Commander, under
predetermined arrangements.
(3) Enabling activities. KFOR will continue to mount operations on the
Kosovo/former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia border, and in depth in the
province of Kosovo, designed to prevent incursions and reduce manpower and
materiel support for any nascent ethnic Albanian insurgent groups.
Additionally, the Senior Military Representative is to continue to provide
border security advice to his host Government and encourage it to coordinate
on this issue with the appropriate authorities in the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia.

5

S/2002/1345

(4)

Limitations

(a) NATO will not provide a safe and secure environment in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. This is the responsibility of the host
Government.
(b)
forces.

NATO will not conduct operations jointly with host Government

(c) NATO will not use military force to maintain international
community monitors’ freedom of movement.
(d) NATO will not provide specific close protection for international
community monitors, nor will it provide security for the monitors’ facilities or
buildings.
(e) NATO will not provide routine logistics, transport
communication support to the international community monitors.

or

(f) NATO forces will not provide escorts for returns of displaced
persons and refugees or internally displaced persons, government forces
returning to former conflict areas or non-governmental or international
organizations.
(g) NATO will not be responsible for the implementation or
enforcement of any agreements between and among the Government of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and any other party.
(h) NATO forces will not serve as a security buffer between any ethnic
groups or observe any geographical cantonization of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia.
(i) Although NATO forces will be involved in civil-military liaison
activity, they are not to undertake practical civil-military cooperation activities
of a humanitarian or sustainment nature.
(j) NATO forces are only to conduct mission-essential or life-saving
mine, booby trap or unexploded ordnance disposal and/or marking. Mine
clearance is a host nation responsibility.
c.
Key military tasks. The key military tasks fall into operational and
advisory bands:
(1)

Operational key military tasks

(a) Conduct liaison and monitoring operations focused in the former
crisis areas, maintaining links with host nation forces, local leaders, the
population and international community organizations.
(b)

Provide situational awareness of events in the former crisis areas.

(c) Facilitate the exchange of information related to liaison and
monitoring activities in the former crisis areas and border security operations.
(d) Provide support to international community monitors, within means
and capabilities.

6

S/2002/1345

(e) Provide advice/coordination and exchange information on border
security with host nation authorities, the Commander of KFOR and the Senior
Military Representative.
(f) Communicate the intent of NATO to the local population to support
wider NATO information activities, including through visible presence.
(2) Advisory key military tasks. Following political guidance and taking
account of ongoing bilateral and multilateral activities, provide military
advice, coordinated with the NATO civilian presence, to the host Government
under, inter alia, the Membership Action Plan, the Partnership Work
Programme and defence and security sector reform activities.
d.

Military priorities

(1)

Information gathering and sharing.

(2) Liaison and coordination with host Government authorities and other
international organizations on the ground, particularly in the former crisis
areas.
(3) Provision of the appropriate support to international community
monitors, within means and capabilities.
(4) Provision of the appropriate visibility to contribute to confidence and
stability.
(5) Timely, coordinated and practical military advice to the host
Government, based on an assessment of needs, to assist it in taking ownership
of security throughout the country.
(6)

Unity and coherency of command.

e.
Desired strategic military endstate. The desired endstate is when
NATO judges that progress towards lasting stability in the country is self-sustaining
to the extent that there is no longer any need for a deployed NATO force in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. This allows the cessation of any NATO
military activities specifically designed to contribute to the encouragement of
stability. Any enduring NATO military presence in the country is represented by
NATO headquarters Skopje, which will continue a range of activities according to
the Senior Military Representative’s terms of reference, commensurate with a
normalized relationship between NATO and a partner country actively engaged upon
its Membership Action Plan.
f.
Forces and resources. The force will be made up of the Senior Military
Representative and NATO headquarters Skopje, with an advisory staff element,
liaison and monitoring teams, a signals unit, command and control helicopter flight
and the necessary combat service support assets. Selected reserves and Medevac
helicopters will be on call from NATO forces already based in Kosovo, under
predetermined arrangements coordinated by the Joint Force Commander.
g.

Coordinating instructions

(1) Timings. This phase of NATO engagement is to begin on 16 December
2002. Its progress will be reviewed by the chain of command in February
2003, with recommendations being passed to NATO headquarters for
consideration by the Military Committee and the North Atlantic Council.

7

S/2002/1345

Operational key military tasks will end on 15 June 2003, unless the North
Atlantic Council directs otherwise. Advisory key military tasks will end on
order.
(2) Use of force. Nothing will negate a commander’s right and obligation to
take all necessary and appropriate action for unit and individual self-defence
and force protection. All personnel have the right to exercise the inherent right
of self-defence. Personnel in the field may be armed.
(3)

Support to international community monitors

(a) Life-saving activity (e.g. Medevac or explosive ordnance disposal)
may be provided on humanitarian grounds, within means and capabilities.
(b) Should an international community monitor perceive that his/her
life or liberty may be threatened, the first recourse is to seek assistance from
the host Government, which has responsibility in this area. Should the host
Government be unable to assist, NATO forces may provide emergency support
within means and capabilities. Steps are to be taken to resolve the situation
quickly through rapid deployment of liaison and monitoring teams to the scene
in order to increase profile, reassure those believing themselves to be at risk
and to deter the perpetrators. Concurrently, complementary activities should be
initiated in the political sphere through the “Principals” structure and, if
necessary, reserves notified.
(c) If forces are required, reserves should be deployed from Kosovo. In
this context, forces that may be called upon from Kosovo will, under
arrangements made by the Joint Force Commander, be pre-identified and
procedures for call forward and movement identified, agreed and practised.
Rules of Engagement will also be in place to allow them to accomplish their
potential tasks. Notice to move is to be kept under review and adjusted to suit
the prevailing circumstances, within means and capabilities. Regular
operational rehearsals are to be conducted to prove procedures, ensure
familiarity and send signals of capability and intent. Should a particular threat
be identified, reserves may be deployed into the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and based there for specified periods for a particular purpose.
(4) Status. The status of the Senior Military Representative/NATO
headquarters Skopje will be agreed during discussions led by NATO
headquarters with the host Government on future NATO military engagement
in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
(5) Release of information. Information may be released to others in the
international community and the host Government in accordance with current
practice.

4.

Service support
Extant logistic principles and procedures apply.

8

S/2002/1345

5.

Command and signal
a.
Command and control. All NATO military activities in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia are to be conducted under the operational
command of the Joint Force Commander and the tactical command of the Senior
Military Representative. Unity and coherence of tactical command will be critical
factors, thus ensuring that all activities are coordinated and appropriate to the
mission.
b.
Coordination. All NATO military engagement in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia will be closely coordinated and conducted in concert with
the activities of the NATO Senior Civilian Representative and other international
community organizations active in the country. Coordination with KFOR on border
security issues will also be an essential component of this operation.
Joseph W. Ralston
General, United States Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander Europe

9
