UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/446
29 May 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 29 MAY 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ADDRESSED
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to inform you and, through you, the members of the
Security Council, that, pursuant to paragraph 8 (a) (ii) of Security Council
resolution 986 (1995) of 14 April 1995, the Government of Iraq has submitted to
me its enhanced distribution plan for the purchase and distribution of
humanitarian supplies during the new period specified in paragraph 1 of
resolution 1153 (1998) of 20 February 1998. The Government of Iraq was informed
today that I had approved the enhanced distribution plan on the understanding
that its implementation would be governed by resolutions 986 (1995) and
1153 (1998) and the Memorandum of Understanding concluded on 20 May 1996 between
the United Nations Secretariat and the Government of Iraq, and would be without
prejudice to the procedures followed by the Security Council Committee
established by resolution 661 (1990).
A copy of the list of supplies and goods accompanying the enhanced
distribution plan will be made available to the Security Council Committee. The
list has been scrutinized by experts of the United Nations Special Commission,
who have noted that some of the items appearing on it would be subject to
notification under the mechanism for monitoring exports and imports that was
adopted by the Council in its resolution 1051 (1996) of 27 March 1996. The list
of items in question is also being forwarded to the Committee. The enhanced
distribution plan and the letter conveying my acceptance of the plan are
attached.

(Signed)

98-14940 (E)

290598

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1998/446
English
Page 2

Annex I
[Original:

English]

Letter dated 29 May 1998 from the Executive Director of the
Office of the Iraq Programme addressed to the Permanent
Representative of Iraq to the United Nations

On behalf of the Secretary-General, I wish to acknowledge receipt, under
cover of your letter dated 27 May 1998 addressed to the Secretary-General (see
annex II), of the enhanced distribution plan submitted by your Government for
the new period as specified in paragraph 1 of Security Council resolution
1153 (1998) of 20 February 1998, and would like to inform you that I have been
authorized by the Secretary-General to convey in this respect the following.
Security Council resolutions 986 (1995) of 14 April 1995 and 1153 (1998)
require that the Government of Iraq guarantee, on the basis of a plan submitted
and approved by the Secretary-General, equitable distribution of medicine,
health supplies, foodstuffs and materials and supplies for essential civilian
needs (humanitarian supplies) exported to Iraq under conditions defined by those
resolutions. The Memorandum of Understanding concluded on 20 May 1996 between
the United Nations Secretariat and the Government of Iraq for the implementation
of resolution 986 (1995) provides that the Government of Iraq shall prepare a
distribution plan describing in detail the procedures to be followed by the
competent Iraqi authorities with a view to ensuring equitable distribution of
humanitarian supplies and submit the plan to the Secretary-General for approval.
The Memorandum states in this regard that if the Secretary-General is satisfied
that the plan adequately ensures equitable distribution of humanitarian supplies
to the Iraqi population throughout the country, he will so inform the Government
of Iraq.
As indicated in the letter dated 15 April 1998 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/1998/330 and Corr.1),
under the prevailing circumstances, both in terms of Iraq’s oil export capacity
and the substantial drop in oil prices, it will not be possible to reach the
revenue target pursuant to paragraph 2 of Security Council resolution
1153 (1998). Accordingly, it is noted that adjustments had to be made in
formulating the enhanced distribution plan, bearing in mind, in particular,
priorities for the food and nutrition and health sectors as well as
intersectoral complementarity.
I have the honour to inform the Government of Iraq through you that, having
examined the enhanced distribution plan, the Secretary-General has come to the
conclusion that the plan, if properly implemented, should meet the requirements
of equitable distribution of humanitarian goods to the Iraqi population
throughout the country. The plan is, therefore, approved with the following
understanding.
The Secretary-General’s acceptance of the enhanced distribution plan does
not constitute an endorsement of either the budgetary allocation for
telecommunications or of the specific items listed in annex VII to the plan.
/...

S/1998/446
English
Page 3

While recognizing that there may well be a need for telecommunications
improvements to facilitate the distribution of humanitarian supplies exported to
Iraq under the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Secretary-General will
await, as agreed between us, the outcome of a joint technical review by United
Nations experts and the relevant technical ministries of the Government of Iraq
before taking a decision on the proposals concerned.
The approval of the enhanced distribution plan is subject to the condition
that its implementation is governed by the relevant provisions of Security
Council resolutions 986 (1995) and 1153 (1998) and the Memorandum of
Understanding and that, in case of inconsistency between the particular
provisions of the plan, on the one hand, and the resolutions and the Memorandum
of Understanding, on the other, the provisions of the latter documents shall
prevail.
Overall, the enhanced distribution plan is considered to be well-balanced
between the respective sectors, and meets considerably the provisions of
paragraph 5 of resolution 1153 (1998). Further amendments to the plan, as
appropriate, should meet the requirements outlined in paragraph 5 of the
resolution. It is recognized that in certain sectors not all the information
required under paragraph 5 of the resolution could be provided in the plan at
this stage because of the complexity of the activities and the range of items to
be procured. Accordingly, the Government as well as the United Nations agencies
and programmes should take all necessary steps to ensure that applications
submitted to the United Nations Secretariat will indicate priority and
complementarity in compliance with paragraph 5 of resolution 1153 (1998).
The enhanced distribution plan contains a categorized list of supplies and
goods to be purchased and imported under the plan. The approval of the plan is
without prejudice to actions that might be taken by the Security Council
Committee established by resolution 661 (1990) regarding applications for export
of particular items contained on the list submitted for the Committee’s
consideration in accordance with its procedures.
Likewise, the categorized list contains certain items the export of which
to Iraq must be declared to the joint unit established by resolution
1051 (1996), as those items will be subject to monitoring because of their
possible dual use for civilian and prohibited purposes under Security Council
resolution 687 (1991) of 3 April 1991 and other relevant resolutions.
Finally, the approval of the enhanced distribution plan submitted by the
Government of Iraq does not necessarily constitute an endorsement of all
information or statements contained in the plan, and is without prejudice to any
recommendation arising from the supplementary report of the Secretary-General as
endorsed by the Security Council in its resolution 1153 (1998).

Benon V. SEVAN
Executive Director

(Signed)

/...

S/1998/446
English
Page 4

Annex II
[Original:

Arabic]

Letter dated 27 May 1998 from the Permanent Representative of
Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General

On instructions from my Government, I have the honour to transmit herewith
a copy of the final version of the enhanced distribution plan submitted by the
Government of the Republic of Iraq in accordance with the Memorandum of
Understanding of 20 May 1996 and Security Council resolution 1153 (1998). I
hope that the plan will be approved as quickly as possible.

(Signed) Nizar HAMDOON
Ambassador
Permanent Representative

/...

S/1998/446
English
Page 5

Enclosure
ENHANCED DISTRIBUTION PLAN
Submitted by the Government of Iraq to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations in accordance with the Memorandum of
Understanding of 20 May 1996 and Security Council resolution
1153 (1998)

/...

S/1998/446
English
Page 6

Table of contents
Executive summary
Part One -

Food Sector

Part Two -

Plan for Purchase and Distribution of Medicine and Medical
Equipment and Supplies

Part Three -

Plan of Equipment Purchase for Water and Sanitation Sector

Part Four -

Plan of Supplies and Equipment for Electricity Sector

Part Five -

Plan of Procurement and Distribution for the Agricultural
Sector

Part Six -

Plan of Purchase of Materials and Requirements for Education
Sector

Part Seven -

Infrastructure Support for the Food, Nutrition, Agriculture
and Health Sector and Telecommunications Plan of Purchase of
Materials and Requirements

Part Eight -

Plan of Purchase of Material and Requirements for Oil Sector

Annexes*
Annex I -

Food

Annex II -

Medicine, Supplies and Equipment

Annex III -

Water and Sanitation

Annex IV -

Electricity

Annex V -

Agriculture

Annex VI -

Education

Annex VII -

Infrastructure Support - Transport and Telecommunications

Annex VIII -

Oil Sector

Annex IX -

Settlement Rehabilitation

Annex X -

Mines Related

NB: Wherever possible, the annexes to this distribution plan include
information on priorities, complementarity and seasonal delivery requirements in
order to facilitate the speedy processing of applicatins by the United Nations
Secretariat for submission to the Sanctions Committee. At this stage, however,
in certain sectors, it is not possible to include all relevant information
because of the complexity of activities, the range of items to be procured and,
in regard to the health sector, the need for stocks to facilitate effective
distribution to medical facilities. Nevertheless, the Government of Iraq will
take all necessary steps to ensure that applications submitted to the United
Nations Secretariat indicate priority and complementarity.

* The annexes to the plan are not included in the present document.
/...

S/1998/446
English
Page 7

/...
