S/2016/355*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 April 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning
Western Sahara
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2218
(2015), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Missio n
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) until 30 April 2016 and
requested me to provide a report to it on the situation in Western Sahara well before
the end of the mandate period. It covers developments since my report dated
10 April 2015 (S/2015/246) and describes the situation on the ground, the status and
progress of the political negotiations on Western Sahara, my activities and those of
my Chef de Cabinet, the implementation of resolution 2218 (201 5) and the existing
challenges to the Mission’s operations and steps taken to address them, as the
Council requested in its resolution 2218 (2015).
2.
From 3 to 7 March 2016, I visited the region to make my own contribution to
the negotiating process, pay tribute to the United Nations peacekeeping operation,
MINURSO and its personnel, see for myself the humanitarian situation on the
ground and discuss other issues of concern. The Government of Morocco took
strong exception to a number of my words and actions during the trip. I regret that it
chose to forgo seeking clarifications through diplomatic channels, instead issuing a
number of public statements and communiqués and organizing mass protest
demonstrations in Rabat and Laayoune. I have repeatedly made it clear that nothing
I had said or done had been meant to take sides, express hostility to Morocco or
signal any change in the approach of the United Nations to the Western Sahara
issue. The results of my trip and subsequent developments are further detaile d in the
sections on political activities and MINURSO below.

II. Recent developments
3.
In an additional reaction to certain of my words and actions during my trip, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Morocco, Salaheddine Mezouar, called on me on
14 March 2016 to deliver a letter in which it was stated that Morocco was entitled to
“immediate, formal and public clarifications about [my] positions, the meaning of
[my] actions, as well as [my] intentions concerning … the parameters agreed during
* Reissued for technical reasons on 27 April 2016.

16-06350* (E)

280416

*1606350*

S/2016/355

[my] phone conversation with His Majesty the King Mohammed VI”. On 15 March,
the Government of Morocco announced a series of measures that have drastically
affected the ability of MINURSO to carry out its functions, including a significant
reduction of the civilian component, in particular the political segment, as well as
the cancellation of Morocco’s voluntary contribution to the functioning of the
Mission.
4.
On 16 March, the Permanent Mission of Morocco sent a note verbale to my
Executive Office transmitting a “list of 84 international civilian personnel of
MINURSO and the African Union who should leave the Kingdom of Morocco
within three days”. On 20 March, the temporary reassignment from Laayoune to
Las Palmas, Spain, or their home countries of the 70 United N ations and 3 African
Union international civilian personnel on the list actually present in Laayoune and
their dependants was completed. In response to the critical staff shortage created in
the Mission as a result, the Department of Field Support has temp orarily
implemented an improvised concept of logistical support to allow for the continuity
of core administrative functions where possible. Only 28 international civilian staff
members remain in Laayoune, while 25 are performing limited functions from Las
Palmas. On 21 March, MINURSO redeployed all three of its liaison officers from
Dakhla to the Awsard team site at the request of Morocco.
5.
In a letter dated 20 March, the Secretary-General of Frente Polisario,
Mohammed Abdelaziz, criticized the decision of Morocco to call for the removal of
the civilian staff and reaffirmed the commitment of Frente Polisario to the mandate
of MINURSO and the relevant military agreements. He also “urgently appealed to
the Security Council to assume its responsibilities” towards the Mission and its
mandate.
6.
The current crisis aside, the situation in Western Sahara, as it presents itself to
MINURSO, has been generally stable since my previous report. However, one
potential violation of the ceasefire occurred, as defined in military agreement No. 1.
On the evening of 27 February 2016, Frente Polisario informed MINURSO of a
shooting incident near Mijek, in the demilitarized buffer strip east of the berm. On
29 February, following necessary mine clearance for access, MINURSO located the
body of one individual and the remains of four camels. The Royal Moroccan Army
confirmed having fired 13 gunshots “in the direction of the camels”. MINURSO
recovered the body, identified by Frente Polisario as a civilian Sahrawi cameleer,
and handed it over to the family of the deceased. On 29 February, the Permanent
Representative of Morocco, Omar Hilale, wrote to me providing details of the
incident and reiterating that, after warnings, shots had been fired in “conditions of
very reduced visibility”. On 13 March, Mr. Abdelaziz wrote to the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights condemning what he considered “an
assassination” and calling upon the United Nations to investigate the incident.
7.
West of the berm, public life proceeded peacefully and included large
gatherings at social events in urban areas without major incident. On the occasions
MINURSO was able to witness, an extensive presence of Moroccan security forces
was noted.
8.
On 4 September 2015, municipal and, for the first time, regional elections
were held in Morocco and in Western Sahara. Insofar as MINURSO could ascertain,
the elections were conducted without incident. In a letter dated 1 October 2015,
Mr. Hilale informed me that each of the 12 new regions, including t he regions of

2/25

16-06350

S/2016/355

Dakhla and Laayoune, would have broad powers, including the mobilization of
financial resources and the establishment of development agencies.
9.
In a statement on 4 November 2015, I recalled that the definitive status of
Western Sahara was the object of a negotiating process being conducted under my
auspices in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions, and I
expressed regret at the absence of genuine negotiations “without preconditions and
in good faith to achieve a mutually acceptable political solution, which will provide
for the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara”. On 5 November,
Mr. Hilale called on me to express his country’s dismay at the content and timing of
the statement. He stressed that the use of the term “definitive status” was new and
contradicted Security Council resolutions, in which the Council called for “a
mutually acceptable political solution”. On 17 November, Mr. Abdelaziz wrote to
me welcoming my call for true negotiations, reaffirming the support of
Frente Polisario for the work of my Personal Envoy and warning: “We are at a
crisis. The conflict cannot be allowed to continue indefinitely”.
10. King Mohammed VI visited Laayoune in November 2015 and Dakhla in
February 2016. In Laayoune, on 6 November, he delivered his annual speech on the
occasion of the fortieth anniversary of the “Green March”. The King stated that the
autonomy initiative “is the most Morocco can offer” and that “[i]ts implementation
hinges on achieving a final political settlement within the framework of the United
Nations”. The King elaborated that integration of the territory into a unified
Morocco would be conducted principally through the “development model for the
southern provinces”. He also stressed that revenues from natural resources would
continue to be invested for the benefit of the local population in consultation and
coordination with it and promised that it would benefit from an important number of
infrastructure projects. He added that the legislators electe d by the citizens were the
“true representatives of the inhabitants”. On 12 November and 15 February,
Mr. Hilale wrote to me providing further details on the initiative, including that it
would consist of projects in the phosphate, agricultural, fisheries and tourism
sectors and that its global budget would be $7.7 billion.
11. In a letter dated 17 November 2015, Mr. Abdelaziz expressed “deep concern”
at the content of the King’s speech, which he called “intentionally provocative and
aimed clearly at drawing a line under the United Nations political process”.
Subsequently, Mr. Abdelaziz stated that Frente Polisario would not exclude
resuming the armed struggle, since the referendum that had been agreed in exchange
for the ceasefire in 1991 had not been held. He also denounced the King’s visit to
Laayoune as contradicting international law.
12. In the refugee camps near Tindouf, Algeria, public life and social activities
were conducted peacefully and in a relatively calm atmosphere. The severe living
conditions, already affected by a continuing decrease in humanitarian aid,
deteriorated further in October 2015 as a result of prolonged heavy rains that
devastated the five camps, destroying many of the refugees ’ mud-brick homes,
infrastructure and food supplies. The extensive damage prompted the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the World Health Organization (WHO) and the World
Food Programme (WFP) to launch a joint flash appeal for $ 19.8 million.
13. Frente Polisario held public events on the occasion of its forty -second
anniversary on 10 May 2015. From 16 to 22 December 2015, Frente Polisario held

16-06350

3/25

S/2016/355

its fourteenth General Peoples’ Congress, with the reported participation of 2,472
delegates. In its final communiqué, the Congress accused Morocco of intransigence
in its refusal to resume negotiations. It welcomed my intention to visit the region
and the intensified efforts of my Personal Envoy as a new opportunity, and
expressed its readiness to engage constructively in the search for a settlement.
However, it also warned that Morocco’s defiance against the efforts of the United
Nations could lead to grave consequences. On 23 December, Mr. Abdelaziz was
re-elected as Secretary-General. In January 2016, he appointed new officials in
several domains.
14. On 23 June 2015, Frente Polisario deposited with the Swiss Federal Council, in
its capacity as depositary of the 1949 Geneva Conventions and Additional Protocols
thereto, a unilateral declaration that Frente Polisario, as the authority representing
the people of Western Sahara, undertook to apply the Conventions and Additional
Protocol I thereto to the conflict between Frente Polisario and Morocco. On 26 June,
the Swiss Federal Council notified the high contracting parties of receipt of the
declaration. On 9 July, it also transmitted a communication dated 30 June from
Morocco in which Morocco rejected the declaration and considered it null and void,
adding that the depositary had exceeded its prerogatives by accepting it.
15. During the reporting period, the Moroccan authorities addressed 11 letters to
me reiterating their support for the United Nations political process, stressing that
the Moroccan autonomy initiative was the only solutio n and affirming that Morocco
respected human rights fully and had made extensive investments in the territory.
They also conveyed their concerns about what they described as the deplorable
humanitarian and human rights situation in the refugee camps near Tindouf. For his
part, Mr. Abdelaziz wrote to me on 10 occasions deploring what he described as
Moroccan obstruction and raising allegations of human rights violations, the
disproportionate use of force and the illicit exploitation of natural resources. He
repeatedly called upon the United Nations to implement appropriate remedies,
arrange the release of all Western Saharan political prisoners and institute a human
rights monitoring mechanism for Western Sahara.

III. Political activities
16. After the publication of my previous report on 10 April 2015 ( S/2015/246), I
decided to dispatch my then Chef de Cabinet, Susana Malcorra, to communicate my
understanding of the issues at stake and give new impetus to the negotiating process
on Western Sahara. Ms. Malcorra carried letters from me to King Mohammed VI
and Mr. Abdelaziz in which I reiterated my personal commitment and political
engagement and called upon the parties to show stronger political will and return to
the negotiating table.
17. In mid-June, Ms. Malcorra delivered letters to Mr. Abdelaziz. An adviser to
King Mohammed VI, Abdelatif Menouni, received her in the absence of the King. In
both letters, I emphasized the dangers posed by the changing regiona l dynamics,
including the spread of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in the Middle
East and North Africa, the worsening migration pressures across the Mediterranean
and the illicit trade in drugs and other contraband in the Sahel. In my view, th ese
dynamics required the international community to make intensified efforts to
address protracted conflicts. In particular, I drew the leaders’ attention to the

4/25

16-06350

S/2016/355

potential dangers relating to the radicalization of youth, which could present a
danger to peace and security in the region and beyond. Given the challenges that no
single actor could address alone, I underscored that, more than ever, the status quo
was no longer an option. I asked Ms. Malcorra to convey that, seven years after the
submission of their respective proposals to the Security Council, the parties had yet
to bridge the divide between their mutually exclusive positions and neither party
had succeeded in winning over the other party to its proposal and moving towards a
solution. I requested my Chef de Cabinet to stress that the resulting lack of regional
integration had real effects on the populations of the region.
18. In his response of 9 August 2015, Mr. Abdelaziz welcomed my call for the
resumption of negotiations and my expressed commitment to visit Western Sahara
and the region, and called the steps “an important demonstration of the resolve of
the United Nations to end the current stalemate and fulfil the promise of a self determination referendum for the Sahrawi people”. For his part, in a letter dated
24 August 2015, the King indicated that “Morocco has a sincere desire to put an end
to this regional dispute” and that its “autonomy initiative is the only way towards a
final solution”. He further stressed that he shared my objective t o relaunch the
political process under the sole auspices of the United Nations. He added that this
shared objective required that Algeria demonstrate the political will to achieve it,
given its “historic and political responsibility in this dispute”.
19. At my request, my Personal Envoy for Western Sahara, Christopher Ross,
moved to intensify his efforts through bilateral consultations and shuttle diplomacy.
His objective was to foster new ideas with a view to resuming the political
negotiations between the parties, in accordance with the Manhasset formula.
Working towards this objective, Mr. Ross conducted four trips to the region: from
31 August to 10 September 2015; from 19 to 28 October 2015; from 22 to
30 November 2015; and from 16 to 25 February 2016.
20. In Rabat, my Personal Envoy met Mr. Mezouar and the new Minister -Delegate
for Foreign Affairs, formerly the Secretary-General of the Ministry, Nasser Bourita.
Mr. Mezouar encouraged my Personal Envoy to visit as often as he wished to pursue
his shuttle diplomacy and reiterated Morocco’s commitment to the negotiating
process under United Nations facilitation. Mr. Bourita, for his part, affirmed that the
basis of the process was the “2004 understanding”, which, in his view, consisted of
a political solution that did not bring the status of Western Sahara into question,
inasmuch as “the Sahara is already Moroccan”.
21. My Personal Envoy’s Moroccan interlocutors introduced two of their long standing positions as new ideas to be explored in shuttle diplomac y. In September
2015, they asked him to explore bringing Algeria to the table as a formal party in
the negotiation process, maintaining that the continuation of the status quo was due
to Algeria’s absence. In October 2015, they suggested that he promote an exchange
of views on self-determination. Mr. Bourita stated that in Morocco’s view, selfdetermination could occur in the constant daily exercise of human rights, in
particular the pursuit of economic, social and cultural development, instead of in the
conduct of a formal exercise.
22. Following an interview with the Spanish news agency EFE, in which
Mr. Mezouar was widely believed to have stated that my Personal Envoy would not
be allowed to visit Western Sahara in the future, the issue was raised by the Security
Council in November 2015 and was defused after the Permanent Representative of

16-06350

5/25

S/2016/355

Morocco assured members of the Council that there were no impediments to
Mr. Ross’s travel. Mr. Bourita later stated that, while Morocco did not question his
right to travel, it was a question of agreeing whether the timing was “opportune”.
Mr. Ross’s previous visit to Western Sahara took place in the spring of 2013.
23. In Rabouni, my Personal Envoy met with Mr. Abdelaziz in October 2015 and
with the Frente Polisario negotiating team, headed by Khatri Adduh, during each
visit. Mr. Ross exchanged views on the negotiating process and expressed the
satisfaction of the United Nations and key international stakeholders with the stated
readiness of Frente Polisario to enter into negotiations on a more flexible basis and
to no longer insist on an immediate referendum, on the condition that Morocco
show similar flexibility.
24. When my Personal Envoy conveyed the two ideas from Rabat, the Frente
Polisario representatives warned that the Moroccan objective was to create
confusion in the process and delay it further. Reiterating the movement ’s
commitment to the peaceful resolution of the conflict, they said that their patience
had limits and that they could not understand why the United Nations was accepting
what they saw as Moroccan efforts to “redefine the negotiating parameters”. They
maintained that Morocco had effectively rejected the negotiation process since 2012
and lacked any respect for the United Nations and Frente Poli sario.
25. In Algeria, the President, Abdelaziz Bouteflika, confirmed that his country ’s
position remained unchanged and reiterated that Algeria would accept any solution
that Frente Polisario endorsed. Underscoring that his country was not a party to the
conflict, the Minister of State and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation,
Ramtane Lamamra, rejected Moroccan efforts to “bilateralize” the Western Sahara
conflict as a “regional dispute” between Algeria and Morocco. He recalled that,
since 1975, the conflict had been between Morocco and Frente Polisario. In
response to Morocco’s query on self-determination, Mr. Lamamra indicated that
Algeria remained attached to that right as defined in the United Nations context and
saw no further reason to elaborate. For his part, the Minister for Maghreb Affairs,
the African Union and the League of Arab States, Abdelkader Messahel, stated that
the preferred solution of Algeria remained for the people of Western Sahara to
exercise their right to self-determination through a referendum based on “one
person, one vote”.
26. In Nouakchott, my Personal Envoy met with the Prime Minister of Mauritania,
Yahya Ould Hademine on two occasions, as well as the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and his Minister-Delegate. As on previous occasions, they all reiterated Mauritania’s
long-standing position of “positive neutrality” with regard to the Western Sahara
negotiating process. The Prime Minister repeated his warning that the continuing
stalemate in the Western Sahara negotiations risked undermining regional stability.
He also stressed the important family and cultural ties between Sahrawis and
Mauritanians.
27. My Personal Envoy also continued his consultations with members of the Group
of Friends on Western Sahara, visiting Madrid, Paris, London and Washington, D.C.,
and meeting the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation in
New York. In these discussions, my Personal Envoy’s interlocutors reiterated their
support for his efforts. For his part, my Personal Envoy reiterated the possible
dangers of the ongoing stalemate and called upon his interlocutors to help to address
the situation. As on previous occasions, he underscored the need for more flexibility

6/25

16-06350

S/2016/355

in the parties’ positions to enable the process to move forward. In Madrid, he also
expressed his deep appreciation for the continuing facilitation of his mission by the
Government of Spain through the provision of a Spanish Air Force aircraft for his
travels within North Africa.
28. In the light of the ongoing stalemate and my desire to visit MINURSO, I
visited the region from 3 to 7 March 2016 following several discussions on the
preparations for the trip. I wanted very much to begin in Rabat in response to the
invitation of 14 April 2014 by King Mohammed VI, but this proved impossible
because his agenda did not permit him to receive me. Regrettably, I had been
obliged to cancel earlier plans to visit the region in November 2015 and January
2016 because of a possible visit to the Democratic People ’s Republic of Korea. On
4 February 2016, the King conveyed an invitation to meet him to discuss a range of
issues, including Western Sahara, as well as mutually convenient dates for a future
visit to the region for the twenty-seventh Arab Summit, due to be held in Marrakesh,
Morocco, in April. Although I offered to begin my trip by meeting a designated
representative of the King, the Moroccan side demurred. It also insisted that any
visit to Laayoune be preceded by a visit to Rabat. I therefore travelled instead to my
other stops — Nouakchott, the Smara refugee camp near Tindouf, Rabouni, the
MINURSO team site in Bir Lahlou and Algiers — with the intention of
subsequently visiting both Rabat and Laayoune, assuming mutually agreed dates
could be found.
29. My visit had four objectives. First, I wanted to make my own assessment and
contribution to the search for a settlement. Second, I sought to visit MINURSO and
pay tribute to its civilian personnel and military observers, who serve under very
difficult conditions. Third, in the first visit to the refugee camps by a SecretaryGeneral since 1998, I wanted to bear witness to this protracted humanitarian plight.
Fourth, I desired to exchange views on other issues of mutual interest with relevant
leaders. My movements were greatly facilitated by the generous offer of the
Government of Spain to make a Spanish Air Force aircraft available for my travel in
the region.
30. In Nouakchott, Rabouni and Algiers, I held political discussions with the
leaders of Mauritania, Frente Polisario and Algeria on the status of the negotiating
process and how to make progress. In the Smara refugee camp, I saw first -hand the
deep emotions and profound frustrations resulting from more than 40 years of living
without the prospect of a better future. Unable to leave my car because of the press
of the crowd, I met youth representatives later the same day in Rabouni. I witnessed
anger and bitterness at the international community, the United Nations, Morocco
and Frente Polisario alike. I recoiled at the inhumane conditions and extremely
harsh environment in which the refugees live. With every interlocutor, I stressed the
urgent need for progress towards “a mutually acceptable political solution, which
will provide for the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara” (see
Security Council resolution 2218 (2015), para. 7). I also committed myself to doing
more to encourage greater humanitarian assistance for the camps.

16-06350

7/25

S/2016/355

IV. Activities of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara
A.

Operational activities
31. As at 31 March 2016, the military component of MINURSO stood at 244
personnel, 11 of whom were female, against the authorized strength of 246. The
military component remains deployed at nine team sites and a li aison office in
Tindouf, Algeria.
32. From 1 April 2015 to 31 March 2016, MINURSO conducted 8,369 ground
patrols and 262 aerial patrols and visited units of the Royal Moroccan Army and the
military forces of Frente Polisario to monitor adherence to the mi litary agreements.
West of the berm, MINURSO military observers regularly visited 585 units, 29
training areas and 316 observation posts of the Royal Moroccan Army and
monitored 399 notified operational activities. East of the berm, the military
observers regularly visited 78 units, 10 training areas and 31 observation posts of
the Frente Polisario military forces and monitored 4 notified operational activities.
MINURSO also monitored one demonstration that supporters of Frente Polisario
had organized close to the berm to verify its exclusively civilian nature and defuse
or prevent possible tensions.
33. As at 31 March 2016, at the team site level, local cooperation had been
maintained by both parties. Owing to the limited logistical support and capacities
available as a result of the withdrawal of MINURSO civilian staff, field locations
are required to strictly control the consumption of water, fuel and other supplies to
preserve stocks.
34. West of the berm, apart from the potential breach of the ceasefire mentioned in
paragraph 6 above, MINURSO recorded no other new violations by the Royal
Moroccan Army besides the nine long-standing violations indicated in my previous
report (S/2015/246, para. 25). The Royal Moroccan Army continued to redeploy its
military personnel to strong points established on the berm from its second line of
defence 15 km from the berm, a major long-standing violation since September
2008. As at 14 March 2016, 55 observation posts remained operational. The Royal
Moroccan Army continued to contest notifications of long -standing violations of the
ceasefire regime with claims of “operational necessities” unrelated to the ceasefire
requirements. On 6 November 2015, the Royal Moroccan Army ordere d the
temporary deployment of an additional contingent of the Moroccan Royal Guard to
the area outside Laayoune to reinforce security during the visit of
King Mohammed VI. East of the berm, MINURSO observed and recorded one new
violation, namely, the Frente Polisario military forces’ relocation of two units away
from their original location, in addition to the three long -standing violations
indicated in my previous report (ibid.).
35. In reaction to an entry formality west of the berm that Morocco holds is
foreseen in the status-of-mission agreement, Frente Polisario implemented a new
entry procedure east of the berm on 15 April 2015, affixing a stamp on the passports
of MINURSO military and civilian staff members. Non -acceptance of passports
bearing the stamp west of the berm resulted in an interruption of MINURSO
personnel rotation and restrictions on deliveries to team sites east of the berm,
affecting MINURSO operations such as patrolling. MINURSO resumed full

8/25

16-06350

S/2016/355

operations on 9 May following intensive dialogue with Frente Polisario that resulted
in the indefinite suspension of the measure. However, Frente Polisario cautioned
that the entry requirement could be reimposed if the political process remained
stalled or the perception of double standards in the tr eatment of the parties by the
United Nations was not corrected. On 25 June 2015, the Under -Secretary-General
for Legal Affairs and United Nations Legal Counsel sent separate letters addressed
to the Government of Morocco and to the Secretary-General of Frente Polisario,
calling upon both of them to respect the status, privileges and immunities of
MINURSO in this regard.
36. In a letter dated 9 August 2015, Mr. Abdelaziz criticized Morocco ’s entry
procedures, as well as its requirement that MINURSO vehicles west of the berm carry
Moroccan licence plates and that mail to localities west of the berm be addressed to
Morocco, not Western Sahara, as violations of its status as a Non-Self-Governing
Territory. He called for these and other measures to be rectified to restore the
credibility of the United Nations and confidence in its neutral role in Western Sahara.
37. These events subsequently prompted MINURSO to review its logistics,
operations and contingency plans to enable it to address possible restrictions on its
operations, adapt to a changing regional security environment and ensure continuity
of operations for 90 days. A separate logistics hub was subsequently proposed to be
located in Tifariti, east of the berm, and medical staff from the military medical unit
were permanently stationed east of the berm to ensure supply and staff well -being
and increase preparedness against any potential threats or interruptions. The latter
constitutes a severe overstretch of the existing medical and logistical capacity of the
Mission. To meet the new requirements, and as a first step, MINURSO requests 11
additional paramedics and 3 additional doctors for the military medical unit that
Bangladesh has provided.
38. The Mission’s Force Commander held regular meetings with military
representatives of both parties to maintain the channels of communication and to
exercise due diligence in ensuring the observance of military agreement No. 1.
From 16 to 18 October 2015, Lieutenant-General Maqsood Ahmed, Military Adviser
for United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, visited Western Sahara and the
refugee camps near Tindouf and met representatives of both parties.
39. Landmines and other explosive remnants of war continued to endanger the lives
of MINURSO military observers and logistical teams, as well as local and nomadic
populations. As of the end of March 2016, a total of 52 cluster strike areas and 42
minefields remained to be addressed east of the berm. However, the departure of all
international staff overseeing the Mine Action Service -managed demining project as
part of MINURSO has resulted in the suspension of all demining activities since
20 March. Previously, two accidents relating to landmines and other explosive
remnants of war occurred east of the berm, involving five civilians. A total of 15
accidents relating to landmines or explosive remnants of war occurred west of the
berm, causing injury to 21 civilians and 8 soldiers and the deaths of 2 civilians and 1
soldier.
40. Prior to 20 March 2016, in response to these threats, the Mine Action
Coordination Centre operated by the Mine Action Service conducted clearance of
landmines and explosive remnants of war, route verification and landmine safety
training activities east of the berm in support of the Mission’s ceasefire monitoring
efforts. Mine Action Coordination Centre teams released a total of 7,382,251 m 2 of

16-06350

9/25

S/2016/355

land and destroyed 1,797 items, including 181 cluster sub-munitions, 144 unexploded
ordnance items and 45 anti-tank mines, as well as 1,427 rounds of small arms
ammunition in areas in which MINURSO military observers and international
logistical staff were operating. Of the 21 cluster strike areas that were cleared, 2 were
located on main supply routes and roads that MINURSO military observers
frequently used. The remaining areas were located around team sites. A total of 29 km
of patrol routes were also verified to facilitate MINURSO patrols to the east of the
berm. These activities saved lives and increased freedom of movement not only for
United Nations personnel, but also for local populations.
41. The Royal Moroccan Army reported the clearance of more than 220,360,000 m2
of land to the west of the berm and the destruction of 9,873 items, including a nti-tank
and anti-personnel mines, unexploded ordnance and small arms ammunition.
42. Prior to 20 March 2016, the Mine Action Coordination Centre worked with
both parties to the conflict on mine action initiatives with the aim of better
ascertaining the threat and impact of landmines and other explosive remnants of war
throughout Western Sahara. Consistent coordination and communication was
maintained in this regard.
43. The potential for regional instability and insecurity has affected the operational
environment of MINURSO increasingly. Primary responsibility for the protection of
the Mission rests with Morocco, Frente Polisario and Algeria. The parties and
neighbouring countries have taken additional measures to prevent infiltration by radical
groups. However, the Mission’s unarmed observers are increasingly exposed to growing
regional threats. The increased competition between Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb
and ISIL for pre-eminence in the region creates the potential for additional radical
actions against countries perceived to be supporting international counter-terrorist
interventions and possibly the United Nations.
44. During the reporting period, the Moroccan media reported on the dismantling
of terrorist cells in Laayoune on at least three differ ent occasions. The Moroccan
authorities subsequently confirmed the details to my Special Representative for
Western Sahara, which prompted a constructive discussion between the MINURSO
leadership and Moroccan authorities on enhancing protective measures fo r United
Nations property and staff west of the berm.
45. For its part, Frente Polisario regularly updated the Mission on possible threats,
such as terrorist attacks and kidnappings, and suggested increasing protective
measures and vigilance. As a precautionary measure and owing to the lack of
MINURSO capability to verify such threats, MINURSO has reduced all ground
patrols to a 50 km radius around its five team sites east of the berm. Frente Polisario
insists that all daylight patrols towards the Mauritanian border be conducted under
its armed escort, which has frequently been met with protest from the Moroccan
authorities, who consider it a serious limitation of the Mission’s freedom of
movement.
46. MINURSO has requested the Royal Moroccan Army and Frente Polisario to
augment their protection of its team sites by stationing quick reaction forces and
increasing the number of security guards, which is not always feasible for the
parties to implement. MINURSO has also increased its alertness and situational
awareness to improve the security and safety of its military and civilian staff.
Department of Safety and Security experts regularly visited team sites and the

10/25

16-06350

S/2016/355

liaison office in Tindouf to review the security arrangements in place and consult
the local representatives of the parties on security matters. Team site personnel have
been duly sensitized to the threat, with an added emphasis on security and safety
drills. The departure of the international security personnel whose names appeared
on Morocco’s list of 16 March 2016 has reduced the security management capacity
of the Mission, leaving MINURSO unable to fully and independently assess and
strengthen the safety and security of its remaining personnel.

B.

Substantive civilian activities
47. Throughout the reporting period, my Special Representative maintained
constructive contacts with the parties, primarily through their respective
coordination offices.
48. West of the berm, access by MINURSO to local interlocutors continued to be
restricted to Morocco’s MINURSO coordination office, as well as the Moroccan
civil and military authorities, whom my Special Representative and relevant
MINURSO staff met regularly on operational matters. MINURSO also met a
number of foreign visitors, including diplomats, legislators, journalists and
academics. However, the Mission’s substantive activities have come to a halt
following the departure of the political segment of the Mission in March 2016 at the
request of Morocco.
49. The recent crisis and the local media coverage that ensued affected the
perception of MINURSO and United Nations impartiality west of the berm, created
tensions and added pressure on the remaining personnel. The long -standing issue of
MINURSO vehicles operating with Moroccan licence plates west of the berm
continues, as described in previous reports (see S/2015/246, para. 40). Moroccan
licence plates must be removed and replaced by United Nations plates when
MINURSO vehicles cross to east of the berm and travel outside the area of
operations, inducing logistical and administrative complications. Despite the clear
provisions of the status-of-mission agreement, the Moroccan authorities have not
implemented their verbal agreement of March 2014 to gradually replace Moroccan
licence plates with United Nations plates on MINURSO vehicles (see S/2014/258,
para. 50).
50. In the refugee camps south of Tindouf, MINURSO and the United Nations
agencies enjoy unhindered access and interaction with Frente Polisario
representatives and refugees, as well as with local and international civil society
organizations. The difficulties experienced in May 2015 notwithstanding (see para. 35
above), the Mission’s leadership maintained constructive cooperation with Frente
Polisario on operational matters. However, as a result of the withdrawal of the
Mission’s international civilian component, the United Nations is now the subject of
additional criticism.

C.

Challenges to the operations of the Mission
51. The parties continue to have significantly divergent interpretations of the
Mission’s mandate. As I have reported repeatedly, Morocco views the role of
MINURSO as being limited to monitoring the ceasefire and military matters, as well
as support for demining and for UNHCR confidence-building measures. Frente
Polisario considers the central purpose of MINURSO to remain the organization of a

16-06350

11/25

S/2016/355

referendum of self-determination, for which monitoring of the ceasefire is
instrumental. For the United Nations, the Mission’s mandate is defined in successive
Security Council resolutions. To respond to the expectations of the Council, effective
implementation of the mandate of MINURSO requires that the Mission be able to
perform the full range of standard peacekeeping functions that United Nations
operations around the world perform. Tensions relating to the parties’ divergent
interpretations of the mandate and, more broadly, to the negotiating process and the
understanding of the United Nations of that process can affect the Mission ’s
operations. This has adverse effects on the credibility of the Missio n and the United
Nations with the parties and the population and impedes their ability to fully
implement the tasks that the Security Council has set forth.
52. The temporary reassignment of the Mission’s international personnel from
Laayoune to various locations has severely affected its capacity to continue its
functions. This is particularly critical for logistical operations that need to be
conducted on both sides of the berm unimpeded. Because of the joint nature of the
Mission, the loss of critical logistical and administrative staff is currently
jeopardizing the Mission’s field operations. MINURSO is currently unable to
sustain basic but critical functions, such as driving supply vehicles across the berm
(which requires international drivers because of the requirements of the parties) and
mechanical repair and maintenance of key equipment and infrastructure required to
keep remote locations functional. The loss of such capacities creates the risk of a
sudden interruption of the Mission’s military activities beyond the risk created by
the ongoing degradation of the provision of basic supplies. The withdrawal of core
parts of the international civilian component also significantly affected financial and
administrative controls over the Mission’s funds and assets, at best creating serious
delays in processes.
53. Beyond the operational impact, the withdrawal of the international civilian
component has seriously compromised the capacity of the Mission to perform the
mandate established by the Security Council. The cancellation of Morocco’s
voluntary contribution of some $3 million per year, including for accommodation
and meals for military observers, immediately created an additional unbudgeted cost
for MINURSO. The military component will struggle to maint ain its monitoring of
the ceasefire, given its reliance on civilian capabilities and technical functions for
sustainability. Other key tasks and standard peacekeeping functions, such as
assessments of and reporting on local conditions that may affect the M ission’s
operations and the political process, have been discontinued.

V. Humanitarian activities and human rights
A.

Persons unaccounted for in the conflict
54. The International Committee of the Red Cross, playing its role as neutral
intermediary, continued to work with the parties and families concerned in treating
the cases of persons still unaccounted for in relation to the past hostilities.

12/25

16-06350

S/2016/355

B.

Assistance to and protection of Western Saharan refugees
55. In accordance with its mandate, UNHCR continued to provide international
protection to Western Saharan refugees living in the five camps near Tindouf and,
together with its partners, deliver life-saving assistance and other livelihood
activities targeting vulnerable refugees, and young people in particular. This
included multisectoral activities in the areas of protection, shelter, water and
sanitation, health, nutrition and education and the provision of non -food items, as
well as a renewed focus on livelihoods. UNHCR continued to carry out its mandated
responsibilities in protection and basic services using a community -based approach.
Pending the registration of the refugees in the camps near Tindouf, the humanitarian
assistance provided by UNHCR and WFP continues to be based on a population
planning figure of 90,000 vulnerable refugees, with WFP furnishing an additional
35,000 food rations to persons with poor nutritional status. In March 2016, UNHCR
conducted an initial technical mission to identify areas in which support and advice
could be provided.
56. Following the heavy floods of October 2015 (see para. 12), UNHCR led the
inter-agency emergency response with other humanitarian actors in close
collaboration with the Government of Algeria, the Algerian Red Crescent and partners
on the ground. UNHCR, WFP, UNICEF and WHO launched an inter -agency appeal of
$19.8 million. UNHCR distributed urgently needed shelter and relief items, including
4,205 emergency family tents and 15,822 essential life-sustaining relief items.
Evacuation of stagnant water and an awareness campaign on the dangers of the most
common waterborne diseases were simultaneously conducted. WFP distributed
205 metric tons of food commodities in the immediate aftermath of the floods; 85,000
individual rations were distributed in early November. UNICEF set up 57 temporary
learning facilities and distributed some 36,000 school supplies, allowing all children
to take their exams. In addition, 15 schools and kindergartens were rehabilitated and
17 temporary health facilities and 5 temporary child -friendly spaces were established.
57. Owing to a lack of funding, shelter rehabilitation activities could only target
the 2,000 most vulnerable families of the 17,841 families affected. As a result, many
families continue to live in temporary tents and damaged houses, or have found
accommodation with other refugee families. The second phase of the emergency
response, along with the rehabilitation of 50 school classrooms, continues in 2016.
With only $11.9 million received thus far, the inter-agency appeal is 40 per cent
underfunded.
58. Similarly, funding shortfalls compelled WFP to adjust the number of food
items provided during the year, resulting in a less diversified food basket. Between
August and October 2015, it was forced to reduce food rations by up to 20 per cent.
In the health sector, UNHCR and its partners continued to cover up to 80 per cent of
the needs in the camps. Chronic conditions such as hypertension, diabetes, anaemia
and kidney failure remained the main health concerns. A health information system
was piloted, which permitted the provision of accurate public health indicators on a
regular basis. Anaemia and stunting prevention programmes targeted some 12,000
children under 5 years of age and 8,000 pregnant and lactating women in 2015. In
March 2016, UNHCR and WFP conducted a joint mission to assess the food
security situation of the Western Saharan refugees and to review the quality of
ongoing food and nutrition-related activities. Given the low level of financial
support, the retention of skilled staff remains a key challenge in the health sector.

16-06350

13/25

S/2016/355

59. UNHCR, through its partner organizations, also provided financial support to
primary and intermediate school teachers in the five camps and ensured that that all
children between the ages of 6 and 17 were enrolled in school. The number of
young refugees enrolled in vocational training courses and other skills training
increased. Twenty-five students received scholarships and are now pursuing higher
studies in Algerian universities. WFP continued to support the school feeding
programme. UNHCR also continued to ensure the supply of potable water to all
refugees living in the five camps. Preventive plans for the maintenance and
rehabilitation of water facilities were implemented to optimize the use of the
existing water infrastructure, which does not provide a sufficient daily quantity.
Efforts and resources continue to be focused on the extension of the water
distribution network in all camps. Hygiene kits were distributed to 38,450 women
and girls of reproductive age.
60. UNHCR has been working in close collaboration with relevant basic service
providers in cases of sexual and gender-based violence to ensure that quality
referral and response services are available in terms of legal, medical and
psychosocial support.
61. UNHCR and its partners have initiated a multi-year livelihoods strategy with a
special focus on the empowerment of youth. In this connection, UNHCR deployed a
mission in March 2016 to identify income-generating opportunities for young
people in the camps near Tindouf. These activities were arti culated in the multi-year
strategy developed as a result of the mission. An innovation centre on information
technology, communications skills and management was established to allow young
refugees to follow online courses and university studies. UNHCR also carried out
other livelihood initiatives and quick impact projects, including provision of support
to three bakeries and one soap factory, as part of the income -generation projects.
Given the current serious funding gaps in its assistance programme in th e camps
(the programme is only 6 per cent funded), UNHCR will continue to sensitize donor
countries and plan donor briefings, together with its partners, with the aim of
obtaining more funding for this refugee situation, which is the most protracted
situation under its mandate.
62. Underfunding continued to affect the regular refugee programme despite high level efforts to mobilize additional assistance. On 22 July, following her visit to the
region (see paras. 16 and 17), my Chef de Cabinet convened a mee ting in New York
of permanent representatives from existing and potential donor countries to
encourage the mobilization of additional financial resources to address the
shortfalls, particularly in food assistance.

C.

Confidence-building measures
63. All activities of the confidence-building measures programme, as stipulated in
the plan of action of 2012, were suspended in June 2014. As it continues its
consultation and cooperation with both parties, UNHCR remains ready to facilitate
the prompt resumption of the family visits and cultural seminars through the
existing coordination mechanism.
64. Over 12,000 individuals are registered to benefit from the family visits
programme. UNHCR remains committed to the mandate and to the principles of the
confidence-building measures programme and has thus maintained a minimum

14/25

16-06350

S/2016/355

operational capacity to respond immediately at such time as confidence -building
activities resume. It is imperative that the programme continue to link the
population divided by the conflict for the last 40 years.

D.

Human rights
65. As jointly agreed with Morocco, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) carried out a technical mission to
Laayoune and Dakhla in Western Sahara from 12 to 18 April 2015. The mission,
which was preceded by meetings with government officials in Rabat, enabled
OHCHR to gather first-hand information and gain greater understanding of the
human rights situation and challenges in Western Sahara and to explore forms of
future cooperation to ensure effective human rights protection for all. MINURSO
provided logistical support during the mission.
66. In Laayoune and in Dakhla, the OHCHR delegation met with numerous
interlocutors, including local authorities, representatives of civi l society and victims
of human rights violations and their relatives. The delegation also met with
ex-prisoners of Frente Polisario. Although the delegation was allowed to meet
interlocutors of its choice, as agreed with the Government of Morocco, its meet ings
with civil society and victims were monitored, and a few incidents of reprisal were
reported. In order to further assess existing protection mechanisms, the delegation
also met with representatives of the National Human Rights Council offices in
Laayoune and in Dakhla to seek their views concerning needs for and gaps in human
rights protection at the local level and ways in which OHCHR could assist in closing
those gaps and strengthening existing capacities. The delegation gathered information
on a variety of alleged human rights violations. It also received information about
existing and planned projects in the economic, social and cultural spheres in Western
Sahara and witnessed some of these in Laayoune and Dakhla first -hand.
67. During the reporting period, the Government of Morocco extended invitations
to four special procedures mandate holders of the Human Rights Council, in
addition to those that remain outstanding from previous years. The Special
Rapporteur on the right to food and the Independent Expert on human rights and
international solidarity undertook missions to Dakhla on 10 October 2015 and 19
and 20 January 2016, respectively. The dates for a follow-up visit by the Special
Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treat ment or
punishment are under discussion.
68. According to various sources, the Moroccan authorities continued to routinely
prevent or disperse gatherings focused on the right to self-determination,
discriminatory employment policies and other socioeconomic issues during the
reporting period. According to the same sources, Moroccan law enforcement officials
also blocked access to demonstrations and often used excessive or unnecessary force
in repressing demonstrations, including during the OHCHR mission. In several
cases, protesters and activists were allegedly subjected to arbitrary arrest, unfair
trials and imprisonment on ostensibly trumped-up charges solely for exercising their
rights to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly. Local human rights grou ps
reported that some persons injured during demonstrations were denied or did not
receive equal and timely access to medical treatment or services. Others refrained
from seeking medical assistance at hospitals out of fear of reprisal from security

16-06350

15/25

S/2016/355

personnel on the scene. However, according to the Moroccan authorities, the right of
assembly is guaranteed by law to all recognized entities unless the law is violated or
it is judged that the gathering is disturbing public order. They added that, on this
basis, a large number of demonstrations took place without incident during the
reporting period.
69. On 12 January 2016, at least 19 Western Saharans, members of the Field
Coordination of Unemployed Sahrawi Graduates, reportedly went on a hunger strike
for almost two weeks to protest economic and social discrimination and demand
equal employment opportunities. The security forces allegedly surrounded the
group’s building and prevented family members and friends from visiting, thereby
restricting the protesters’ access to water. This led to a drastic deterioration in the
health of the majority of the strikers. On 23 January, electricity in the building was
reportedly cut in an apparent attempt to force an end to the strike. On 26 January,
OHCHR sent a note verbale to the Permanent Mission of Morocco in Geneva
requesting information on the circumstances of the incident and the measures that
Morocco had taken to address the demands of the group. On 30 March, the
Permanent Mission of Morocco responded that, after a visit to the group by a
multidisciplinary commission, the participating doctors reported that the hunger
strike was fictitious and that the strikers had eaten during their visit. In its response,
the Permanent Mission also concluded that each time the hunger strikers simulated
fainting they were evacuated to a hospital for medical treatment.
70. The 21 Western Saharans that belong to the Gdeim Izik protest camp group
continued to serve the prison sentences, including life sentences, that a military
court had imposed in 2013. 1 The new Code on Military Justice (No. 108-13), which
took effect in July 2015, ending military court trials of civilians, did not
retroactively benefit that group, and the group’s petition of the verdict remained
pending in the court of cassation. Torture and ill-treatment in places of deprivation
of liberty, including as a result of overcrowding and limited access to medical care,
continued to be reported. In a letter dated 16 February 2016 addressed to me, the
Permanent Representative of Morocco confirmed that a decision had been made to
designate the National Human Rights Council as the national preventive mechanism
for inspecting places of detention, as envisaged in the Optional Protocol to the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment, subject to parliamentary approval.
71. A number of Western Saharan human rights groups that had previously sought
official recognition from the Moroccan authorities were not accorded legal status
during the reporting period. The Moroccan authorities’ harassment of Western
Saharan human rights defenders and activists continued. Unnecessary restrictions
were reportedly imposed on some human rights defenders and activists seeking to
enter and leave Western Sahara west of the berm, thereby limiting their freedom of
movement. According to the Moroccan authorities, 34,943 foreigners from more
than 120 countries visited Western Sahara west of berm during the reporting period,
including human rights organizations, diplomats and journalists. Local authorities
reportedly continued to restrict access for some foreign visitors, including
journalists, human rights defenders and activists, expelling some and preventing
others from visiting.
__________________
1

16/25

See S/2013/220, paras. 14, 81 and 82; S/2014/258, para. 81; and, para. 57.

16-06350

S/2016/355

72. In its concluding observations with regard to Morocco’s fourth periodic report,
adopted on 8 October 2015, the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights of the Economic and Social Council welcomed the adoption of several
measures promoting the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights by the
population (E/C.12/MAR/CO/4, para. 4). Available information indicates, however,
that Western Saharans continue to face discrimination in the enjoyment of their
economic, social and cultural rights. The Committee recommended that Morocco
strengthen its efforts, under the auspices of the United Nations, to find a solution to
the issue of the right to self-determination for Western Sahara (ibid., para. 6 (a)),
and that it take appropriate steps to permit Western Saharans to fully enjoy their
economic, social, and cultural rights. The Special Rapporteur on the right to food
visited Dakhla in October 2015. In her report on the mission, she stated that she had
witnessed significant efforts to develop infrastructure and that many were benefiting
from agricultural and fishing projects. She also echoed some of the Committee ’s
findings and recommendations (see A/HRC/31/51/Add.2, paras. 56-60).
73. Moroccan and international investments in Western Sahara and its territorial
waters continue to be a subject of contention between the Government of Morocco
and Frente Polisario. On 10 December 2015, the General Court of the European
Court of Justice delivered a judgment in the case of Frente Polisario v. Council of
the European Union (case T-512/12) granting Frente Polisario standing before the
Court and annulling the European Union-Morocco agreement on agricultural
products, processed agricultural products, and fish and fishery products insofar as it
applies to Western Sahara. Morocco has denounced this judgment as politically
motivated. On 19 February, the Council of the European Union brought an appeal
against the judgment, alleging that the Court’s decision had erred in law on six
grounds, including by holding that Frente Polisario had the capacity to bring
proceedings before the courts of the European Union and by holding that Frente
Polisario was directly and individually concerned by the case (ca se C-104/16 P).
74. The offices of the National Human Rights Council in Laayoune and Dakhla
continued to carry out a range of activities, including monitoring demonstrations,
organizing capacity-building activities and visiting places of detention and medi cal
facilities. The offices of the Council continued to prepare reports and submit
recommendations on certain human rights issues to relevant authorities. In 2015, the
Council received over 300 complaints, the majority of which concerned allegations
of human rights violations by security forces and local authorities and conditions of
detention. Progress was reported concerning the timely response by the authorities
to such complaints. According to several sources, however, the majority of the
responses remained insufficient. Cases of enforced disappearance, which were
either excluded on technical grounds by the Equity and Reconciliation Commission
or occurred after the Commission’s process ended, remained unresolved. Morocco
has declared that the National Human Rights Council has been mandated to deal
with such cases. According to various sources, however, the lack of accountability
and the absence of investigation into allegations of human rights violations against
Western Saharans remained major concerns during the reporting period.
75. Pursuant to an agreement with Algeria and Frente Polisario, OHCHR carried
out a technical mission to the Western Saharan refugee camps near Tindouf , Algeria,
from 29 July to 4 August 2015. The mission, which was preceded by meetings with
government officials in Algiers, enabled OHCHR to gather first -hand information
and gain greater understanding of the human rights situation and challenges in the

16-06350

17/25

S/2016/355

camps and to explore future forms of cooperation to ensure effective human rights
protection for all. MINURSO provided logistical support during the mission.
76. With the cooperation of Frente Polisario and the Algerian authorities, the
delegation visited three of the five refugee camps near Tindouf, namely Awsard,
Smara, and Laayoune. The delegation was able to meet with various interlocutors of
its choice, including representatives of Frente Polisario, the “Sahrawi Committee for
Human Rights” and civil society representatives, as well as interlocutors critical of
Frente Polisario. The delegation also met with Western Saharan refugees and
victims and family members of victims of past enforced disappearances, without
any limitations.
77. In the refugee camps, the delegation witnessed visible efforts to ensure, within
the limited resources available, access to education and health care, administration
of justice and preservation of cultural heritage. The information available did not
reveal a pattern of human rights violations and abuses by Frente Polisario. The dire
humanitarian situation, coupled with the absence of access to the natural wealth and
resources in Western Sahara west of the berm, prevented the Western Saharans in
the refugee camps from enjoying their economic, social and cultural rights.
78. The “jurisdiction” of the “military court” established by Frente Polisario had
traditionally encompassed the investigation and trial of people accused of “crimes
against security” until 2012, when a “decision” transferred some crimes, including
drug-related crimes, from the “jurisdiction” of “civil courts” to that of a “military
court”. In my previous report, I had cited this as an area of concern ( S/2015/246,
para. 63). On 16 August 2015, a “decision” was issued limiting the jurisdiction of
the “military court” to “security crimes”. It did not, however, apply retroactively to
ongoing cases, as stated in the “decision”. This reportedly included the cases of a
number of civilians whom the “military court” convicted on charges of drug
trafficking and sentenced to prison terms on 14 September 2015.
79. The few human rights groups that exist in the refugee camps continued to
operate freely without any reported impediments. However, repeated requests for
recognized status submitted by a human rights group advocating against alleged
slavery and calling for equal representation of dark -skinned Western Saharans in
public positions, were still pending as at 31 March 2016. During the reporting
period, Frente Polisario and civil society actors reportedly made concerted efforts to
eradicate alleged slavery-like conditions and resolved at least 15 such cases.
80. During the reporting period, individuals and groups in the camps continued to
express diverse views and to mount small demonstrations, and the few existing
private electronic media in the refugee camps continued to operate and even to
criticize the leadership and management of the refugee camps. Movement within the
five refugee camps and surrounding areas, including Rabouni, continued to be free,
although it was regulated by Frente Polisario at security checkpoints and there was a
night time curfew.
81. Frente Polisario continued to express a readiness to cooperate with all United
Nations human rights activities, while insisting that this cooperation should not be a
substitute for a human rights component in the MINURSO mandate. Morocco
maintained repeatedly that OHCHR should work with Algeria, the host country, in
dealing with human rights in the refugee camps.

18/25

16-06350

S/2016/355

82. During my meeting with Mr. Abdelaziz, I raised the cases of three young
women reportedly held against their will by their families in the refugee camps for
different periods. Mr. Abdelaziz promised to pay special attention to resolving these
cases, while reminding me that appropriate processes had already been initiated.

VI. African Union
83. Until the Government of Morocco requested that the three African Union
personnel leave Laayoune, MINURSO continued its cooperation with the observer
delegation of the African Union led by Yilma Tadesse (Ethiopia), as well as its
support for the delegation with logistical and administrative assistance drawn from
its existing resources. On 18 March, the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission issued a statement deploring the decision by Morocco to remove
personnel from MINURSO. She also stressed the need to make progress in the
political process and called for the international community to provide unreserved
support for the United Nations efforts.

VII. Financial aspects
84. The General Assembly, by its resolution 69/305, appropriated the amount of
$51.1 million for the maintenance of MINURSO for the period from 1 July 2015 to
30 June 2016. My proposed budget in the amount of $54.3 million for the
maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017
(A/70/696) has been submitted to the Assembly for consideration during the second
part of its resumed seventieth session. It should be noted that proposed requirements
are based upon the prevailing mandate and scope of the Mission.
85. As at 31 March 2016, unpaid assessed contributions to the special account for
MINURSO amounted to $47.9 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions
for all peacekeeping operations as at the same date amounted to $2,593.6 million.
86. Reimbursement of troop costs has been made for the period up to 31 July
2014. During the period from 1 July to 31 December 2015, partial payments were
made for the reimbursement of the costs of contingent -owned equipment covering a
six-month period.

VIII. Observations and recommendations
87. Given the lack of progress toward a resolution of the dispute over the status of
Western Sahara, which has not changed since my last report, the efforts of the
United Nations through the work of my Personal Envoy, of MINURSO and of the
agencies present on the ground remain highly relevant.
88. The frustrations I witnessed among Western Saharans, coupled with the
expansion of criminal and extremist networks in the Sahel-Sahara region, present
increased risks for the stability and security of all the countries of the region. A
settlement of the Western Sahara conflict would mitigate these potential risks and
promote regional cooperation in the face of common threats and regional integration
to bolster economic opportunity.

16-06350

19/25

S/2016/355

89. As I urged during my visit to the region, it is crucial to make progress as soon
as possible to address the tragic humanitarian situation that has lasted for far too
long. In this connection, I continue to note with regret that the political process that
began in April 2007 has not yet opened the way to the genuine negotiations that the
Council and I have repeatedly called for.
90. The fundamental difficulty is that each party comes to the table with a
different vision. Morocco considers that Western Sahara is already part of Morocco,
that the only basis for negotiations is its initiative for autonomy under Moroccan
sovereignty and that Algeria must be a party to those negotiations. Frente Polisario
considers that the definitive status of Western Sahara remains to be determined, that
the final word must be that of the autochthonous population through a referendum
with independence as an option, that all proposals and ideas that the parties put
forward should be on the table and that the only parties to the negotiation are
Frente Polisario and Morocco.
91. The time has come to engage in serious negotiations without pre conditions and
in good faith to reach “a mutually acceptable political solution, which will provide
for the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara” (see Security Council
resolution 2218 (2015), para. 7). The mutually acceptable political soluti on should
include resolution of the dispute over the status of Western Sahara, including
through agreement on the nature and form of the exercise of self -determination. The
negotiations must be open to the two parties’ proposals and ideas. Algeria and
Mauritania, as neighbouring countries, can and should make important contributions
to this process. To this end, I have requested my Personal Envoy to redouble his
efforts to make progress with all concerned.
92. The Security Council established MINURSO to monitor the ceasefire between
the parties, to maintain the military status quo and, subject to the agreement of the
parties, to organize a referendum of self-determination. As with any United Nations
peacekeeping operation, MINURSO is responsible for reporting to the Secretariat,
the Security Council and my Personal Envoy on local developments affecting or
relating to the situation in its area of operation, including the maintenance of the
ceasefire and political and security conditions affecting the peace pro cess that my
Personal Envoy facilitates.
93. Without a suitable and fully staffed international civilian component, the
Mission cannot fulfil a core component of its functions and will thus fail to meet the
Security Council’s expectations. At the time of writing, the expulsion of most of
the MINURSO international civilian component had essentially resulted in the de
facto alteration of the mandate of MINURSO, a development that can be expected
to be exploited by terrorist and radical elements. Even with a limited presence of
international civilian support personnel, military activities will not be sustainable
in the medium to long term, as the military and civilian components of the Mission
go hand in hand. The military personnel create a conducive situation on the ground
to allow the political process to move forward, and all rely on civilian support to
function as required. Beyond the acute operational consequences created by this
situation, the continued inability of the Mission to execute its mandated tasks is in
itself not sustainable and will entail, in the short to medium term, significant
implications for the stability of the region, as well as for the credibility of the
Security Council and United Nations peacekeeping operations and political missions
globally.
94. I am very deeply concerned that the security environment in the Mission ’s area
of operation is likely to continue to deteriorate and further compound the existing

20/25

16-06350

S/2016/355

limitations placed on its ceasefire monitoring activities. Prior to the current crisis,
MINURSO had been working to update its logistical and security arrangements to
adjust to and anticipate these evolving conditions; it is doing so with limited
resources and capabilities. I recommend that, as a first step, and pending a thorough
assessment of the Mission’s support requirements, the Security Council approves
the deployment of 14 additional military medical personnel as discussed in
paragraph 37 above.
95. I call on the Security Council to restore and support the mandated role of
MINURSO, uphold peacekeeping standards and the impartiality of the United
Nations, and, most importantly, avoid setting a precedent for United Nations
peacekeeping operations around the world. The Mission’s presence and successful
operation is critical to ensuring the parties’ observation of the ceasefire, as a
mechanism to support the implementation of successive Security Council
resolutions, and as a visible representation of the international community ’s
commitment to achieving a resolution to the conflict. As broad engagement across
sectors and communities is essential for any peacekeeping mission, I hope in
particular that the remaining limitations on the Mission’s “free interaction with all
interlocutors”, as cited in every Security Council resolution on the subject since
2012, will be removed.
96. The risk of a rupture of the ceasefire and a resumption of hostilities, with its
attendant danger of escalation into full-scale war, will grow significantly in the event
that MINURSO is forced to depart or finds itself unable to execute the mandate that
the Security Council has set. In this context, and in light of the continuing efforts of
my Personal Envoy and the continuing importance of MINURSO, I recommend that
the Security Council extend the mandate of MINURSO for a further 12 months, until
30 April 2017.
97. I note with great concern the chronic lack of funding for the refugee
programme and the deteriorating humanitarian situation, as witnessed during my
recent visit to the refugee camps near Tindouf, which has been further compounded
by the torrential rains and flooding in late 2015. Although this exceptional natural
disaster brought new attention to the plight of the Western Saharan refugees, once
the initial momentum fades away, donor fatigue and diminishing humanitarian
budgets are likely to continue to be a major challenge in providing humanitarian
assistance.
98. I urge the international community to continue its support and to increase
funding to this vital humanitarian programme. To that end, I am pleased to note that
UNHCR is convening a donors’ briefing and call upon donor countries to fully
support the efforts and initiatives of UNHCR and its partners to obtain more funding
for this refugee situation, bearing in mind that it is the most protracted such
situation that UNHCR is mandated to address. I also reiterate my call for continued
consideration of registration in the refugee camps near Tindouf and invite efforts in
this regard.
99. I remain concerned by the continued suspension of the confidence-building
measures programme because it is heartbreaking to see families separated for so
long. I encourage the parties to engage in further dialogue with UNHCR on the
resumption of this important humanitarian programme for the Western Saharan
population.
100. It remains vital to address all human rights protection gaps and underlying
human rights issues in situations of protracted conflict such as that in Western

16-06350

21/25

S/2016/355

Sahara. Human rights do not have borders. All stakeholders are obliged to uphold
the human rights of all people. I therefore urge the parties to respect and promote
human rights, including by addressing outstanding human rights gaps and enhancing
their cooperation with OHCHR and the various United Nations human ri ghts
mechanisms.
101. I commend the parties’ cooperation with OHCHR during its missions to
Western Sahara and the refugee camps in 2015. I also take note of Morocco’s
invitations to and cooperation with the special procedures mandate holders of the
Human Rights Council. I welcome confirmation that the National Human Rights
Council has been designated as the independent national preventive mechanism, as
envisaged in the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and urge completion of the
legislative formalities required to complete the process. I also welcome the
expressed readiness of Frente Polisario to cooperate with OHCHR, as well as its
positive amendment of the jurisdiction of the “military court” in the refugee camps.
102. I urge further engagement with regard to the human rights situation in Western
Sahara and the refugee camps, including by supporting human rights entities
operating there and by augmenting the provision of huma nitarian aid in the camps.
Given ongoing reports of human rights violations, it is necessary to sustain an
independent and impartial understanding of the human rights situation in both
Western Sahara and the camps, through regular cooperation with OHCHR an d other
human rights bodies, with the objective of ensuring protection of all. This should
contribute to full and effective implementation of international human rights law
and standards by the parties. It would also contribute to the creation of an
environment conducive to making progress in the negotiating process.
103. In the light of continued interest in the exploration and exploitation of the
natural resources of Western Sahara, I reiterate my call on all relevant actors to
“recognize the principle that the interests of the inhabitants of these territories are
paramount”, in accordance with Article 73 of the Charter of the United Nations.
104. When all is said and done, however, what I want to emphasize most strongly is
that the conflict over Western Sahara and the attendant, truly heart-wrenching,
human suffering must come to an end for the well-being of the Western Saharans
and for the stability and security of the North African region and beyond. In 2007,
the Security Council asked the parties to negotiate a solution, and they have been
unable to do so despite the passage of nine years. It is more urgent than ever for the
parties to engage in genuine dialogue and for the international community to lend
all assistance in this regard.
105. In conclusion, I wish to extend my sincere thanks to my Personal Envoy for
Western Sahara, Christopher Ross, for his repeated and tireless engagement with the
parties and neighbouring States in our collective efforts to resolve this conflict.
Similarly, I am very grateful to Kim Bolduc, my Special Representative in Western
Sahara and head of MINURSO for her exemplary leadership. Both of these
committed international officials have my total support and appreciation for the
work they have been carrying out in the most difficult of political circumstances. In
addition, I would like to thank Major General Tayyab Azam, as well as his
predecessor, Major General Edy Mulyono, for their able and dedicated service to
MINURSO. Finally, I also thank the men and women of MINURSO for their work
to fulfil the Mission’s mandate in difficult conditions.

22/25

16-06350

S/2016/355

Annex
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara
Contributions as at 31 March 2016
Military observers a

Troops a

Civilian police b

Total

Argentina

3

–

–

3

Austria

5

–

–

5

Bangladesh

8

20

–

28

Bhutan

2

–

–

2

Brazil

10

–

–

10

China

7

–

–

7

Croatia

7

–

–

7

Djibouti

1

–

–

1

Egypt

20

–

–

20

El Salvador

3

–

–

3

France

6

–

–

6

Germany

4

–

–

4

Ghana

10

7

–

17

Guinea

4

–

–

4

Honduras

13

–

–

13

Hungary

6

–

–

6

India

3

–

–

3

Indonesia

5

–

–

5

Ireland

3

–

–

3

Jordan

–

–

–

–

Kazakhstan

5

–

–

5

Malawi

3

–

–

3

Malaysia

12

–

–

12

Mexico

4

–

–

4

Mongolia

4

–

–

4

Nepal

5

–

–

5

Nigeria

3

–

–

3

Pakistan

14

–

–

14

Poland

1

–

–

1

Republic of Korea

4

–

–

4

Russian Federation

14

–

–

14

Sri Lanka

3

–

–

3

Country

16-06350

23/25

S/2016/355

Military observers a

Troops a

Civilian police b

Total

Switzerland

1

–

–

1

Togo

2

–

–

2

10

–

–

10

205

27

–

232 c

Country

Yemen
Total
a

Authorized military strength is 246, including the Force Commander.
Authorized strength is 12.
c
Actual strength on the ground, for military and civilian police, including the Force
Commander.

b

24/25

16-06350

S/2016/355

16-06350

25/25
