General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

2. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize the necessary material resources in order to help alleviate the sufferings and mitigate the damages inflicted on Yemen as a
result of the earthquake;
3. Appeals to Member States to contribute generously
to the relief efforts, through bilateral and/or multilateral
channels, for the reconstruction of the affected areas in
Yemen;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue, through
the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator, his efforts in mobilizing all emergency assistance
to Yemen;
5. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system-in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the Economic
Commission for Western Asia, the World Bank, the World
Food Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Fund for Population Activities, the United
Nations Children's Fund and the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization-to maintain and expand their
programmes of assistance to Yemen and to co-operate closely
with the Secretary-General in organizing an effective programme of assistance to that country;
6. Calls upon regional and interregional organizations
and other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental
organizations to give urgent relief contributions to Yemen.
109th plenary meeting
17 December I 982

37/167.

United Nations Conference for the Promotion
of International Co-operation in the Peaceful
Uses of Nuclear Energy 81

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the principles and provisions of its resolutions
32/50 of 8 December 1977, 33/4 of 2 November 1978, 34/
63 of 29 November 1979, 35/ 112 of 5 December 1980 and
36/78 of 9 December 1981 regarding the United Nations
Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation
in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy and the relevant
paragraphs of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, 82
Taking note with satisfaction of the appointment of the
Secretary-General of the Conference,
Recalling the experience gained during the last three decades of applications of nuclear energy and technology for
power production and other uses,
Reaffirming the responsibility of States that are advanced
in the nuclear field to promote the fulfilment of the legitimate
nuclear energy needs of the developing countries by participating in the fullest possible transfer of nuclear equipment,
materials and technology under agreed and appropriate international safeguards applied through the International
Atomic Energy Agency on a non-discriminatory basis in
order to prevent effectively the proliferation of nuclear
weapons,
Having considered the report of the Preparatory Committee for the Conference on its second and third sessions, 8 -1
Expressing concern at the lack of progress and recognizing the pressing need to speed up and complete substantive
81

110th plenary meeting
17 December 1982
37/233.

Question of Namibia 84
A

SITUATION IN NAMIBIA RESULTING FROM THE ILLEGAL
OCCUPATION OF THE TERRITORY BY SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations Council
for Namibia"~ and the relevant chapters of the report of the

See also sect. X.B.1, decisions 37/453 and 37/454.

82 Resolution S-10/2.
13

preparations for the Conference, its provisional agenda, its
documentation and its rules of procedure, so as to ensure
a successful conference which would achieve the objectives envisaged in General Assembly resolutions 32/50 and
35/l 12,
l. Decides that the Preparatory Committee for the United
Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Cooperation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy shall meet
twice during 1983, once early in the year for ten working
days in New York and, subsequently, for an appropriate
duration prior to the Conference;
2. Requests the Preparatory Committee and the Secretary-General of the Conference, in order to speed up substantive preparations, to make appropriate arrangements,
including as necessary through intersessional work by States
members of the Committee under the guidance of its Chairman and also through regional efforts and appropriate public
information activities, with a view to ensuring meaningful
results from the Conference;
3. Decides to take suitable decisions in regard to the
date of the Conference in the light of the results of the
session of the Preparatory Committee to be held early in
1983;
4. Reiterates that the aim of the Conference is to promote international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and, to this end, to establish universally
acceptable principles for such co-operation in accordance
with the objectives contained in General Assembly resolution 32/50;
5. Reaffirms the provision of paragraph 4 of General
Assembly resolution 36/78 that the outcome of the Conference should be embodied in appropriate documents, in a
suitable format, pertaining, inter alia, to ways and means
of promoting such international co-operation in the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy;
6. Decides that the necessary resources should be provided to ensure successful preparations for the Conference,
including adequate staffing of the secretariat and the availability of expert support in the substantive fields to be covered by the Conference;
7. Invites the International Atomic Energy Agency to
contribute to the Conference in terms of paragraph 3 of
resolution 32/50 and paragraph l l of resolution 36/78 in
accordance with its responsibilities under its statute;
8. Urges all States to co-operate actively in the preparation and the holding of the Conference and to respect
and observe the principles set forth in resolution 32/50;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session an item entitled "United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in
the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy".

Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirtv-seventh Session,
Supplement No. 48 (A/37/48)

"' See also sect. I. footnote 7. and sect. X.B.6, decision 37/426.
" Official Record.,· of the General Assemblv, Thirtv-seventh Session.
Supplement No. 24 (1\1.17124).
·
·

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 86
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling, in particular, its resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27
October 1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967 and subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council relating to Namibia, as well as the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice of 21 June 1971 ,87
delivered in response to the request addressed to it by the
Security Council in its resolution 284 (1970) of 29 July
1970,
Recalling also its resolutions 3111 (XXVIII) of 12 December 1973 and 31/146 and 31/152 of 20 December 1976,
by which it, inter alia, recognized the South West Africa
People's Organization as the sole and authentic representative of the Namibian people and granted observer status
to it,
Recalling further its resolutions ES-8/2 of 14 September
1981 and 36/121 B of JO December 1981, by which it called
upon States to cease forthwith, individually and collectively,
all dealings with South Africa in order totally to isolate it
politically, economically, militarily and culturally,
Recalling the Paris Declaration on Sanctions against South
Africa and the Special Declaration on Namibia, 88 adopted
by the International Conference on Sanctions against South
Africa,
Taking into consideration the Arusha Declaration and
Programme of Action on Namibia, 89 adopted by the United
Nations Council for Namibia on 13 May 1982 at its extraordinary plenary meeting held at Arusha, United Republic
of Tanzania,
Strongly reiterating that the continuing illegal and colonial occupation of Namibia by South Africa, in defiance
of repeated General Assembly and Security Council resolutions, constitutes an act of aggression against the Namibian people and a challenge to the authority of the United
Nations, which has direct responsibility for Namibia until
independence,
Stressing the grave responsibility of the international
community to take all possible measures in support of the
Namibian people in their liberation struggle under the leadership of their sole and authentic representative, the South
West Africa People's Organization,
Reaffirming its full support for the armed struggle of the
Namibian people under the leadership of the South West
Africa People's Organization to achieve self-determination,
freedom and national independence in a united Namibia,
Indignant at South Africa's refusal to comply with repeated resolutions of the Security Council, in particular
resolutions 385 (l 976) of 30 January 1976, 435 ( 1978) of
29 September 1978 and 439 ( 1978) of 13 November 1978
and at its manoeuvres aimed at perpetuating its brutal domination and exploitation of the Namibian people, as repeatedly manifested in the course of the consultations for
the implementation of the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia.
86

/bid., Supplement No. 23 (A/37/23/Rev.1), chaps I-VI and VIII.
Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South
Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council
Resolution 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion, I.C.J. Reports 1971, p. 16.
•• Report of the International Conference on Sanctions a!{ainst South
Africa, Paris, 20-27 May 1981 (A/CONF. 107/8), sect. X.
•• Official Records of the General Assemhlv. Thim seventh Session.
Supplement No. 24 (A/37/24), para. 767
87

41

Commending the front-line States and the South West
Africa People's Organization for the statesmanlike and constructive attitude which they have displayed throughout the
consultations to implement Security Council resolution 435
(1978),
Strongly condemning South Africa's continued illegal occupation of Namibia, its brutal repression of the Namibian
people and its ruthless exploitation of the people and resources of Namibia, as well as its attempts to destroy the
national unity and territorial integrity of Namibia,
Strongly condemning the racist regime of South Africa
for its efforts to develop a nuclear capability for military
and aggressive purposes,
Deeply concerned at the increasing militarization of Namibia, the forceful conscription of Namibians, the creation
of tribal armies and the use of mercenaries for internal
repression and external aggression,
Noting with grave concern that, as a result of the Security
Council's failure on 3 I August 1981, 90 on account of the
veto of the United States of America, to exercise its responsibilities, unprovoked ma<;sive armed aggression against
Angola continues,
Expressing its strong condemnation of South Africa's
continuing acts of aggression against independent African
States, particularly Angola, which have caused extensive
loss of human life and destruction of economic
infrastructures,
Reaffirming that the resources of Namibia are the inviolable heritage of the Namibian people and that the exploitation of those resources by foreign economic interests
under the protection of the illegal colonial administration,
in violation of the Charter of the United Nations, of the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council and of Decree No. I for the Protection of
the Natural Resources of Namibia, 91 enacted by the United
Nations Council for Namibia on 27 September 1974, and
in disregard of the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice of 21 June 1971, is illegal and contributes
to the maintenance of the illegal occupation regime,
Deeply deploring the continued collaboration with South
Africa of certain Western States, in particular the United
States of America, as well as that of Israel, in disregard of
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council,
Deeply concerned at the continued assistance rendered to
the racist Pretoria regime by certain international organizations and institutions, in particular the International Monetary Fund, in disregard of the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly,
Indignant at the continuing arbitrary imprisonment and
detention of political leaders and followers of the South
West Africa People's Organization, the killing of Namibian
patriots and other acts of brutality, including the wanton
beating, torture and murder of innocent Namibians, and the
arbitrary inhuman measures of collective punishment and
measures designed to intimidate the Namibian people and
to destroy their will to fulfil their legitimate aspirations for
self-determination, freedom and national independence in a
united Namibia,
Noting with grave concern that the Security Council has
been prevented on several occasions from taking effective
action against South Africa in the discharge of its responsibilities under Chapter VII of the Charter on account of the
90
See Official Records of the Securit\' Council. Thirty-sixth Year, 2300th
meeting.
"' Official Records of the General Assemhly, Thirty-fifth Session. Supplem,·nt No ?4 ( A/35124 L v,,1 I. annex II

42

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

vetoes cast by one or more of the Western permanent members of the Security Council,
Commending the efforts of the United Nations Council
for Namibia in the discharge of the responsibilities entrusted
to it under the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia until
independence,
1. Approves the report of the United Nations Council
for Namibia;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of Namibia to self-determination, freedom and national independence in a united Namibia, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations and as recognized in General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2145 (XXI) and in subsequent
resolutions of the Assembly relating to Namibia, as well as
the legitimacy of their struggle by all means at their disposal.
including armed struggle, against the illegal occupation of
their territory by South Africa;
3. Reiterates that, in accordance with its resolution 2145
(XXI), Namibia is the direct responsibility of the United
Nations until genuine self-determination and national independence are achieved in the Territory and, for this purpose, reaffirms the mandate given to the United Nations
Council for Namibia as the legal Administering Authority
for Namibia until independence under resolution 2248
(S-V) and subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly;
4. Reaffirms that the South West Africa People's Organization, the national liberation movement of Namibia,
is the sole and authentic representative of the Namibian
people;
5. Solemnly reaffirms that the genuine independence of
Namibia can be achieved only with the direct and full participation of the South West Africa People's Organization
in all efforts to implement the resolutions of the United
Nations relating to Namibia and further reaffirms that the
only parties to the conflict in Namibia are, on the one hand,
South Africa, as the illegal occupying Power, and, on the
other, the Namibian people under the leadership of the South
West Africa People's Organization, their sole and authentic
representative;
6. Strongly condemns the South African regime for its
continued illegal occupation of Namibia in defiance of the
resolutions of the United Nations relating to Namibia;
7. Declares that South Africa's illegal occupation of
Namibia constitutes an act of aggression against the Namibian people in terms of the Definition of Aggression contained in General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX) of
14 December 1974 and supports the armed struggle of the
Namibian people, under the leadership of the South West
Africa People's Organization, to achieve self-determination,
freedom and national independence in a united Namibia;
8. Reiterates that, in accordance with the resolutions ot
the United Nations, in particular Security Council resolution
432 (1978) of 27 July 1978 and General Assembly resolutions S-9/2 of 3 May 1978 and 35/227 A of 6 March 1981,
Walvis Bay and the offshore islands of Namibia are an
integral part of Namibia and that all attempts by South Africa
to annex them are therefore illegal, null and void;
9. Reaffirms that Security Council resolution 435 (1978),
together with Council resolution 385 (1976), is the only
basis for a peaceful settlement of the question of Namibia
and calls for its immediate and unconditional implementation without qualification or modification;
10. Firmly rejects the manoeuvres by one member of
the Western contact group aimed at undermining the international consensus embodied in Security Council resolution
435 ( 1978) and at depriving the oppressed people of Namibia

of their hard-won victories in the struggle for national
liberation;
11 . Expresses its appreciation to the front-line States
and the South West Africa People's Organization for their
statesmanlike and constructive attitude throughout the consultations to implement Security Council resolution 435
(1978);
12. Strongly condemns South Africa for obstructing the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 385 (1976),
435 ( 1978) and 439 ( 1978) and for its manoeuvres, in contravention of those resolutions, designed to consolidate its
colonial and neo-colonial interests at the expense of the
legitimate aspirations of the Namibian people for genuine
self-determination, freedom and national independence in a
united Namibia;
13. Denounces all fraudulent constitutional and political
schemes through which the illegal racist regime of South
Africa may attempt to perpetuate its colonial domination
in Namibia and, in particular, calls upon the international
community, especially all Member States, to continue to
refrain from according any recognition or extending any cooperation to any regime which the illegal South African
administration may impose upon the Namibian people in
disregard of the present resolution, of Security Council resolutions 385 ( 1976), 435 ( 1978) and 439 ( 1978) and of other
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Council;
14. Strongly urges the Security Council to act decisively
against any dilatory manoeuvres and fraudulent schemes of
the illegal occupation regime aimed at frustrating the legitimate struggle of the Namibian people, under the leadership
of the South West Africa People's Organization, for selfdetermination and national liberation, as well as at negating
the achievements of their just struggle;
15. Declares that all so-called laws and proclamations
issued by the illegal occupation regime in Namibia are illegal, null and void;
16. Calls upon Member States and the specialized agencies and other international organizations associated with
the United Nations to render sustained and increased support
as well as material, financial, military and other assistance
to the South West Africa People's Organization so as to
enable it to intensify its struggle for the liberation of Namibia;
17. Deeply deplores the increased assistance rendered
by certain Western States to South Africa in the political,
economic, military and cultural fields, expresses its conviction that this assistance should be exposed before the
world public at large and demands that it be immediately
terminated;
18. Strongly condemns South Africa for its military buildup in Namibia, its introduction of compulsory military service for Namibians, its recruitment and training of Namibians fur tribal armies and the use of mercenaries to suppress
the Namibian people and to carry out its military attacks
against independent African States, its threats and acts of
subversion and aggression against those States and the forcible displacement of Namibians from their homes;
19. Strongly condemns South Africa for its persistent
acts of subversion and aggression against Angola, including
the occupation of a part of its territory, and calls upon South
Africa to cease all acts of aggression against and withdraw
all its troops from that country;
20. Calls upon the international community to extend,
as a matter of urgency, full support and assistance, including
military assistance, to the front-line States in order to enable
them to defend their sovereignty and territorial integrity
against the repeated acts of aggression by South Africa;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to develop, in consultation with the United Nations Development

II.

43

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Programme, a comprehensive programme of assistance to
States which are neighbours of South Africa and Namibia,
on the understanding that such assistance should not only
envisage the overcoming of short-term difficulties but be
designed to enable those States to move towards complete
self-reliance, and requests the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the
development of this programme;
22. Reiterates its call upon all States to take legislative
and other appropriate measures to prevent the recruitment,
training and transit of mercenaries for service in Namibia;
23. Strongly condemns the illegal South African administration for its massive repression of the people of Namibia and their national liberation movement, the South
West Africa People's Organization, with the intention of
establishing an atmosphere of intimidation and terror for the
purpose of imposing upon the Namibian people a political
arrangement aimed at undermining the territorial integrity
and unity of Namibia as well as perpetuating the systematic
plunder of the natural resources of the Territory;
24. Demands that South Africa immediately release all
Namibian political prisoners, including all those imprisoned
or detained under the so-called internal security laws, martial law or any other arbitrary measures, whether such Namibians have been charged or tried or are being held without
charge in Namibia or South Africa;
25. Demands that South Africa account for all "disappeared" Namibians and release any who are still alive
and declares that South Africa shall be liable for damages
to compensate the victims, their families and the future
lawful Government of an independent Namibia for the losses
sustained;
26. Strongly condemns the collusion by the Governments of certain Western and other States, particularly those
of the United States of America and Israel, with the racist
regime of South Africa in the nuclear field and calls upon
France and all other States to refrain from supplying the
racist minority regime of South Africa, directly or indirectly,
with installations that might enable it to produce uranium,
plutonium or other nuclear materials, reactors or military
equipment;
27. Strongly condemns the activities of all foreign economic interests operating in Namibia under the illegal South
African administration which are illegally exploiting the
resources of the Territory and demands that transnational
corporations engaged in such exploitation comply with all
relevant resolutions of the United Nations by immediately
refraining from any new investment or activities in Namibia,
by withdrawing from the Territory and by putting an end
to their co-operation with the illegal South African
administration;
28. Requests once again all Member States to take all
appropriate measures, including legislation and enforcement
action, to ensure the full application of, and compliance
with, the provisions of Decree No. I for the Protection of
the Natural Resources of Namibia;
29. Declares that, by their depletive exploitation of natural resources and continued accumulation and repatriation
of huge profits, the activities of foreign economic, financial
and other interests operating at present in Namibia constitute
a major obstacle to its political independence;
30. Requests the Uovernments ot the Federal Republic
of Germany, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, which operate the Urenco
uranium-enrichment plant, to have Namibian uranium specifically excluded from the Treaty of Almelo, which regulates the activities of Urenco;

31 . Deeply deplores the continued collaboration of the
International Monetary Fund with South Africa, as exemplified by the recent grant of a credit of one billion special
drawing rights in disregard of General Assembly resolution
37/2 of 21 October 1982, and calls upon the Fund to put
an end to such collaboration;
32. Reiterates its request to all States to take legislative,
administrative and other measures, as appropriate, in order
effectively to isolate South Africa politically, economically,
militarily and culturally, in accordance with General Assembly resolutions ES-8/2 and 36/121 B;
33. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia
to continue to follow the implementation of the provisions
of paragraph 32 above on the basis of information received
from States as well as other sources;
34. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia,
in implementation of paragraph 15 of resolution ES-8/2 and
of the provisions of resolution 36/121 B, to continue to
monitor the boycott of South Africa and to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session a comprehensive report on all contacts between all States and South
Africa, containing an analysis of the information received
from Member States and other sources on the continuing
political, economic, financial and other relations of States
and their economic and other interest groups with South
Africa and of measures taken by States to terminate all
dealings with the racist regime of South Africa;
35. Requests all States to co-operate fully with the United
Nations Council for Namibia in the fulfilment of its tasks
concerning the implementation of General Assembly resolutions ES-8/2 and 36/ 121 B and to report to the SecretaryGeneral by the thirty-eighth session of the Assembly on the
measures taken by them in the implementation of those
resolutions;
36. Declares that South Africa's defiance of the United
Nations, its illegal occupation of the Territory of Namibia,
its war of repression against the Namibian people, its persistent acts of aggression launched from bases in Namibia
against independent African States, its policies of apartheid
and its development of nuclear weapons constitute a serious
threat to international peace and security;
37. Strongly urges the Security Council, in the light of
the serious threat to international peace and security posed
by South Africa, to respond positively to the overwhelming
demand of the international community by immediately imposing against that country comprehensive mandatory sanctions, as provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations;
38. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
1 I 3th plenary meeting
20 December 1982
B

IMPLEMENTATION OF SECURITY COUNCIL
RESOLUTION 435 (1978)
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the imperative need to proceed without any
further delay with the implementation of Security Council
resolution 435 (1978) of 29 September 1978, which, together with Council resolution 385 (1976) of 30 January
1976, is the only basis for a peaceful settlement of the
question of Namibia,

44

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

Taking note of the consultations which have been held
with a view to achieving the implementation of Security
Council resolution 435 (1978) and noting that those consultations have so far failed to bring about its implementation,
Condemning the attempts to link the independence of
Namibia with totally extraneous issues, in particular the
withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola, an issue which
falls within the exclusive domestic jurisdiction of a sovereign Member State,
l. Reaffirms the direct responsibility of the United Nations for Namibia pending its achievement of genuine selfdetermination and national independence;
2. Reiterates that Security Council resolution 435 ( 1978).
in which the Council endorsed the United Nations plan for
the independence of Namibia, is the only basis for a peaceful
settlement of the question of Namibia and calls for its immediate and unconditional implementation without qualification or modification;
3. Firmly rejects the persistent attempts by the United
States of America and South Africa to establish any linkage
or parallelism between the independence of Namibia and
any extraneous issues, in particular the withdrawal of Cuban
forces from Angola, and emphasizes unequivocally that the
persistence of such attempts would only retard the decolonization process in Namibia as well as constitute interference in the internal affairs of Angola;
4. Requests the Security Council to exercise its authority for the implementation of its resolution 435 ( 1978)
so as to bring about the independence of Namibia without
further delay.
113th plenary meeting
20 December 1982
C
PROGRAMME OF WORK OF THE UNITED NATIONS COUNCIL
FOR NAMIBIA

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, 85
Reaffirming that Namibia is the direct responsibility of
the United Nations and that the Namibian people must be
enabled to attain self-determination and independence in a
united Namibia,
Recalling its resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967, by
which it established the United Nations Council for Namibia
as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia until
independence,
Taking into consideration the Arusha Declaration and
Programme of Action on Namibia, 89 adopted by the United
Nations Council for Namibia on 13 May 1982 at its extraordinary plenary meeting held at Arusha, United Republic
of Tanzania,
Convinced of the need for continued consultations with
the South West Africa People's Organization in the formulation and implementation of the programme of work of
the United Nations Council for Namibia as well as in any
matter of interest to the Namibian people,
Recalling paragraph 18 of its resolution 36/ 121 C of
10 December 1981, in which it requested the SecretaryGeneral, after consulting the United Nations Council for
Namibia regarding its assessment of the situation pertaining
to Namibia, to carry out preparatory work with a view to
organizing, at an appropriate time, an international conference in support of the struggle of the Namibian people for
independence,
Deeply conscious of the urgent and continuing need to
press for the termination of South Africa's illegal occupation

of Namibia and to put an end to its repression of the Namibian people and its exploitation of the natural resources
of the Territory,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved by the
International Conference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia, held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May
1977, 92
1. Approves the report of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, including the recommendations contained
therein, and decides to make adequate financial provision
for their implementation;
2. Expresses its strong support for the efforts of the
United Nations Council for Namibia in the discharge of the
responsibilities entrusted to it both as the Legal Administering Authority for Namibia and as a policy-making organ
of the United Nations;
3. Requests all Member States to co-operate fully with
the United Nations Council for Namibia in the discharge of
the mandate entrusted to it under the provisions of General
Assembly resolution 2248 (S-V) and subsequent resolutions
of the Assembly:
4. Decides that the United Nations Council for Namibia, in the discharge of its responsibilities as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia until independence, shall:
(a) Continue to mobilize international support in order
to press for the speedy withdrawal of the illegal South African administration from Namibia in accordance with the
resolutions of the United Nations relating to Namibia;
(b) Counter the policies of South Africa against the
Namibian people and against the United Nations, as well
as against the United Nations Council for Namibia as the
legal Administering Authority for Namibia;
(c) Denounce and seek the rejection by all States of all
fraudulent constitutional or political schemes through which
South Africa may attempt to perpetuate its presence in
Namibia:
(d) Ensure non-recognition of any administration or entity installed at Windhoek not issuing from free elections in
Namibia conducted under the supervision and control of the
United Nations, in accordance with the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council;
(e) Undertake a concerted effort to counter the attempts
to establish any linkage or parallelism between the decolonization of Namibia and extraneous issues;
5. Decides that the United Nations Council for Namibia
shall:
(a) Consult Governments in order to further the implementation of United Nations resolutions relating to Namibia
and to mobilize support for the cause of Namibia;
(b) Represent Namibia in United Nations conferences
and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, bodies and conferences to ensure that the rights and
interests of Namibia shall be adequately protected;
6. Decides that Namibia, represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia, shall participate as a full member
in all conferences and meetings organized by the United
Nations to which all States or, in the case of regional conferences and meetings, all African States are invited;
7. Requests all committees and other subsidiary bodies
of the General Assembly and of the Economic and Social
Council to continue to invite a representative of the United
Nations Council for Namibia to participate whenever the
rights and interests of Namibians are discussed, and to consult closely with the Council before submitting any draft
02
See Official Records of' the Security Council, Thirty-second Year.
Supplement for Ju/1. Auxust and September 1977. document S/123441
Rev. I

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

resolution which may involve the rights and interests of
Namibians;
8. Reiterates its request to all specialized agencies and
other organizations and conferences of the United Nations
system to grant full membership to Namibia, represented
by the United Nations Council for Namibia as the legal
Administering Authority for Namibia, so that the Council
may participate in the work of those agencies. organizations
and conferences;
9. Reiterates its request to all specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system that have
not yet done so to grant a waiver of the assessment of
Namibia during the period in which it is represented by the
United Nations Council for Namibia;
10. Again requests all intergovernmental organizations,
bodies and conferences to ensure that the rights and interests
of Namibia are protected and to invite Namibia, represented
by the United Nations Council for Namibia, to participate
as a full member whenever such rights and interests are
involved;
l l. Welcomes the recent admission of Namibia, represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia, as a
full member of the International Atomic Energy Agency and
of the International Telecommunication Union, as well as
Economic and Social Council decision 1982/110 of 16 April
1982 to grant membership to Namibia, represented by
the United Nations Council for Namibia, in the Executive
Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees;
12. Takes note of the accession by the United Nations
Council for Namibia, in its capacity as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia, to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination93 and the International Convention on the
Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Aparthei<f'J4
and requests the Council to accede to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 194995 and the Additional Protocols
thereto% and to such other international conventions as it
may deem appropriate;
13. Takes note of the signing by the United Nations
Council for Namibia, on behalf of Namibia, of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea97 and the Final
Act of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of
the Sea;98
14. Decides that the United Nations Council for Namibia shall:
(a) Review the progress of the liberation struggle in
Namibia in its political, military and social aspects and
prepare periodic reports related thereto;
(b) Consider the compliance of Member States with the
relevant United Nations resolutions relating to Namibia,
taking into account the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice of 21 June 1971 ;87
(c) Consider the activities of foreign economic interests
operating in Namibia with a view to recommending appropriate policies to the General Assembly in order to counter
the support which those foreign economic interests give to
the illegal South African administration in Namibia;
(d) Continue to examine the exploitation of and trade
in Namibian uranium by foreign economic interests and
report on its findings to the General Assembly at its thirtyeighth session;
93

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
Resolution 3068 (XXVIII), annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75. Nos. 970-973.
96
A/32/144, annexes I and II.
97
Official Records of the Third United Nations Conference on the law
of the Sea, vol. XVII, document A/CONF.62/122.
98
Ibid., document A/CONF.62/121.
94

9

'

45

(e) Notify the Governments of States whose corporations, whether public or private, operate in Namibia of the
illegality of such operations;
(f) Send missions of consultation to Governments whose
corporations have investments in Namibia in order to review
with them all possible action to discourage the continuation
of such investments;
(g) Contact administering and managing bodies of foreign corporations operating in Namibia regarding the illegal
basis on which they are operating in the Territory;
(h) Contact specialized agencies and other international
organizations associated with the United Nations, in particular the International Monetary Fund, with a view to protecting Namibia's interests;
(i) Draw the attention of the specialized agencies to
Decree No. l for the Protection of the Natural Resources
of Namibia,9 1 enacted by the United Nations Council for
Namibia on 27 September 1974;
U) Take all measures to ensure compliance with the
provisions of Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural
Resources of Namibia, including consideration of the institution of legal proceedings in the domestic courts of States
and other appropriate bodies;
(k) Conduct hearings, seminars and workshops in order
to obtain relevant information on the exploitation of the
people and resources of Namibia by South African and other
foreign interests and to expose such activities;
([) Organize regional symposia on the situation in Namibia with a view to intensifying active support for the
Namibian cause;
(m) Prepare and publish reports on the political, economic, military, legal and social situation in and relating to
Namibia;
(n) Secure the territorial integrity of Namibia as a unitary State, including Walvis Bay and the offshore islands
of Namibia;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to complete, in accordance with the guidelines established by the United Nations Council for Namibia, the preparation of an indexed
reference book on transnational corporations operating in
Namibia;
16. Decides to make adequate financial provision in the
section of the programme budget of the United Nations
relating to the United Nations Council for Namibia to finance
the office of the South West Africa People's Organization
in New York in order to ensure appropriate representation
of the people of Namibia through the South West Africa
People's Organization at the United Nations;
17. Decides to continue to defray the expenses of representatives of the South West Africa People's Organization, whenever the United Nations Council for Namibia so
decides;
18. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia
to continue to consult with the South West Africa People's
Organization in the formulation and implementation of its
programme of work, as well as in any matter of interest to
the Namibian people;
19. Requests the Secretary-General, in order to facilitate
financial reporting to the United Nations Council for Namibia, to ensure that, within the section of the programme
budget of the United Nations relating to the Council, the
accounts shall reflect closely the activities of the Council
as described in the report of the Council to the General
Assembly at its thirty-seventh session; 85
20. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure
the establishment of an appropriate accounting system which

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

46

will enable the Council, in its capacity as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia, to receive speedy and comprehensive financial data on projects for which the Council
is directly responsible;
21. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the President of the United Nations Council for Namibia,
to review the requirements of personnel and facilities of all
units which service the Council so that the Council may
fully and effectively discharge all tasks and functions arising
out of its mandate;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Office of the United Nations Commissioner for Namibia with
the necessary resources in order for it to strengthen, under
the guidance of the United Nations Council for Namibia,
the assistance programmes and services for Namibians, the
implementation of Decree No. l for the Protection of the
Natural Resources of Namibia, the preparation of economic
and legal studies and the existing activities of dissemination
of information undertaken by that Office;
23. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia,
in the discharge of its responsibilities as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia, to hold plenary meetings
away from Headquarters whenever it deems it necessary,
and requests the Secretary-General to defray the cost of these
meetings and to provide the necessary staff and services for
them;
24. Decides that an International Conference in Support
of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence
shall be held at the headquarters of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in Paris
during 1983;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to organize the
above-mentioned Conference in co-operation with the United
Nations Council for Namibia and in consultation with the
Organization of African Unity and to this end to appoint,
in consultation with the United Nations Council for Namibia, a Secretary-General of the Conference and provide
other necessary staff and services for the Conference.

113th plenary meeting
20 Dece"}ber 1982
D
DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION AND MOBILIZATION OF INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC OPINION IN SUPPORT OF NAMIBIA

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, 85
Recalling its resolutions 36/121 A to F of 10 December
1981 and all other relevant resolutions and decisions of the
United Nations relating to Namibia,
Taking into consideration the Arusha Declaration and
Programme of Action on Namibia, 89 adopted by the United
Nations Council for Namibia on 13 May 1982 at its extraordinary plenary meeting held at Arusha, United Republic
of Tanzania,
Stressing the urgent need to intensify efforts to mobilize
international public opinion on a continuous basis with a
view to assisting effectively the people of Namibia, under
the leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization, in their legitimate struggle for self-determination,
freedom and independence in a united Namibia,
Recognizing the important role that non-governmental organizations are playing in the dissemination of information
on Namibia and in the mobilization of international public
opinion in support of the Namibian cause,
Reiterating the importance of publicity as an instrument
for furthering the mandate given by the General Assembly

to the United Nations Council for Namibia and mindful of
the pressing need for the Department of Public Information
of the Secretariat to intensify its efforts to acquaint world
public opinion with all aspects of the question of Namibia.
in accordance with policy guidelines formulated by the
Council,
l. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia,
in pursuance of its international campaign in support of
Namibia, to continue to consider ways and means of increasing the dissemination of information relating to Namibia;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, in all
its activities of dissemination of information on the question
of Namibia, follows the policy guidelines laid down by the
United Nations Council for Namibia as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia,
3. Requests the Secretary-General to direct the Department of Public Information, in addition to its responsibilities
relating to southern Africa, to assist, as a matter of priority.
the United Nations Council for Namibia in the implementation of its programme of dissemination of information in
order that the United Nations may intensify its efforts to
generate publicity and disseminate information with a view
to mobilizing public support for the independence of Namibia, particularly in the Western States;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to give the widest
possible publicity to the forthcoming International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for
Independence, convened pursuant to paragraph 24 of resolution C above, through all the means at his disposal.
including special publications, press releases and radio and
television broadcasts;
5. Decides to intensify its international campaign in
support of the cause of Namibia and to expose and denounce
the collusion of certain Western States with the South African racists and, to this end, requests the United Nations
Council for Namibia to include in its programme of dissemination of information for 1983 the following activities:
(a) Preparation and dissemination of publications on the
political, economic, military and social consequences of the
illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa, as well as
on legal matters and on the question of the territorial integrity of Namibia;
(b) Production and dissemination of radio programmes
in English, French, German and Spanish designed to draw
the attention of world public opinion to the current situation
in Namibia;
(c) Production of material for publicity through radio
and television broadcasts;
(d) Placement of advertisements in newspapers and
magazines;
(e) Production of films, film-strips and slide sets on
Namibia;
(j) Production and dissemination of posters;
(g) Full utilization of the resources related to press releases, press conferences and press briefings in order to
maintain a constant flow of information to the public on all
aspects of the question of Namibia;
(h) Production and dissemination of a comprehensive
economic map of Namibia;
(i) Preparation and wide dissemination of booklets,
containing:
(i) Official declarations of the Council;
(ii) Joint communiques and press releases issued by
missions of consultation of the Council:
(iii) Resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council relating to Namibia, together with

II.

47

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

relevant portions of Assembly resolutions on the
question of foreign economic interests operating in
Namibia and on military activities in Namibia;
U) Publicity for and distribution of an indexed reference
book on transnational corporations operating in Namibia;
(k) Preparation and dissemination of a booklet based on
a study on the implementation of Decree No. I for the
Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia, 91 enacted
by the Council on 27 September I 974;
([) Acquisition of books, pamphlets and other materials
relating to Namibia for further dissemination;
6. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia,
on the occasion of the International Conference in Support
of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independenc~,
to organize, in co-operation with the Department of Pubhc
Information, an international seminar of media leaders with
a view to alerting the mass media to the need to increase
publicity on the question of Namibia, particularly in its
political, economic and military aspects;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to allocate, in consultation with the United Nations Council for Namibia, sales
numbers to publications on Namibia selected by the Council;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the United
Nations Council for Namibia with the work programme of
the Department of Public Information for the year 1983
covering the activities of dissemination of information on
Namibia, followed by periodic reports on the programmes
undertaken, including details of expenses incurred;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to group under a single heading, in the section of the proposed programme budget of the United Nations for the biennium 1984-1985 relating
to the Department of Public Information, all the activities
of the Department related to the dissemination of information on Namibia;
10. Requests Member States to broadcast programmes
on their national radio and television networks and to publish
material in their official news media, informing their populations about the situation in Namibia and the obligation
of Governments and peoples to assist in the struggle of
Namibians for independence;
I I. Calls upon the United Nations Council for Namibia
to enlist the support of non-governmental organizations in
its efforts to mobilize international public opinion in support
of the liberation struggle of the Namibian people and of
their liberation movement, the South West Africa People's
Organization;
12. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia
to organize, at the conclusion of the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for
Independence, a workshop for non-governmental organizations concerned with the question of Namibia at which
those organizations will consider their contribution to the
implementation of the decisions of the Conference;
13. Requests those non-governmental organizations and
support groups that are actively engaged in supporting the
struggle of the Namibian people under the leadership of the
South West Africa People's Organization, their sole and
authentic representative, to intensify, in co-operation with
the United Nations Council for Namibia, international action
in support of the liberation struggle of the Namibian people,
including assistance to the Council in the monitoring of the
boycott of South Africa called for in General Assembly
resolution ES-8/2 of 14 September 1981 ;
14. Decides to allocate the sum of $200,000 to be used
by the United Nations Council for Namibia for its programme of co-operation with non-governmental organizations, including support to conferences in solidarity with
Namibia arranged by those organizations, dissemination of

conclusions of such conferences and support to such other
activities as will promote the cause of the liberation struggle
of the Namibian people, subject to decisions of the Council
in each individual case on the recommendation of the South
West Africa People's Organization.
113th plenary meeting
20 December 1982

E
UNITED NATIONS FUND FOR NAMIBIA

The General Assembly,
Having examined the sections of the report of the United
Nations Council for Namibia relating to the United Nations
Fund for Namibia, 99
Recalling its resolution 2679 (XXV) of 9 December 1970,
by which it decided to establish the United Nations Fund
for Namibia,
Recalling also its resolution 3112 (XXVIII) of 12 December 1973, by which it appointed the United Nations
Council for Namibia trustee of the United Nations Fund for
Namibia,
Recalling its resolution 31/153 of 20 December 1976, by
which it decided to launch the Nationhood Programme for
Namibia,
Recalling further its resolution 34/92 A of 12 December
1979, by which it approved the Charter of the United
Nations Institute for Namibia, 100
1. Takes note of the relevant sections of the report of
the United Nations Council for Namibia;
2. Expresses its appreciation to all States, specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, governmental and non-governmental organizations and
individuals that have made voluntary contributions to the
United Nations Fund for Namibia, the United Nations Institute for Namibia and the Nationhood Programme for Namibia, and calls upon them to increase their assistance to
Namibians through those channels;
3.' Decides to allocate as a temporary measure to the
United Nations Fund for Namibia the sum of $1 million
from the regular budget of the United Nations for 1983;
4. Urges the organizations of the United Nations system
to waive programme-support costs in respect of projects in
favour of Namibians financed from the United Nations Fund
for Namibia and other sources;
5. Requests the Secretary-General and the President of
the United Nations Council for Namibia to intensify appeals
to Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations and individuals for generous voluntary contributions to the General Account of the United Nations
Fund for Namibia and to the Trust Funds for the Nationhood
Programme for Namibia and the United Nations Institute
for Namibia and, in this connection, emphasizes the need
for contributions in order to increase the number of scholarships awarded to Namibians under the United Nations
Fund for Namibia;
6. invites Governments to appeal once more to their
national organizations and institutions for voluntary contributions to the United Nations Fund for Namibia;
7. Decides that the United Nations Fund for Namibia,
including the Trust Funds for the Nationhood Programme
for Namibia and the United Nations Institute for Namibia,
shall be the primary source of assistance to Namibians;
99
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Session,
Supplement No. 24 (A/37/24), part two, sects. X and XI.B.
00
•
Ibid .. "/hirty-fourrh Sessum, Supplement No. 24 (A/34/24), annex
XXXII.

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

48

!S. Decides that Namibians shall continue to be eligible
for assistance through the United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Africa and the United
Nations Trust Fund for South Africa;
9. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, when
planning and initiating their new measures of assistance to
Namibians, to do so within the context of the Nationhood
Programme for Namibia and the United Nations Institute
for Namibia;
IO. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, in the
light of the urgent need to strengthen the programme of
assistance to the Namibian people, to make every effort
to expedite the execution of Nationhood Programme for
Namibia projects and other projects in favour of Namibians
and to execute these projects on the basis of procedures
which will reflect the role of the United Nations Council
for Namibia as the legal Administering Authority for
Namibia;
l l. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to assist
Namibian refugees and requests him to expand these efforts
in view of the substantial increase in the number of Namibian refugees;
12. Decides that the United Nations Council for Namibia shall:
(a) Continue to formulate policies of assistance to
Namibians and co-ordinate assistance for Namibia provided
by the specialized agencies and other organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system;
(b) Continue to act as trustee of the United Nations Fund
for Namibia and, in this capacity, administer and manage
the Fund;
(c) Continue to provide broad guidelines and formulate
the principles and policies for the United Nations Institute
for Namibia;
(d) Continue to co-ordinate, plan and direct the Nationhood Programme for Namibia in consultation with the
South West Africa People's Organization, with the aim of
consolidating all measures of assistance by the specialized
agencies and other organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system into a comprehensive assistance programme;
(e) Continue to consult with the South West Africa People's urgamzanon in the formu1ation and impfementanon
of assistance programmes for Namibians;
(f) Report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth
session on activities in respect of the United Nations Fund
for Namibia, the United Nations Institute for Namibia and
the Nationhood Programme for Namibia;
13. Approves the amendments to the Charter of
the United Nations Institute for Namibia adopted by the
United Nations Council for Namibia at its 391 st meeting,
on lO November 1982;!0 1
14. Commends the United Nations Institute for Namibia
for the effectiveness of its training programmes for Namibians and its research activities on Namibia, which contribute substantially to the struggle for freedom of the
Namibian people and to the establishment of an independent
State of Namibia;
15. Kequests the Umtect Nations Council for Namibia
tQcomplete the preparation of and publish at an early date,
through the United Nations Institute for Namibia, a comprehensive reference book on Namibia covering all aspects
of the question of Namibia as considered by the Unitec
1111

IV.

Ibid .. Thirty-seventh Session. Supplement No. 24 (A/37/24). annex

Nations since its inception, in accordance with the outline
prepared by the Council;
16. Commends the progress made in the implementation
of the pre-independence components of the Nationhood Programme for Namibia and requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to elaborate and consider in due course
policies and contingency plans regarding the transitional and
post-independence phases of the Programme;
17. Requests the United Nations Institute for Namibia
to prepare, in co-operation with the South West Africa People's Organization, the Office of the United Nations Commissioner for Namibia and the United Nations Development
Programme, a comprehensive document on all aspects of
economic planning in an independent Namibia, and requests
the Secretary-General to provide substantive support through
the .Office of the Commissioner for the preparation of that
document;
18. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia
to carry out, in consultation with the Office of the United
Nations Commissioner for Namibia, a demographic study
of th,. Namibian population and a study of its educational
needs;
19. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to cooperate closely with the United Nations Institute for Namibia
in strengthening its programme of activities;
20. Expresses its appreciation to those specialized
agencies and other organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system that have contributed to the Nationhood
Programme for Namibia and calls upon them to continue
their participation in the Programme by:
(a) Implementing projects approved by the United
Nations Council for Namibia;
(b) Preparing new project proposals at the request of
the Council;
(c) Allocating funds from their own financial resources
for the implementation of the projects approved by the
Council;
21. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Development Programme for its contribution to the financing and administration of the Nationhood Programme for
Namibia and calls upon it to continue to allocate, at the
request of the United Nations Council for Namibia, funds
from the indicative planning figure for Namibia, for the
implementation of the projects within the Nationhood Programme and to increase the indicative planning figure for
Namibia;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Office of the United Nations Commissioner for
Namibia with the necessary resources for the performance
of the responsibilities entrusted to it by the United Nations
Council for Namibia as the co-ordinating authority in the
implementation of the Nationhood Programme for Namibia.
I I3th plenary meeting
20 December 1982

37/253.

Question of Cypruslll 2

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Cyprus,
Recalling its resolution 3212 (XXIX) of I November 1974
and its subsequent resolutions on the question of Cyprus,
Recalling the high-level agreements of 12 February 1977
and 19 May 1979,
Reaffirming the principle of the inadmissibility of occupation and acquisition of territory by force,
102

See also sect. X B ,, decision J,14y;
