S/PV.9175

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9175th meeting

Monday, 31 October 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Biang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Ravindran
Mr. Mythen
Ms. Mbabu
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. De Laurentis

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-66252 (E)
*2266252*

S/PV.9175

Threats to international peace and security

States, which called for ICAO’s action, particularly as
two passengers were detained after landing in Minsk.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Germany,
Belarus, Greece, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Salvatore Sciacchitano, President of the Council
of the International Civil Aviation Organization, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Sciacchitano.
Mr. Sciacchitano: It is my pleasure to address the
Security Council on behalf of the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO), the United Nations
specialized agency for civil aviation, established by the
Convention on International Civil Aviation, adopted in
Chicago in 1944.
As mandated by the Chicago Convention, ICAO
works with its 193 member States and the civil
aviation industry to adopt standards and recommended
practices and foster consensus on policies and global
plans to enhance the safety, security and sustainability
of international aviation. ICAO also coordinates and
facilitates assistance and capacity-building for States
and conducts audits of their oversight performance in
the areas of aviation safety and security.
As I was invited to today’s Security Council
meeting on threats to international peace and security
in order to provide a briefing on the forced landing of
Ryanair Flight FR-4978 by Belarus, allow me to outline
what happened and how ICAO addressed the issue.
On 23 May 2021, Ryanair Flight FR-4978,
travelling from Athens to Vilnius, was diverted over
Belarus airspace and landed at Minsk National Airport.
The diversion was triggered by information provided
by the Belarusian air traffic controller of a bomb threat
on board the aircraft. That event immediately raised
doubts and concerns among several ICAO member
2/19

31/10/2022

On 27 May 2021, the ICAO Council decided to
undertake a fact-finding investigation of the event
acting under sub-paragraph (e) of article 55 of the
Chicago Convention, which states that the Council may:
“[i]nvestigate, at the request of any contracting
State, any situation which may appear to
present avoidable obstacles to the development
of international air navigation; and, after such
investigation, issue such reports as may appear to
it desirable.”
The Council requested that the ICAO secretariat
prepare a report that would present the available facts
and relevant legal instruments and identify any gaps
in order to safeguard international civil aviation and
called upon States to collaborate with the investigation.
I wish to clarify here that this investigation does
not fall within the scope of the Chicago Convention’s
Annex 13 — Aircraft Accident and Incident
Investigation. Aircraft accidents or incidents fall under
State responsibility. Pursuant to the foregoing decision
of the Council, on 3 June 2021 the Secretary-General
instituted a Fact-Finding Investigation Team composed
of seven staff members specializing in air traffic
control, operational safety, international air law and
aviation security and led by the Deputy Director for
Aviation Security and Facilitation of the Air Transport
Bureau, who is here with me today.
With the support and cooperation of many
States connected to the event, the team gathered a
considerable amount of information and materials,
and it had the opportunity to travel to various States
to conduct interviews of relevant actors and witnesses
despite the coronavirus disease-related constraints.
The investigation established that, after entering
Belarusian airspace, the pilots were informed by the
controller of the Minsk Area Control Centre of a bomb
threat on board and of the fact that the bomb would
explode over Vilnius. The pilots were invited to divert
to land in Minsk, and they were deliberately left with
no other option. Despite their multiple requests to be
put in contact with their operations centre in order to
coordinate a decision, no attempt was made by the
Minsk Area Control Centre to do that.
According to the authorities of Belarus, a first email
was received at 9.25 a.m. Universal Time Coordinated
22-66252

31/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

(UTC), followed by a second email at 9.56 a.m. UTC,
both containing identical information about the bomb
threat. Meanwhile, information obtained from the email
service provider shows that only the second email was
sent to Minsk National Airport, at 9.56 a.m. UTC, that
is, 26 minutes after the information was communicated
by the controller to the pilots.
The investigation team could not verify that
Belarus received the threat email at 9.25 a.m. UTC
that allegedly triggered the actions by the authorities,
as they did not provide logs of the email server or the
email files in their original format, including their
metadata, citing their erasure in accordance with their
data retention policy.
Moreover, no cellular phone records of the
personnel involved, documenting the time and duration
of the calls and person or entity contacted, were made
available by Belarus to support the alleged sequence
of events related to the transmission of the information
regarding the bomb threat from Minsk National Airport
personnel to the Minsk Area Control Centre.
The investigation report was first submitted to the
Security Council in January. As there were some gaps
and missing information, the report was not able to
identify responsibilities at that stage. In view of new
developments made public by two States around the
same period, the Council decided that the investigation
should continue.
Prior to the issuance of the report in January,
the investigation team was not able to meet with, or
interview, the controller of the Minsk Area Control
Centre who was assigned to the Ryanair flight. The
authorities of Belarus informed the team that that
individual had not reported for duty after his summer
leave and that they had no information as to his
whereabouts and no way to contact him.
Subsequently, with the assistance of the authorities
of the United States, the investigation team gained
access to interview the controller, whose testimony
materially contradicts the information and materials
provided by the authorities of Belarus about the events
of 23 May 2021, including with regard to the email as
the origin of the bomb threat information, and reflects
the involvement of an unidentified individual who had
been given access to the Minsk Area Control Centre.
The investigation team had access to the audio
recordings made by the air traffic controller during

S/PV.9175

the event and their transcripts, which supported his
statements with verified material evidence. The audio
recordings were compared to those already in the
possession of the investigation team, as detailed in
Appendix I of the investigation report.
The additional information and materials gathered
helped to fill in some of the remaining gaps and led to the
conclusion that Belarus senior officials orchestrated the
deliberate diversion of the flight under the false pretext
of a bomb threat. The final report of the investigation
team was considered by the Council on 18 July.
The actions of the State of Belarus amounted to
the use of civil aviation for a purpose inconsistent with
the purposes of the Chicago Convention, which is a
contravention of its article 4.
In the light of what I have reported here, the ICAO
Council decided that the actions of the Government
of Belarus referred to amounted to an infraction of
the Chicago Convention, to be reported to the ICAO
Assembly, and that the final report of the investigation
team should be forwarded to the Secretary-General for
information and any appropriate further action. The
report was duly forwarded to the Secretary-General on
12 August.
Finally, during its forty-first session, held from
27 September to 7 October, the ICAO Assembly
acknowledged that there was an infraction of the
Chicago Convention by Belarus and adopted resolution
A41-1, condemning the actions of the Government
of the Republic of Belarus in committing an act of
unlawful interference that deliberately endangered the
safety and security of Ryanair Flight FR-4978 and the
lives of those on board.
I wish to thank His Excellency Ambassador Michel
Xavier Biang, President of the Security Council, for
inviting me today and for giving ICAO the opportunity
to address the Security Council. I will be happy to
answer any questions that representatives may have.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Sciacchitano for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would like to thank
the President of the Council of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), Mr. Salvatore
Sciacchitano, for his detailed and clear briefing.

22-662523/19

S/PV.9175

Threats to international peace and security

31/10/2022

On 26 May 2021, the Security Council discussed
an unusual act: a Ryanair passenger plane was forced
to land by the Belarus authorities in order to arrest
Belarusian dissident journalist Roman Protasevich
and his partner. Members of the Council called on the
International Civil Aviation Organization to investigate
that incident.

the 1944 Chicago Convention on International Civil
Aviation and the 1971 Montreal Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of
Civil Aviation. Belarus is a party to both instruments
and has an obligation to respect them. The 1971
Montreal Convention in particular is crystal clear in its
prohibition of

We welcome the report of the ICAO Fact-Finding
Investigation Team and the resolution adopted at the
forty-first session of the ICAO Assembly, entitled
“Infraction of the Convention on International Civil
Aviation by the Republic of Belarus”. We thank all the
States that contributed with a significant amount of
specific information, leading to objective assessments.
It is also worth mentioning that several States initiated
investigation processes regarding that case.

“unlawfully and intentionally … communicat[ing]
information which [a person] knows to be false,
thereby endangering the safety of an aircraft
in flight”,

We are deeply concerned by the findings of the
report in relation to the responsibility, the role and the
implication of the Belarusian authorities regarding the
deviation of the aeroplane with the only purpose of
arresting a dissident journalist. There is clear evidence
that four individuals, Government officials of Belarus,
were critical participants in diverting the flight to
Minsk National Airport with a false bomb threat. The
individuals worked with air traffic control staff at
Minsk National Airport to convey a false bomb threat
to the flight in order to cause its diversion there, and
they were subsequently involved in falsifying reports
to conceal their actions.
As the ICAO report states,
“[N]either a bomb nor evidence of its existence was
found during pre-departure screening in Athens,
Greece, and, after various searches of the aircraft
in Belarus and Lithuania, it is considered that the
bomb threat was deliberately false.”
Furthermore, Minsk was not the closest airport for an
urgent landing in such a distressful situation. According
to company executives, flights in that area would
normally be diverted to Poland or the Baltic States, but
the pilot was given no option but to land in Minsk, and
Minsk alone. We suspected then, and we now know,
that the bomb threat was inexistent, the alarm false and
the entire operation staged — a premeditated breach of
global aviation rules and a State-sponsored hijacking.
By doing that, Belarus violated international law,
which is cause for great concern. It acted in violation
of the treaties on international civil aviation, namely,
4/19

as well as of attempting to communicate or assisting
the communication of such information. Belarus has
intentionally committed an act of unlawful interference.
Those actions of Belarus need to be seen in the light
of its well-documented domestic policy of violations
of human rights and its foreign policy in violation of
international law. During the mass protests against the
manipulation of the parliamentary elections in 2020,
we saw massive repression against the people, the
opposition, civil society, independent media and every
voice critical of the Government.
Belarus even invited foreign troops from countries
with extensive experience in suppressing opposition to
successfully crack down on those protests, reducing
public space and limiting the freedom of expression.
Just last week, the Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in Belarus, Anaïs Marin, reported to
the Third Committee on the erosion of the rights to
participation, opinion and expression, intimidation
in workplaces, independent trade union movement
dismantlement and other human rights infringements.
At several of its meetings, the Security Council
condemned the complicity of Belarus in Russia’s
aggression in Ukraine. There is abundant and mounting
evidence that Belarus has been and remains heavily
involved in the war in Ukraine. From the very start of
the war in February, Russian tanks crossed Belarus’
southern border towards Kyiv, and Russia regularly
launches missiles from Belarusian territory.
Those actions qualify as an act of aggression under
article 3 (f) of the annex to General Assembly resolution
3314 (XXIX), on the definition of aggression, namely,
“[t]he action of a State in allowing its territory,
which it has placed at the disposal of another State,
to be used by that other State for perpetrating an act
of aggression against a third State”.
22-66252

31/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

That is the definition we agreed to. Such actions run
contrary to international law and also go against the
will of the Belarussian people themselves. According
to a poll conducted by Chatham House in March,
some weeks after the start of the Russian aggression
in Ukraine, the public at large was clearly against
the involvement of Belarus in the aggression and
the deployment of Russian troops on the territory
of Belarus.
Let me conclude by reiterating a note of caution
regarding the latest move of Russia and Belarus — the
creation of a new joint force — which has been set up in
an opaque fog. We want to believe that it is not another
move preparing another act or operation from Belarus,
which would expand the war and make Belarus a direct
aggressor State.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
When we discussed this issue immediately after
the incident (see S/PV.8792), many members of the
Security Council emphasized the importance of an
international independent investigation. We therefore
thank Mr. Sciacchitano, President of the Council of the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), for
attending today’s Security Council meeting to relate
the findings of the ICAO Fact-Finding Investigation
Team and the subsequent decisions of the ICAO Council
and Assembly.
It is clear from the investigation that on 23 May
2021, the Belarus authorities deliberately communicated
a false bomb threat to Ryanair Flight FR-4978, before
manipulating circumstances to influence the aircraft
to land at Minsk National Airport. That the threat was
communicated to the aircraft before the so-called bomb
threat email was even sent to Minsk National Airport
leaves little room for doubt. It appears that the purpose
of that brazen and dangerous operation was to arrest
and detain a journalist, Roman Protasevich, and his
partner, Sofia Sapega, who with their fellow passengers
happened to be flying over Belarus on their way from
Athens to Vilnius.
As the ICAO Council and Assembly made clear, the
actions of the Belarusian State endangered the safety
and security of a commercial passenger aircraft and the
lives of all those on board. And they were a flagrant
violation of the Chicago Convention on International
Civil Aviation and the Montreal Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of
Civil Aviation.

S/PV.9175

But that is not all. As we said last year, the use of a
spurious terrorist threat to divert an airliner also served
to undermine measures put in place by the international
community to counter real aviation terror threats,
including those addressed by the Security Council in
resolution 2309 (2016).
The Lukashenko regime therefore broke
international law, created a major risk to the safety of
innocent passengers and undermined aviation safety
more broadly, proving itself to be entirely irresponsible
on the issue of international peace and security. And for
what? All to silence an opposition journalist, further
stifling any semblance of free speech left in Belarus.
That has only been compounded further by its role
as a staging ground and facilitator of Russia’s illegal
invasion of Ukraine, through which it continues to
show reckless contempt for international law and the
Charter of the United Nations.
We call on Belarus to hold accountable those
responsible for that incident, desist from any further
unlawful actions and end its support for Russia’s illegal
war on Ukraine.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): We
would like to thank Mr. Sciacchitano for his briefing.
The United States expresses appreciation to the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and
its Fact-Finding Investigation Team for painstakingly
researching and comprehensively analysing the events
surrounding the unlawful forced diversion of Ryanair
Flight FR-4978 to Minsk National Airport in May 2021.
It is unfortunate that the country whose actions were
investigated has sought to discredit the investigation
and ICAO. We encourage those who have doubts to
read the public report for themselves. The report and
investigation were expertly handled and a credit to
the organization.
When the Council discussed this serious threat to
international civil aviation last year (see S/PV.8792),
some Council members claimed it was premature to draw
conclusions before ICAO had finished its investigation.
Now we have the results. ICAO found that the bomb
threat against Ryanair Flight FR-4978 was deliberately
false, and that false threat was communicated to the
flight crew on the instructions of senior officials of the
Belarus regime.
As we just heard, ICAO’s report established without
any doubt that Belarus authorities manufactured a

22-662525/19

S/PV.9175

Threats to international peace and security

false bomb threat to force Flight FR-4978 to land in
Minsk for the purpose of detaining an opposition
journalist, in violation of Belarus’s obligations under
the Convention on International Civil Aviation, better
known as the Chicago Convention. That act of unlawful
interference put civilians in danger and undermined
the fundamental trust between pilots and air traffic
controllers in a way that could have wide-ranging
safety repercussions for international civil aviation.
The United States underscores and applauds the
condemnation by the Assembly of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) of Belarus’s
violations of the Chicago Convention, in particular
article 4, which prohibits the misuse of civil aviation.
The ICAO Assembly’s show of unity in condemning
Belarus’s actions sends a strong message that the
international community will not stand for egregious
acts of unlawfulness in international civil aviation. The
Council must also send a clear message that such actions
threatening our skies are unacceptable. The Lukashenko
regime’s forced diversion of Ryanair Flight FR-4978
to detain the passenger and independent Belarusian
journalist Roman Protasevich and his companion Sofia
Sapega was a violation of international aviation law,
an act of transnational repression and a manipulation
of the civil air navigation system. There must be
consequences for those responsible. They are not the
actions of a responsible international actor.
We gather here in the Security Council and
throughout the multilateral system charged with
defending peace and security in the world. We have a
responsibility to put on record our denunciation of State
actors who flagrantly violate their responsibilities and
put their own ulterior interests ahead of international
peace and security. Since the representative of Belarus
is here today, I would also like to take this opportunity
to reiterate that the United States calls on Belarus to
release Sofia Sapega and to cease the intimidation and
harassment of opposition journalist Roman Protasevich,
as well as for the unconditional release of the more than
1,300 political prisoners currently held by the regime.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the President of the Council of
the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO),
Mr. Salvatore Sciacchitano, for his briefing.
France welcomes the ICAO Council’s decision of
18 July, as well as the resolution adopted by its Assembly
at its forty-first session recognizing the responsibility
6/19

31/10/2022

of the Belarusian authorities for the diversion to Minsk
of Ryanair Flight FR-4978 on 23 May 2021.
The facts are serious. The ICAO’s investigation
shows that Belarus organized a false bomb threat.
The conclusions we draw from the case are extremely
worrying. The Belarusian regime orchestrated the
hijacking of a civilian aircraft with the sole aim
of arresting an opposition journalist, Mr. Roman
Protasevich, as well as Ms. Sofia Sapega. It did not
hesitate to endanger the safety of the passengers and
crew on board. France condemns that flagrant violation
of international air law and the threat to the safety and
security of international civil aviation, which is nothing
less than an act of air piracy.
Such an irresponsible act is one of the many
manifestations of the Belarusian regime’s brutal
crackdown on any voices of dissent since the rigged
election of August 2020. I also want to recall that almost
a year ago to the day, we met for consultations following
the Belarusian authorities’ instrumentalization of
migrants at European borders. Again, on that occasion,
Belarus did not hesitate to endanger the lives of
vulnerable individuals for political purposes. France
also condemns Belarus’s complicity in the war against
Ukraine, as Belarusian territory continues to be used
for missile and drone strikes on Ukrainian civilian
infrastructure. With its falsification of the results of
the August 2020 elections, its repression and stifling
of civil society, its hijacking of the Ryanair flight,
its instrumentalization of the migrant issue and its
participation in the war against Ukraine, Belarus’
violations of international law continue to multiply.
France commends the courage of the Belarusian citizens
who have spoken out against Mr. Lukashenko’s regime.
We call on the Belarusian authorities to drop all legal
proceedings against Mr. Protasevich and Ms. Sapega,
as well as against all political prisoners detained in
Belarus. France will continue to support the Belarusian
people in their democratic aspirations.
Mr. Ravindran (India): Let me also thank President
of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
for his briefing. We have taken note of the points made.
The incident involving Ryanair Flight FR-4978
in the Belarusian airspace in May 2021 is being
dealt with by ICAO, the apex international technical
organization in the field of civil aviation. India has
always maintained that such incidents should be subject
to independent investigations conducted by ICAO. In
22-66252

31/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

that regard, we have taken note of the conclusions of the
investigation into the incident. The conclusions of any
such investigation should be established based on facts
and free of any political considerations.
India calls for consistency in action with regard
to violations of the Chicago Convention by Member
States. Actions that lead to isolation or exclusion will
not only impinge on cooperation in the civilian aviation
sector, but they will cause delays in determining
circumstances that put the safety and security of
the passengers in jeopardy. We need to encourage
concerned Member States to extend their cooperation
to those investigations. We also believe that measures
that harm civilian populations should be avoided.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I thank Mr. Sciacchitano,
President of the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO), for his briefing.
Ireland welcomes the conclusions of the ICAO
investigation into the forced landing of a Ryanair
aircraft in Minsk in May 2021, as confirmed by the
ICAO Council and endorsed by its Assembly. We thank
the ICAO Fact-Finding Investigation team for its work,
as well as the Member States that contributed to that
important task. Ireland condemns the act of unlawful
interference committed by the Government of Belarus
concerning the forced landing of Flight FR-4978, which
was a clear breach of international aviation law. It
needlessly endangered the safety of an aircraft in flight
and of its passengers and crew on board. We call on
Belarus to take all appropriate action, as requested by
the ICAO Assembly.
The facts are clear and based on a detailed and
thorough fact-finding investigation that gathered
incontrovertible evidence of State-led breaches of
international aviation law. The bomb threat against
the Ryanair aircraft was deliberately false. Senior
Government officials in Belarus knowingly participated
and gave instructions to force it to land in Minsk. In
sum, the Lukashenko regime orchestrated the hijacking
of a civilian aircraft to arrest an opposition journalist
and his companion, in a clear indication of the lengths
to which Lukashenko will go to repress all dissent
against his brutal regime.
Ireland condemns the detention of journalist
Roman Protasevich and his companion, Sofia Sapega,
for his alleged crime of honest media reporting on
Lukashenko’s regime of repression and intimidation.
That serious incident was the latest in a pattern of

S/PV.9175

repressive actions by the Lukashenko regime against
the Belarusian people and civil society following
the fraudulent presidential election of August 2020.
With no democratic legitimacy, Lukashenko relies on
repression and threats to maintain his rule at the cost
of his country’s prosperity and the human rights of
his people. Ireland condemns the use of State violence
against peaceful protesters, indiscriminate detentions
and curtailments of the freedom of assembly and media
freedoms in Belarus, and calls for their immediate
cessation. We remain steadfast in our support for a
sustainable, democratic and peaceful resolution of the
situation in Belarus.
The brazen steps taken by Belarus to arrest
Mr. Protasevich are yet another stark reminder of the
dangers faced by journalists and media workers. They
have long been the international community’s earlywarning system. Our efforts to uphold democracy,
monitor human rights abuses and identify emerging
conflicts would be a fraction of what they are without
the information we receive from journalists. Peace
and security, freedom of expression and a free and
independent press are inextricably linked. Journalists
and media workers are indispensable to our work in the
Security Council. It is therefore vital that the Council
uphold resolutions 1738 (2006) and 2222 (2015) in order
to protect journalists and media professionals working
in armed conflict and to secure accountability for
crimes against them, as well as to ensure a free and
independent press.
With Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine,
it is clear that the impact of Lukashenko’s actions is
no longer confined to the borders of Belarus. Russia
has not acted alone in this war: it invaded Ukraine
via Belarus; it launched missile strikes against
Ukrainian targets, including against critical civilian
infrastructure, from the territory of Belarus. Ireland
condemns the involvement of Belarus in this illegal,
unjustified war and reminds it of its responsibility to
abide by international law.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Before I address the topic of today’s
discussion, let me express our surprise and great
disappointment at the decision of the President to
allow representatives of several European Union (EU)
States to participate in today’s meeting. They have no
connection with today’s agenda item. That sets a bad
example and demonstrates a lack of integrity. It also
plays into the hands of Western countries, which as

22-662527/19

S/PV.9175

Threats to international peace and security

we just heard very clearly, planned an anti-Belarusian
show — and for that matter anti-Russian show — for the
Security Council today. We can explain the President’s
clear neglect of the Council’s rules of procedure and
duties by inexperience and the overall strain that comes
at the end of a Security Council presidency, which was
on the whole successful.
We take note of the briefing by the President of the
Council of the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO), Mr. Salvatore Sciacchitano, on the event
involving the landing of Ryanair Flight FR-4978 at
Minsk National Airport on 23 May 2021. However, the
picture painted of that event and its allegedly objective
investigation by the ICAO team does not resemble what
actually happened. We have every reason to believe that
the so-called “fact-finding process” was nothing more
than the widely practiced settling of scores by Western
countries with countries they dislike. Let me explain.
Let us start with the report submitted by the ICAO
Fact-Finding Investigation Team, which was the basis
of the recent ICAO Assembly resolution condemning
Belarus. There are many questions that can be posed
about that document — questions about which some
States prefer to remain silent. Let us examine the facts.
On 31 January, the ICAO Council hosted a
discussion about what it said was the final report on
the incident involving Ryanair Flight FR-4978. The
Team had concluded that a Belarusian MIG-29 had not
intercepted or escorted the Ryanair flight and that the
decision to land in Minsk had been made independently
by the crew of the aircraft and the alleged guilt of the
Belarusian side was not established.
Could such conclusions satisfy Western countries?
Clearly not, as they needed the report to be political
in nature so that they could use it to justify their
illegitimate restrictive measures against the Belarusian
air industry. They took advantage of their majority in
the ICAO Council and forced the Team to continue the
investigation. As a result, the final report was not final
at all.
Upon considering the revised report, the ICAO
Council reached a completely different decision, which
condemned the acts of the Belarusian authorities
and found that its officials were allegedly complicit
in providing Ryanair Flight FR-4978 with false
information about the threat of an explosion. Thus,
essentially, the ICAO Council repeated the allegations
made by Western countries in May 2021.
8/19

31/10/2022

This situation is painfully reminiscent to the
investigation by the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) into the incident that
occurred in Douma, Syria, on 7 April 2018. I recall that
Western sponsors were not satisfied with the OPCW’s
initial report, which confirmed the lack of proof of the
use of chemical weapons, and as a result the already
finalized report was further doctored and tailored to
satisfy their predetermined conclusions about Syria’s
involvement in the provocation staged by the notorious
White Helmets.
Western States and the OPCW Director-General,
Mr. Arias, do their utmost to turn a blind eye to the
obvious facts that confirm manipulation and fraud,
which dramatically undermines trust in the OPCW
Technical Secretariat and the organization as a whole.
Similarly, the revised ICAO report on the landing
of the Ryanair flight in Minsk, which is completely at
odds with the initial report, carries little credibility
in terms of its objectiveness. Suffice it to say that
the revised report cites as one of its sources an
anonymous individual, who allegedly used to be an
air traffic controller and is now outside Belarus, and
uses unverified audio recordings while ignoring the
information shared by the Belarusian authorities.
Many appear to forget that the Team’s task was not
to find ways to accuse the Republic of Belarus but to
determine the facts and identify gaps with a view to
maintaining the safety and security of international
air transport. I will provide just one example. The
report states that some European States read the
communications about a threat of an explosion onboard
the aircraft 24 or more hours after those messages had
been sent. Is that the proper level of flight security?
Is that acceptable to European airline passengers?
However, instead of adopting measures to rectify that
egregious situation, Western States continue to blame
the Belarusian side.
In our view, what is important is that Belarus itself
maintained absolute transparency in the investigation,
with no other agenda. The Belarusian aviation
authorities interacted closely with ICAO and provided
all the information requested. However, that responsible
approach was not welcome, as it did not fit into the
predetermined plans of Western countries, which did not
wait for the outcome of the international investigation.
Before the report was even released, they decided to
suspend flights through Belarusian air space, ban EU22-66252

31/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9175

bound flights of Belarusian air companies and impose
illegitimate restrictions on Minsk. As far as they were
concerned, ICAO had only one goal — to confirm the
conclusions and claims of the Western capitals, which
ICAO did the second time around to the detriment of
its reputation.

the real issues facing the States Members of the
United Nations. It is otherwise difficult to explain
the presence of five additional participants from the
European Union at today’s meeting and none at all at
the debate of 28 October on the situation in the Middle
East (see S/PV.9174).

As a result, we now have serious doubts about
the impartiality of ICAO because no objective and
transparent investigation into the incident involving
that Ryanair flight was conducted. Let us recall
similar air incidents. What would be the reaction of
the international community to an investigation into,
for example, the forced landing of the aircraft of the
President of Bolivia in Vienna in 2013, the landing of a
Belavia flight in Kyiv in 2016 or the emergency landing
in Berlin in May 2021 of a Ryanair flight en route from
Dublin to Krakow upon receiving information about an
explosive device onboard?

We believe firmly that international civil aviation
and the International Civil Aviation Organization
should not become an instrument for applying political
pressure. It would be extremely regrettable if it were
allowed to slide down the same slippery slope as that
of the Technical Secretariat of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, which is being
rapidly politicized and losing all sense of independence.
Such a scenario would cause irreparable damage to
international cooperation in the area of civil aviation.

In October, the biased report that had been redrafted
to meet the pre-cooked accusations was endorsed by a
resolution adopted at the forty-first session of the ICAO
Assembly, which characterizes the legitimate acts of
the Belarusian Government as a blatant violation of
the Convention on International Civil Aviation. We
consider that decision to be not only unfounded, but also
overtly politicized. We sincerely regret that, contrary to
ICAO’s long-standing reputation as a technical body,
its Assembly was used as a platform to promote the
political interests of some countries.
Overall, the recent developments in ICAO have
demonstrated that the organization is rapidly losing its
ability to deliver in an impartial and professional way
on its mandate, namely, to contribute to the safe and
progressive development of international civil aviation.
We see an ever-increasing number of situations in which
ICAO acts in the interest of a small group of countries.
As we can see, the inability to properly respond
to civil aviation issues leads to those topics being
addressed in a non-specialized forum — the Security
Council. Instead of addressing issues pertaining to
the maintenance of international peace and security,
the Security Council must again spend its time on the
schemes concocted by our former Western partners
against countries they dislike, although that bears no
relation to the mandate of the Security Council.
Judging by the number of representatives of
European States inscribed on the list of speakers,
those schemes are of greater concern to them than

Ms. Juul (Norway): We thank the President
of the Council of the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO) for sharing this important but
worrying information. We appreciate the opportunity
to discuss the issue today and thank the United States
and Albania for the initiative.
In our view, ICAO’s reports makes it clear that the
Belarusian authorities forced the landing of Ryanair
Flight FR-4978. They did so deliberately on a false
premise of safety concerns and therefore bear the
responsibility for unnecessarily endangering the safety
of the passengers and flight crew. While Belarus has
pointed to missing information in the investigation,
ICAO’s conclusions make it clear that that is in large
part due to a lack of full cooperation in good faith on
the part of the Belarusian authorities themselves. We
deplore that and stress once again that their actions
constituted a threat to European security, undermining
international law and our collective security.
We should also recall that the incident took place
in conjunction with the Belarus authorities’ active
facilitation of migration flows across its borders
with Poland, Lithuania, and Latvia as a destabilizing
measure putting people’s lives at risk. With the benefit
of hindsight, we now see the full context of the forced
landing. It not only constituted a threat but was a
clear sign of Belarus’s complete disregard for global
peace, security and international norms. Since the
incident, Belarus has helped facilitate Russia’s illegal
invasion of Ukraine. We are gravely concerned about
the escalation, as well as about the reports of Russia’s
additional military build-up on Belarusian territory.

22-662529/19

S/PV.9175

Threats to international peace and security

Norway has repeatedly expressed its concern
about the oppressive political situation in Belarus and
its Government’s actions in using any means deemed
necessary to maintain its grip on power. We continue to
urge the authorities to cease their policies of intimidation
and harassment of civil society, media workers and
members of the pro-democracy movement. Belarus
must cease its attacks on civil society and human rights
defenders, commit to regional stability, fully respect its
obligations under international law, re-establish good
relations with its neighbours and engage in a genuine
dialogue with pro-democracy forces in the country.
That is the only possible path forward.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I thank Mr Sciacchitano
for his briefing. Brazil participated actively in the
discussions in July of the Council of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) on the incidents
involving Ryanair Flight FR-4978. We reiterate
our appreciation for the efforts of the Fact-Finding
Investigation Team in updating information essential
to clarifying the episode. We are concerned about the
indications of violations by Belarus of the Convention
for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the
Safety of Civil Aviation. We understand that altering a
flight plan for political purposes establishes a serious
precedent that jeopardizes the integrity and the safety
of international civil aviation. The report of the ICAO
Fact-Finding Investigation, entitled Event Involving
Ryanair Flight FR4978 in Belarus Airspace on 23 May
2021, should be seen as an appeal to all States to avoid
such practices in the future.
The seriousness of the incident is undeniable.
However, Brazil understands that this is an issue
related to human rights and the safety of international
civil aviation. Perhaps, we should reflect on whether
the Security Council is the most appropriate forum for
discussing the matter. In that regard, we fully support
the submission of the report to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, which
we consider to be a forum more competent to duly
discuss the issue within the United Nations system.
Ms. Mbabu (Kenya): I thank Mr Sciacchitano for
his briefing.
Kenya expresses its deepest condolences and
sympathies to the Governments and the people of
Somalia for the heinous terrorist attack in Mogadishu.
We stand with them and the families that have lost
loved ones and wish all the injured a quick recovery.
10/19

31/10/2022

Kenya takes note of the report of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Fact-Finding
Investigation, Event Involving Ryanair Flight FR4978
in Belarus Airspace on 23 May 2021, published in July
after investigations into the diversion of a Ryanair
passenger aircraft on 23 May 2021. When the Security
Council met last year about the worrying allegations
(see S/PV.8792), we called for further investigations of
the situation that would enable us to engage on it from
an informed position. In the report, ICAO acknowledges
that the bomb threat against the Ryanair flight was
deliberately false, endangering the flight’s safety in an
unlawful act of interference and an infraction of the
Convention on International Civil Aviation.
Civil
aviation,
including
scheduled
and
non-scheduled commercial passenger flights, is
essential to our mobility in our globalized system. The
operation of commercial air services hinges on the
adherence of Member States to the relevant principles
of international law, conventions and other legal and
administrative obligations. The findings of the report,
which confirm State interference with respect to the
freedoms of the air, particularly the first freedom of
the air, and the interception of the passenger aircraft
in Belarus’s airspace, are therefore deeply concerning.
Such action sets a dangerous precedent that could prompt
unnecessary restrictions on commercial passenger air
services and diminish confidence in air travel.
As countries of the international system, we have
a duty to respect established international jurisdictions
and norms and the rights of passengers. In that light,
we reiterate the critical need to honour and adhere
to principles of international law, the Montreal and
Chicago Conventions and other legal obligations and
instruments that guarantee the safety and security of
all passengers boarding international aircraft.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the President of the Council of
the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO),
Salvatore Sciacchitano, for his briefing.
Mexico expresses its concern about the seriousness
of unlawful interference in civil aviation in any form.
With regard to the issue of Ryanair Flight FR-4978,
the incident has already been appropriately addressed,
and as Mr. Sciacchitano mentioned, it has been taken
up by the ICAO Council and Assembly, which are the
competent bodies for dealing with the issue.
22-66252

31/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

As Mexico has stated in the context of such
discussions and based on the conclusions contained
in the report of the ICAO Fact-Finding Investigation,
entitled Event Involving Ryanair Flight FR4978 in
Belarus Airspace on 23 May 2021, I would like to
reiterate our condemnation of any act in contravention
of the Chicago Convention. As my country made clear
within the ICAO Council, the interference with the
Ryanair flight constituted a violation of the rules of
international civil aviation by endangering the safety
of a commercial passenger aircraft and the lives of
those on board. But while all of that is unacceptable, in
Mexico’s opinion the incident, as well as the subsequent
detention of a journalist and his travelling companion,
should be addressed within the framework of the
competent civil aviation and human rights forums.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Mr. Salvatore Sciacchitano for his briefing.
In May last year, the Security Council discussed
the forced landing of a Ryanair flight by Belarus under
“Any other business” in internal consultations. Since
then, the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO) has been responsible for the handling of that
matter in accordance with the division of labour and
its responsibility. Today, the Council is convening
this debate to discuss that incident at the behest of a
small number of members. Whether this is conducive
to resolving the issue and whether it is an appropriate
way for the Council to fulfil its primary responsibilities
in the maintenance of international peace and security
are debatable.
China noted that, on 27 July, Belarus submitted a
position paper to the General Assembly at its seventysixth session (see A/76/909 annex), objecting to the
final ICAO report on the forced landing of the Ryanair
flight by Belarus. In the position paper, Belarus states
that key information on which the conclusions of the
final report were based is false and has not been verified
with Belarus. Furthermore, the information provided
by Belarus, the State in question, was not reflected in
the ICAO fact-finding report.
China maintained that the forced landing of the
Ryanair flight in Belarus should be judged and handled
in accordance with the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, international law
and international norms based on facts and evidence
without geopolitical considerations, without selectivity
and without double standards. We also believe that

S/PV.9175

ICAO, the specialized agency of the United Nations
responsible for civil aviation affairs, should abide by
the purposes and principles of the Chicago Convention
and perform its duties strictly according to its mandate.
At present, different parties have different views on
the ICAO fact-finding report and have concerns about
the source and authenticity of some key information in
the report. ICAO should eliminate interference from
political factors, fully listen to the views of relevant
parties, seek to fully grasp the situation, treat the
concerns of all parties equally, conduct independent,
professional and serious analysis, and draw conclusions
that can stand the test of time.
China has always opposed unilateral sanctions that
are not authorized by the Council and those that lack a
basis in international law. Unilateral sanctions against
Belarusian airlines and restrictions on and disruptions
of the normal aviation order are detrimental to the
healthy development of international civil aviation and
should be lifted immediately.
Just now, some members mentioned the domestic
situation in Belarus. I would like to point out that the
situation in Belarus is the internal affair of that country.
China has always respected the Belarusian people in
independently choosing their development path in
accordance with their national conditions, respected the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Belarus, and resolutely opposed external interference
in the internal affairs of Belarus.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
the President of the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO), Mr. Sciacchitano, for his briefing.
At the outset, I would underline that the United
Arab Emirates has engaged in both the ICAO Council
and Assembly in relation to the matter before us today.
As stressed in the preamble to the 1944 Convention
on International Civil Aviation, the Chicago Convention,
the development of international civil aviation can
“greatly help to create and preserve friendship and
understanding among the nations and peoples of
the world”. Those words continue to ring true today.
The smooth and safe operation of international civil
aviation is vital for international exchange, commerce
and development.
The United Arab Emirates is keenly aware of the
value and importance of the proper functioning of
international civil aviation. As a major global aviation

22-6625211/19

S/PV.9175

Threats to international peace and security

hub, we have prioritized civil aviation as an important
element in our own economic diversification. The
United Arab Emirates, including as a member of the
ICAO Council, strongly supports the need to uphold
rules and standards that govern international civil
aviation. That centrally includes the aforementioned
Chicago Convention and the 1971 Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of
Civil Aviation.
When there is an incident affecting the safe
functioning of civil aviation, it is important to establish
the facts professionally and impartially. The formation
by the ICAO Council of the fact-finding investigation
team and its report on the event involving Ryanair
Flight FR-4978 on 23 May 2021 therefore served a
valuable purpose. We appreciate ICAO’s work and
the consideration given to the issue by both the ICAO
Council and the Assembly.
It is our firm belief that international civil aviation
rules and standards are mutually beneficial to all
Member States. We believe they should continue to be
dealt with as a technical matter. We reiterate our call
for all Member States to comply with the applicable
conventions and regulations.
The world is in dire need of economic stability and
reliability. We can respond to that need by protecting
both the tremendous economic opportunities and the
people-to-people connections that international civil
aviation affords.
Mrs. Hackman (Ghana): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
briefing, which borders on the important matter of
aviation safety and security.
I also thank the President of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), Mr. Salvatore
Sciacchitano, for his briefing and for sharing with
the Council the conclusions of the ICAO Council’s
discussions on the fact-finding investigation report
on the May 2021 incident involving Belarus’ unlawful
interference with Ryanair Flight FR-4978.
The Security Council, in its resolution 2309 (2016),
recognized the vital importance of a secure global
aviation system to the economic development and
prosperity of all States. Like other forms of international
transportation, air travel has for decades enabled the
movement of people across national borders and served
12/19

31/10/2022

as a bridging factor for trade, education, culture,
science and several other aspects of human interaction.
The disruption of air travel by unauthorized
authorities therefore poses grave danger not only for
those passengers involved in specific travel, but for
the wider global community and the many States that
rely on the predictability of air travel for managing
inter-State exchanges.
We therefore welcome ICAO’s final fact-finding
report, which established accountability for Belarus’
actions for the landing of Ryanair Flight FR-4978
in Minsk on 23 May 2021. The actions, the report
indicates, were in contravention of international
aviation regulations, including the preamble and article
4 of the Chicago Convention on International Civil
Aviation, to which Belarus is a State Party.
The landing of Flight FR-4978, which was en
route to Vilnius from Athens, together with preceding
incidents of State and non-State orchestrated attacks
on international civil flights, some of which have been
tragic, are incompatible with the norms of international
behaviour and deserve international condemnation.
In reminding all States parties of their
commitments not to use international civil aviation
for purposes that are inconsistent with the aims of the
Convention, we stress the urgent need for enhanced
cooperation among States parties and ICAO to secure
the aviation environment from all forms of threats,
including terrorist attacks, piracy, hijacking and such
other threats currently derailing maritime and other
international transportation sectors.
Finally, we reaffirm our full commitment to
the Convention on International Civil Aviation
and stand ready to support further Council action
aimed at securing safer skies in the interest of our
international community.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Gabon.
I thank Mr. Salvatore Sciacchitano, President of the
Council of the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO), for his briefing.
This meeting sends a strong message of the
Security Council’s commitment to ensuring the safety
and security of international civil aviation. We listened
carefully to the recounting of the events that occurred
22-66252

31/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

on 23 May 2021, concerning the incident involving the
commercial Ryanair Flight FR-4978 from Athens to
Vilnius, as they appear in the July report of the ICAO
Fact-Finding Investigation Team.
At the outset, I would like to commend the
cooperation throughout the process by most of the
States concerned in the investigation. That enabled the
collection of the factual data presented to us today.
Gabon takes careful note of the course of events
on 23 May before, during and after the receipt of the
email message indicating that a bomb had been placed
on the aircraft, that it could be activated over Vilnius
and that, consequently, the aircraft had to return to land
in Minsk.
We also take note of the results of the investigations
carried out by the relevant services of the countries
concerned, which concluded:
“[a]s neither a bomb nor evidence of its existence
was found during pre-departure screening in
Athens, Greece and after various searches of the
aircraft in Belarus and Lithuania, it is considered
that the bomb threat was deliberately false.”
The report also relates that the investigators were
not able to establish the receipt by the Belarusian
authorities of an initial message informing them of
a bomb threat on the basis of which said authorities
notified the crew.
In view of the seriousness of the facts reported,
we call on all the States concerned to participate
constructively in the investigations by providing
all the information required to establish the facts,
in accordance with the international conventions
governing air navigation.
My country urges all the countries concerned
to respond to the requests for information and to
collaborate, in good faith, in the criminal investigations
to establish responsibility. It is essential that the safety
of air traffic be preserved in all circumstances and
that the integrity of equipment, crew members and
passengers never be subject to unlawful constraints or
restrictions contrary to the relevant provisions of the
Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Lithuania.

S/PV.9175

Mr. Paulauskas (Lithuania): At the outset, I would
like to thank the delegations of Albania and the United
States for requesting that the Security Council consider
the incident in Belarus airspace involving Ryanair
Flight FR-4978, under the agenda item “Threats to
international peace and security”. Indeed, we regard this
matter as a threat to international peace and security.
Let us recall that on 23 May 2021, the lives of 122
persons of various nationalities who were on board
the hijacked Ryanair aircraft were endangered by
the Belarusian authorities. Let us also recall that the
Security Council held its first meeting on the incident
on 26 May 2021.
I sincerely thank Mr. Salvatore Sciacchitano,
President of the Council of the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO), for his comprehensive
briefing. We welcome the recent adoption by the
ICAO Assembly of the resolution on the breach of
the Convention on International Civil Aviation by the
Republic of Belarus. Lithuania appreciates the initiative
of the President of the ICAO Council to forward the
fact-finding investigation report and the Council’s
related decisions thereon to Secretary-General António
Guterres for consideration of any appropriate actions.
On behalf of my Government, I would like to express
appreciation to the ICAO Fact-Finding Investigation
Team for its strenuous and diligent efforts, as well as
its comprehensive analysis of the incident. I also thank
numerous Governments, including Bulgaria, Germany,
Greece, Ireland, Latvia, Poland, Romania, Ukraine,
United Kingdom and the United States, as well as
the aviation safety control institutions and equipment
manufacturers for their engagement with the ICAO
team and for providing it with an extensive amount of
information and material in order to establish the facts
and identify the relevant provisions in international air
law instruments.
We fully share ICAO’s assessment that, by forcing
the Ryanair flight to land in Minsk, Belarus violated
the Conventions for the Suppression of Unlawful
Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation, also known
as the Montreal Convention, and the Convention on
International Civil Aviation, also known as the Chicago
Convention. Besides numerous other important
findings and conclusions by the investigative team,
it is also very important to underline that, following
its consideration of the complete fact-finding results,
the ICAO Council acknowledged that the bomb threat

22-6625213/19

S/PV.9175

Threats to international peace and security

against Ryanair Flight FR-4978 was deliberately false
and endangered its safety and, furthermore, that the
threat was communicated to the flight crew upon
the instructions of the senior Government officials
of Belarus.
It is therefore evident that the sole purpose of
the actions of the Belarus authorities in this grave
incident was to take into custody two members of the
anti-Government opposition — Mr. Roman Protasevich
and Ms. Sofia Sapega — who were passengers on
the flight from Athens to Vilnius. The actions of the
Belarus authorities were aimed at forcing Ryanair
Flight FR-4978 to land in Minsk, and therefore,
under false pretences, allowing Belarus security
services to arrest the persons in question. By doing so,
Belarusian authorities committed yet another human
rights violation.
Permit me to recall that Lithuania’s criminal
investigative authority initiated an investigation
regarding the commission of an offence of enforced
disappearance — the hijacking of an aircraft for terrorist
purposes under the relevant articles of the criminal code
of the Republic of Lithuania. Lithuania duly informed
the investigative team that requests for mutual legal
assistance had been submitted to the other States
connected to the incident. The investigations have been
initiated and are ongoing in other States concerned.
In conclusion, various actions in the commission of
these flagrant violations of the security of civil aviation
that deliberately endangered the safety and security of
the Ryanair flight and the lives of all those on board
should be condemned internationally. The ICAO
Council also recalled that the use of civil aviation in
that manner contravenes the spirit of the Convention on
International Civil Aviation, in particular its preamble
and article 4.
We therefore call on the Security Council to
recognize the responsibility of Belarus for the breaches
of international law. Belarus must be held accountable
for those grave violations. All human rights violations
committed by the Belarus authorities in the Ryanair
flight incident must become the subject of scrutiny by
the Human Rights Council. It is also necessary that the
Council demand from the authorities of Belarus that
they provide all critical information that was requested
but not made available to the team of investigators.
The results of this investigation could lead to the
improvement of ICAO standards and recommended
14/19

31/10/2022

practices, procedures and guidance materials, as well as
help fill gaps in the safety and security of international
civil aviation. We kindly request that the Security
Council remains seized of this issue.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): I would like to express
my gratitude to the President of the Council of the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
for a very informative briefing on the findings of the
ICAO investigation into the May 2021 forced landing
in Minsk of the Ryanair Flight FR-4978 aircraft,
which was registered in Poland. My country, including
the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, the Civil Aviation
Authority and the National Public Prosecutor’s Office,
cooperated closely with the ICAO’s Fact-Finding
Investigation Team, which visited our country several
times in the past year. The evidence provided by Poland
to ICAO experts was used in the preparation of the
final version of the report and served as a basis for its
key findings.
It was long-overdue for the Security Council to
discuss the threats to international peace and security
posed by the policies and actions orchestrated by the
regime in Minsk. Such behaviour destabilizes the
situation in our region on several levels. The forced
landing we are discussing today is just one of many
examples of such misconduct.
First, let me refer to the matter directly at hand.
We wish to express our appreciation for the work of
the ICAO Council, which confirmed — as we just
heard — that the submitted evidence undeniably
indicates that the action of the Belarusian authorities
violated international civil aviation regulations,
namely, the Chicago Convention on International
Civil Aviation and the Montreal Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of
Civil Aviation, and that those authorities deliberately
communicated a false bomb threat in order to cause the
Ryanair flight to land in Minsk, thereby endangering
the lives of the passengers on board. The only reason
for doing that was the premeditated apprehension of an
activist of the Belarusian opposition who was present
on board. The materials contained in the ICAO report
clearly indicate that the sanctions measures taken
against Belarus by the European Union (EU) and
other countries in the aftermath of the incident were
appropriate and took place in response to an act of
22-66252

31/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

unlawful interference. Poland expresses its readiness
to continue its cooperation in international forums to
prevent such incidents in the future. The overriding
goal of the international community should first and
foremost be global aviation safety.
Secondly, the situation at the border between Poland
and Belarus has remained unstable for more than a year
now. In 2021, the Minsk regime decided to artificially
engineer a migration crisis of unprecedented size in
order to exert political pressure on the EU. Thousands
of vulnerable people from all around the world were
deceitfully lured by a Belarussian disinformation
campaign to enter Belarus on the false promise of
a better future, whereas their lives in fact became
bargaining chips in the political machinations that
contributed to destabilizing the situation in the entire
region. Unfortunately, the Polish border authorities still
record violent attempts to illegally cross the border
on a daily basis. The weaponization of migration
serves the sole purpose of diverting our attention
from helping Ukraine to defend its country against the
Russian aggression.
Thirdly, the authorities in Minsk violate human
rights on a massive scale and persecute their
own citizens. That was confirmed by numerous
international organizations and independent reports.
Tens of thousands of Belarusians were forced to flee
the country. Many thousands are imprisoned only
for expressing their views. The number of political
prisoners is steadily increasing and has reached almost
1,350 persons. In order to artificially create an external
enemy, Minsk undertook a series of hostile activities
against the Polish minority in Belarus. They include the
arrests of the leaders of the Union of Poles in Belarus,
Ms. Andżelika Borys, who was released from custody
after one year and is currently under house arrest, and
Mr. Andrzej Poczobut, who was arrested in 2021, still
awaits trial and was recently included in the register of
those regarded as terrorists. Polish cultural associations
in Belarus are under coordinated attack from the local
and central authorities, which have adopted a systemic
approach to eliminating the Polish language from the
public discourse, including the education system.
Against that backdrop, Poland has continuously
offered safe refuge for Belarusians who left their country
due to fear of political persecution. Since the fraudulent
presidential elections in 2020, we have issued more
than 450,000 visas to Belarusian nationals, including
43,000 humanitarian visas. We also provided support

S/PV.9175

to journalists, researchers, students and other people
who settled in our country, enabling them to continue
their professional activity. In the long term, the policies
pursued by the Minsk regime will not only destabilize
the situation in Belarus, but also negatively influence
regional security and undermine international efforts
for the broad implementation of international human
rights standards. Without the democratization of the
political system in Belarus, there will not be sustainable
stability in the region.
Two weeks ago, on 4 October, Alexandr
Lukashenko, President of Belarus, finally openly
admitted that Belarus was taking part in the Russianwaged war against Ukraine. But, since the very first
days of the Russian invasion, Belarus has in fact been
used by Russia as a launching pad for its attacks against
Ukraine, including Kyiv. Invading Russian troops were
given free passage through Belarusian territory, and
hundreds of Russian missiles were launched from it.
As a neighbour of Belarus, Poland is deeply concerned
by the Belarusian complicity in the Russian aggression.
Our message to the authorities in Minsk is clear: they
should think about all the negative effects of their
engagement on the side of the aggressors, withdraw all
their support and help to stop the shedding of blood of
their next-door neighbours.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Latvia.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): I speak on behalf of the
Czech Republic, Estonia and my own country, Latvia.
We welcome the fact that the Security Council is
addressing the Lukashenko regime’s reckless behaviour
with regard to the forced landing of the Ryanair plane
in May 2021. We thank the President of the Council of
the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
for his briefing and for drawing the Security Council’s
attention to the results of the investigation.
We reiterate our strong condemnation of the forced
landing of the Ryanair flight in Minsk on 23 May
2021. That premeditated and intentional act of the
Lukashenko regime was a blatant attack on the safety of
international civil aviation and demonstrated flagrant
disregard for international law.
After a thorough, impartial and independent
investigation, the ICAO Council established that the
bomb threat against the Ryanair flight was deliberately
false and endangered its safety, and that the threat was

22-6625215/19

S/PV.9175

Threats to international peace and security

communicated to the flight crew upon the instructions
of officials of the Lukashenko regime. There can be
no doubt about the attribution and the perpetrators
of that irresponsible and dangerous act. Those are
the methods of terrorists, not responsible actors of
international relations.
The ICAO investigation established the facts, and
it provides trustworthy and reliable information. That
information constitutes a good basis for the further
actions of the Security Council and the United Nations.
Public confidence in the security of air transport
is vital. In its resolution 2309 (2016), the Security
Council affirms that all States have the responsibility
to protect the security of citizens and nationals of
all nations against attacks on air services operating
within their territory, in a manner consistent with
existing obligations under international law. We call
on the Council to maintain close attention to the safety
of international aviation and full accountability for
those responsible.
It is clear to everyone by now that the Lukashenko
regime landed the plane by force only for one
reason — to arrest a journalist and civil activist who
used to criticize the Lukashenko regime.
The Lukashenko regime’s attempts to silence
political opposition and independent journalists were
not an exception, but a deliberate policy, especially
after the sham so-called presidential elections of
August 2020, when the Lukashenko regime felt
particularly vulnerable. According to the Viasna
Human Rights Centre, as of 28 October, there are 1,337
political prisoners in Belarus. People are arrested just
for expressing their political views. That was the policy
and practice of the Soviet Union.
Unfortunately, due to various support from Russia,
Lukashenko managed to keep de facto power in Belarus
at the expense of fundamental human rights despite the
large majority of the Belarus people demanding change.
It is a sad reality that Lukashenko has highjacked the
sovereignty of Belarusian people.
The forced landing of the plane is just one element
of the reckless behaviour of the Lukashenko regime.
Since 24 February, Belarus has supported and enabled
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine in many ways, both
politically and practically, such as letting the Russian
armed forces use its territory and airspace for military
supplies and missile, artillery and drone attacks, as
16/19

31/10/2022

well as for equipment and troop incursions into the
internationally recognized territory of Ukraine.
We call on Belarus to stop supporting Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine, immediately release all
prisoners sentenced on politically motivated grounds,
cease all other ongoing human rights violations, respect
the fundamental democratic rights of Belarusian
citizens and stop hybrid attacks on the European
Union border.
We call on the Russian armed forces to withdraw
from the whole territory of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders, stop the war
and the human suffering and cease exacerbating the
negative global consequences. Justice must prevail; the
perpetrators must, and will, be held accountable.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Greece.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): At the outset, I wish to
thank the President of the Council of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) for his
informative briefing.
Greece condemned in the strongest terms the act of
unlawful interference by the Belarusian authorities that
took place on 23 May 2021 and resulted in the forced
landing in Minsk of the Ryanair aircraft operating
Flight FR-4978 from Athens to Vilnius. We wish to
recall that there were 11 Greek citizens among the
aircraft’s passengers. Such practices are reminiscent of
a different era and do not befit any State bound by, and
compliant to, its international obligations.
From the very beginning, Greece supported the
adoption of tough measures against Belarus in order
to send a strong message that such behaviour cannot
be tolerated. We also stated that this unprecedented
incident bears all the legal characteristics of a blatant
violation of international law and cannot be allowed to
stand without any consequences whatsoever.
In that regard, we note the conclusions of the
report of the ICAO Fact-Finding Investigation Team
determining that the actions of the Government of
Belarus amounted to a flagrant violation of the Chicago
Convention on International Civil Aviation. We also
welcome the ICAO Council’s condemnation of the
actions of the Government of Belarus in committing an
act of unlawful interference.
22-66252

31/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

In conclusion, we would like to underline that the
violation of the relevant provisions of the Montreal
Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Civil Aviation not only endangers
the safety of aircraft and civil aviation in general but
is also a violation of the Convention on International
Civil Aviation and its regulatory framework. Greece
once again stresses and reaffirms that respect
for international law and the international treaty
framework, especially the Convention and its annexes,
is of paramount importance and the central pillar of its
foreign policy.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for the opportunity to speak in the Security
Council today. I also thank Mr. Salvatore Sciacchitano,
President of the Council of the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO), for his briefing.
We take note that the ICAO Council condemned the
actions of the Government of Belarus and designated
them an act of unlawful interference. Germany agrees
with that assessment and condemns in the strongest terms
the forced diversion and landing of the flight. Also, as
acknowledged by the ICAO Council, the claim of a bomb
threat was deliberately false and communicated on the
instructions of senior Government officials of Belarus.
The sole purpose of that egregious act, which seriously
endangered the safety of more than 100 passengers and
crew personnel, was the pre-planned arrest of activist
Roman Protasevich and his companion, Sofia Sapega.
That shocking incident shows the true nature of the
Belarusian regime, which does everything in its power
to silence the voices of the people.
After rigging the August 2020 presidential
elections and violently suppressing public dissent, the
Belarus authorities organized a relentless campaign of
persecution and intimidation to eradicate the country’s
formerly vibrant civil society and political opposition.
Today there are well over 1,300 political prisoners
in Belarus, and thousands more have been forced
into exile. More than 700 civil-society and charity
organizations have been dissolved.
Germany is appalled by those immense restrictions
affecting all of Belarusian society and has therefore
expanded its support programmes by setting up an action
plan for civil society in Belarus. The initiative supports,
among others, students, independent media and victims

S/PV.9175

of State violence. It also funds the documentation of the
severe human rights crimes, for which the Lukashenko
regime must be held accountable. To that end, jointly
with our partners, we support the crucial efforts of the
International Accountability Platform for Belarus.
Unfortunately, as the incident with Ryanair Flight
FR-4978 shows, the repression does not stop at the
borders of Belarus. The Lukashenko regime is also
actively engaged in spreading instability and fuelling
war in Eastern Europe, against the will of the vast
majority of Belarusian citizens. In the early days of
Russia’s war of aggression on Ukraine, Russian troops
attacked Ukraine from the territory of Belarus. Its
territory has since been a staging ground for missile
and drone attacks against Kyiv and other Ukrainian
cities, killing thousands of innocent Ukrainian citizens.
Those Belarussian officials complicit in the
committing of war crimes by Russia in Ukraine will
be held to account. We urge the Government of Belarus
to be on the right side of history and to immediately
stop its support for Russia’s war of aggression on
Ukraine. We further call on Minsk to free all political
prisoners and unconditionally end its campaign of
domestic repression. Belarus must leave its path of selfdestruction — a path towards isolation, oppression and
poverty. It is still not too late to reverse course.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belarus.
Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): For
many years now, Western countries have been waging
a large-scale political, economic and information war
against the Republic of Belarus. Economic terrorism
is being used, including the imposition of numerous
sanctions to economically strangle our country and its
people, in violation of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law. They have also grossly violated
the provisions of the Budapest Memorandum — to which
delegations in this Chamber often like to refer — under
which Belarus voluntarily gave up the most modern
nuclear weapons of the time without receiving anything
in return.
The convening of today’s meeting is yet another
manifestation of the war. The very establishment of
the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
Fact-Finding Investigation Team to investigate the
event involving Ryanair Flight FR-4978 in the airspace
of Belarus on 23 May 2021 contradicts the mandate
of the organization and sets a dangerous precedent of

22-6625217/19

S/PV.9175

Threats to international peace and security

manipulating the foundations of civil aviation safety.
The report of the ICAO Fact-Finding Investigation
Team, which was written hastily and under the pressure
brought to bear by certain Western countries, is not
a consensus report, is biased and lacks objectivity.
Incidentally, that point was also brought to the attention
of the participants at the recently held forty-first session
of the ICAO Assembly.
As has already been mentioned today, the position
of the Republic of Belarus on that report was circulated
as official document of the General Assembly on
27 July under agenda item 88, entitled “Strengthening
and promoting the international treaty framework”
(see A/76/909 annex). Belarus will never accept the
conclusions of the report, which is based on incomplete
information and lacks the necessary international
cooperation, which is also noted in the report.
We have not received answers to key questions sent
to other countries involved with the aim of conducting
an objective and comprehensive investigation. Also,
additional information from Belarus was not requested.
The report is full of mistakes and inaccuracies and
uses non-aviation and biased approaches. The fact
that the report uses information from an anonymous
source in the absence of proper technical expertise
is unacceptable.
In addition, the written testimony of the air
traffic controller who was present, which Belarus
duly provided to ICAO, was not taken into account.
We have stated that the content of the alleged audio
recording supposedly made by air traffic controllers
and submitted — very conveniently — by United States
authorities to the ICAO Fact-Finding Investigation
Team is fraudulent and a forgery.
Let me turn to the most important point. The FactFinding Investigation Team itself acknowledged that
there was no escort, interception or forced landing of
Ryanair Flight FR-4978 by any military aircraft in the
airspace of Belarus, which indicates that the captain
of the foreign aircraft personally and independently
made the decision to land at Minsk National Airport.
Those indisputable facts, which, by the way, were
acknowledged by the Fact-Finding Investigation
Team, did not prevent Western countries from
immediately accusing Belarus of forcibly landing the
aircraft — even words such as “air terrorism” were
uttered here today. And almost immediately after the
incident, those countries imposed sanctions not only
18/19

31/10/2022

on Belarus’ national airline, Belavia, but also on their
own national airlines, which were banned from using
Belarusian airspace. I would like to remind the Council
that Belavia, Belarus’s national airline, was practically
the only carrier that transported and rescued citizens of
Western countries, at their States’ request, during the
pandemic in situations of total lockdown, for which it
was profusely thanked at the time by both nationals and
representatives of those States.
Another outrageous fact is that the members of the
Belarusian delegation were ready to hold a substantive
discussion on all of these issues at the forty-first
session of the ICAO Assembly, but Canada would not
grant them visas and they were therefore forced to
participate in the session virtually. It was clear that
the organizers of that performance simply did not
want to receive uncomfortable answers to any of their
questions. Even in that online format, the Belarusian
side submitted working documents on aviation security
for consideration by the session, but they were blocked
by Western countries, only confirming the West’s desire
to compel international organizations — in this case,
ICAO — to act in their particular political interests,
even when that was to the detriment of flight safety.
Mr. Protasevich’s name has been mentioned several
times here, since he is supposedly the reason why the
incident in question occurred. Mr. Protasevich has
prepared a video address to the Council specifically
for this meeting, and a link to it can be found on the
Belarusian Permanent Mission’s Twitter account.
Anyone can listen to what Mr. Protasevich has to say,
but I would ask them not to be distracted when he
says that he is still under house arrest. That is a legal
decision by the courts of the Republic of Belarus, a
State that fully adheres to the rule of law, unlike certain
other countries.
I would also like to say a few words with regard
to the many accusations against Belarus that we have
heard in this Chamber today about alleged violations of
human rights. Some of the versions of events provided
are far-fetched, to say the least. In any case, I will speak
briefly on human rights.
In that connection, I would like to remind the
Council about the illegal sanctions on Belarusian
potash fertilizer, among other things. Of course,
while potash fertilizer is not a foodstuff, we all
know that it is essential to ensuring future harvests.
The lack of Belarusian potash fertilizer in the world
22-66252

31/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

markets — given that, according to certain statistical
calculations, the Republic of Belarus produces as much
as one third of the world’s potash fertilizers — will
lead to the needless death by starvation of additional
tens of millions of people. To those who are developing
and implementing the sanctions, I want to say that
they are depriving people of their most fundamental
right, the right to life, and yet they have the nerve to
lecture us on how we should be complying with human
rights — as they understand them, of course. Sooner or

S/PV.9175

later, they will be cast out, either by their own people
or by the millions arriving from those countries that
they are trying to destroy, who will come not in search
of their mythical human rights as the West understands
them, but for a piece of bread to feed their families and
their children. And there will be a place for the West’s
leaders in history not as politicians, but as criminals
and mass murderers.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

22-6625219/19
