A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/94
16 February 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 108 (a)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/48/626)]
48/94.

Importance of the universal realization of the right of
peoples to self-determination and of the speedy granting
of independence to colonial countries and peoples for
the effective guarantee and observance of human rights

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its faith in the importance of the implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Reaffirming also the importance of the universal realization of the
right of peoples to self-determination, national sovereignty and territorial
integrity and of the speedy granting of independence to colonial countries and
peoples as imperatives for the full enjoyment of all human rights,
Reaffirming further the obligation of all Member States to comply with
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the resolutions of the
United Nations regarding the exercise of the right to self-determination by
peoples under colonial and foreign domination,
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action 1/ adopted at
the World Conference on Human Rights,
Considering the urgent need of Namibia for assistance in its efforts to
reconstruct and strengthen its fledgling economic and social structures,
__________
1/
Report of the World Conference on Human Rights, Vienna,
14-25 June 1993 (A/CONF.157/24 (Part I)), chap. III.

/...

A/RES/48/94
Page 2

Recalling the Abuja Declaration on South Africa, adopted by the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its
twenty-seventh ordinary session, held at Abuja from 3 to 5 June 1991, 2/ and
the statement on developments in South Africa, adopted by the Ad Hoc Committee
of the Organization of African Unity on Southern Africa at its extraordinary
session of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs, held on 29 September 1993, 3/
Affirming the need to exercise vigilance with respect to developments in
South Africa to ensure that the common objective of the international
community and the peoples of South Africa is achieved by the establishment of
a united, democratic and non-racial South Africa without deviation or
obstruction,
Recalling the signing of the General Peace Agreement for Mozambique 4/
at Rome on 4 October 1992, which provides for the termination of the armed
conflict in that country,
Reaffirming the national unity and territorial integrity of the Comoros,
Deeply concerned by Israel’s continuing occupation of parts of southern
Lebanon and its frequent attacks against Lebanese territory and people, as
well as its refusal to implement Security Council resolution 425 (1978) of 19
March 1978,
Bearing in mind United Nations resolutions related to the question of
Palestine,
Taking note of the recent positive evolution in the Middle East peace
process, in particular the signing on 13 September 1993 of the Declaration of
Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements 5/ by the Government of the
State of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization,
1.
Calls upon all States to implement fully and faithfully all the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations regarding the exercise of the right
to self-determination and independence by peoples under colonial and foreign
domination;
2.
Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of peoples for
independence, territorial integrity, national unity and liberation from
colonial domination, apartheid and foreign occupation, in all its forms and by
all available means;
3.
Reaffirms also the inalienable right of the Palestinian people and
all peoples under foreign occupation and colonial domination to selfdetermination, independence and sovereignty;
__________
2/

A/46/390, annex II.

3/

A/48/461-S/26514, annex.

4/

S/24635, annex.

5/

See A/48/486-S/26560.

/...

A/RES/48/94
Page 3

4.
Calls upon those Governments which do not recognize the right to
self-determination and independence of all peoples still under colonial
domination, alien subjugation and foreign occupation to do so;
5.
Calls upon Israel to refrain from violation of the fundamental
rights of the Palestinian people and from denial of its right to selfdetermination;
6.
Urges all States, the specialized agencies and organizations of
the United Nations system, as well as other international organizations, to
extend their support to the Palestinian people through its sole and legitimate
representative, the Palestine Liberation Organization, in its struggle to
regain its right to self-determination and independence in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations;
7.
Urgently appeals to all States, the organizations of the United
Nations system and other international organizations to render assistance to
Namibia in order to enhance its efforts to promote democracy and economic
development;
8.
Strongly urges the Government of South Africa to take additional
steps to implement fully the provisions of the statement on developments in
South Africa, adopted on 29 September 1993 by the Ad Hoc Committee of the
Organization of African Unity on Southern Africa, 3/ in order to achieve the
objectives of the Declaration on Apartheid and its Destructive Consequences in
Southern Africa; 6/
9.
Calls upon all parties to refrain immediately from acts of
violence and calls upon the Government of South Africa to exercise its
responsibility to end the ongoing violence through, inter alia, strict
adherence to the National Peace Accord signed on 14 September 1991; 7/
10.
Calls upon all signatories to the National Peace Accord to
manifest their commitment to peace by fully implementing its provisions, and
calls upon other parties to contribute to the attainment of its objectives;
11.
Strongly condemns the establishment and use of armed groups with a
view to pitting them against the national liberation movements;
12.
Demands that the Government of South Africa repeal the security
legislation that remains in force, which inhibits free and peaceful political
activity;
13.
Requests the Secretary-General to act speedily to implement
Security Council resolution 772 (1992) of 17 August 1992 in its entirety,
including those parts pertaining to the investigation of criminal conduct and
the monitoring of all armed formations in the country;
14.
Demands the full application of the mandatory arms embargo against
South Africa, imposed under Security Council resolution 418 (1977) of 4
__________
6/

Resolution S-16/1, annex.

7/

See Centre against Apartheid, Notes and Documents, No. 23/91.
/...

A/RES/48/94
Page 4

November 1977, by all countries and more particularly by those countries which
maintain military and nuclear cooperation with the Government of South Africa
and continue to supply it with related matériel;
15.
Appeals to the international community, pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 47/82 of 16 December 1992, to continue to extend
assistance to Lesotho to enable it to fulfil its international humanitarian
obligations towards refugees;
16.
Pays tribute to the Government and people of Angola for their
noble contribution to the evolving climate of peace in southern Angola, and
addresses its strongest appeal to the National Union for the Total
Independence of Angola to undertake to commit itself to the peace process that
will lead to a comprehensive settlement in Angola on the basis of the Peace
Accords; 8/
17.
Demands that the Government of South Africa pay compensation to
Angola for damages caused, in accordance with the relevant resolutions and
decisions of the Security Council;
18.
Demands also that the Government of South Africa pay full and
adequate compensation to Botswana for the loss of life and damage to property
resulting from the unprovoked and unwarranted military attacks of 14 June
1985, 19 May 1986 and 20 June 1988 on the capital of Botswana;
19.
Calls upon the international community to continue to extend its
generous support to the ongoing efforts aimed at ensuring respect for and the
successful implementation of the General Peace Agreement for Mozambique 4/ and
at assisting the Government of Mozambique in the establishment of lasting
peace and democracy and in the promotion of an effective programme of national
reconstruction in that country;
20.
Fully supports the Secretary-General in his efforts to implement
the plan for the settlement of the question of Western Sahara by organizing,
in cooperation with the Organization of African Unity, a referendum for the
self-determination of the people of Western Sahara;
21.
Notes the contacts between the Government of the Comoros and the
Government of France in the search for a just solution to the problem of the
integration of the Comorian island of Mayotte into the Comoros, in accordance
with the resolutions of the Organization of African Unity and the United
Nations on the question;
22.
Strongly condemns the continued violation of the human rights of
the peoples still under colonial domination and alien subjugation;
23.
Calls for a substantial increase in all forms of assistance given
by all States, United Nations organs, the specialized agencies and nongovernmental organizations to the victims of racism, racial discrimination and
apartheid through anti-apartheid organizations and national liberation
movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity;
__________
8/

See S/22609, annex.

/...

A/RES/48/94
Page 5

24.
Reaffirms that the practice of using mercenaries against sovereign
States and national liberation movements constitutes a criminal act, and calls
upon the Governments of all countries to enact legislation declaring the
recruitment, financing and training of mercenaries in their territories and
the transit of mercenaries through their territories to be punishable offences
and prohibiting their nationals from serving as mercenaries, and to report on
such legislation to the Secretary-General;
25.
Demands the immediate and unconditional release of all persons
detained or imprisoned as a result of their struggle for self-determination
and independence, full respect for their fundamental individual rights and
compliance with article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 9/
under which no one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment;
26.
Expresses its appreciation for the material and other forms of
assistance that peoples under colonial rule continue to receive from
Governments, organizations of the United Nations system and other
intergovernmental organizations, and calls for a substantial increase in that
assistance;
27.
Urges all States, the specialized agencies and other competent
organizations of the United Nations system to do their utmost to ensure the
full implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples and to intensify their efforts to support
peoples under colonial, foreign and racist domination in their just struggle
for self-determination and independence;
28.
Decides to consider this question at its forty-ninth session under
the item entitled "Right of peoples to self-determination".
85th plenary meeting
20 December 1993

__________
9/

Resolution 217 A (III).
