VI.

33/103.

Resolutions adoptoo on the reports of the Third Committee

Status of the International Convention
on the Suppression and Punishment of
the Crime of Apartheid

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3068 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973, by which it adopted and opened for
signature and ratification the International Convention
on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid, and its resolutions 3380 (XXX) of 10
November 1975, 31/80 of 13 December 1976 and
32/12 of 7 November 1977 as well as Commission
on Human Rights resolutions 13 (XXXIII) of 11
March 1977 53 and 7 (XXXIV) of 22 February 1978,54
Welcoming the Declaration and the Programme of
Action adopted by the World Conference to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination, 55
Reaffirming its firm conviction that apartheid constitutes a total negation of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and is a gross
violation of human rights and a crime against humanity
seriously disturbing and threatening international peace
and security,
Underlining that ratification of and accession to the
Convention on a universal basis and implementation
of its provisions are necessary for its effectiveness and
would be a useful contribution towards implementing
the programme for the International Anti-Apartheid
Year and achieving the goals of the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
Welcoming Security Council resolution 418 (1977)
of 4 November 1977 as a useful step towards achieving
the purposes of the Convention,
Firmly convinced that the legitimate struggle of the
oppressed peoples in southern Africa against apartheid,
colonialism and racial discrimination and for the effective realization of their inalienable and legitimate
rights, including their right to self-determination, and
for human rights, thirty years after the adoption of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, demands
more than ever all necessary support by the international community, and, in particular, further action by
the Security Council,
1. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral56 on the status of the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the
Crime of Apartheid;

2. Expresses its satisfaction with the increase in
the number of States which have ratified the Convention or acceded thereto;
3. Commends the States parties to the Convention
that have submitted their reports under article VII of
the Convention and urges other States to do so as soon
as possible, taking fully into account the guidelines 57
prepared by the Working Group on the Implementation
of the International Convention on the Suppression
118 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/5927 ), chap. XXI,
sect. A.
54 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. XXVI. sect. A.
55 Report of the World Conference to Com hat Racism and
Racial Discrimination, Geneva, 14-25 August 1978 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.XIV.2). chap. n.
56 A/33/148.
57 E/CN.4/1286, annex.

149

and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid established
in accordance with article IX of the Convention;
4. Appeals once again to all States which have not
yet become parties to the Convention to ratify it or
accede to it without delay;
5. Welcomes the efforts of the Commission on
Human Rights to undertake the functions set out in
article X of the Convention and invites the Commission to continue its efforts, especially with a view
to preparing a list of individuals, organizations, institutions and representatives of States which are alleged
to be responsible for crimes enumerated in article II
of the Convention, as well as of those against which
legal proceedings have been undertaken;
6. Calls upon the competent United Nations organs
to provide the Commission on Human Rights, through
the Secretary-General, with information relevant to the
preparation of the above-mentioned list according to
article X of the Convention as well as with information concerning the obstacles which prevent the effective suppression and punishment of the crime of
apartheid;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
next annual reports under General Assembly resolution
3380 (XXX) a special section concerning the implementation of the Convention.
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
33/104.

Alternative approaches and ways and
means within the United Nations system
for improving the effective enjovment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the creation of a post
of United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/130 of 16 December
1977,
Recalling also that, in its resolution 32/130, it
requested the Commission on Human Rights to undertake an over-all analysis of the alternative approaches
and ways and means within the United Nations system
for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms in the light of the concepts
enumerated in that resolution,
Noting Economic and Social Council decision
1978/20 of 5 May 1978, in which the Council authorized the establishment of an open-ended working
group of the Commission on Human Rights to meet
for one week immediately before the Commission's
thirty-fifth session to continue this over-all analysis,
Taking note of relevant parts of the Declaration of
the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Non-Aligned Countries, held at Belgrade from 25 to
30 July 1978, in which, inter alia, the Ministers pointed
out that the human rights and fundamental freedoms
of the individual and of peoples are inalienable and,
proceeding from the inseparability of economic, social,
cultural, civil and political rights, stressed the need to
create conditions, at the national and international
levels, for the full promotion and protection of human
rights of the individual and peoples, 58
,,s A/33/206, annex I, parn. 155.

150

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

Welcoming the Ministers' expressed readiness to
work towards the implementation of General Assembly
resolution 32/130 through the United Nations system,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the progress
report on the over-all analysis 59 which was submitted
to the General Assembly by the Commission on
Human Rights, through the Economic and Social
Council, in accordance with Assembly resolution
32/130;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
continue with high priority this over-all analysis, which
will contribute to the implementation of resolution
32/130;
3. Expresses the hope that all Member States, the
specialized agencies concerned and United Nations
organs in the field of human rights will continue to
support the ongoing process of over-all analysis being
carried out by the Commission on Human Rights;
4. Looks forward to discussing at its thirty-fourth
session the conclusions and recommendations of the
Commission on Human Rights which will result from
its over-all analysis;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to the specialized agencies concerned
and all United Nations organs in the field of human
rights;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session an item entitled "Alternative
approaches and ways and means within the United
Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms".
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
33/105.

Alternative approaches and ways and
means within the United Nations system
for promoting the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the creation of a post
of United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolution 32/130 of 16 December 1977, in which it requested an over-all analysis
of the United Nations approach to human rights in
the light of the concepts enumerated in that resolution,
Recalling the decision of the Third Committee at
the thirty-second session of the General Assembly to
refer the proposal for the establishment of a post of
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
for consideration by the Commission on Human Rights
at its thirty-fourth session in the context of the over-all
analysis of the alternative approaches and ways and
means for improving the effective enjoyment of human
Iights and fundamental freedoms, 60
Recalling also Commission on Human Rights resolution 26 (XXXIV) of 8 March 1978,61 in which
59 Official

Records of the Economic and Social Coun-

cil, 1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. IX.
60 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Annexes, agenda item 76, document A/32/423,
para. 23.
6 1 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. XXVI, sect. A.

the Commission considered advisable the establishment, which the Economic and Social Council authorized on 5 May 1978 in its decision 1978/20, of an
open-ended working group of the Commission that
would meet for one week before its thirty-fifth session
to undertake the necessary work relating to the over-all
analysis,
l. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
take into account, in continuing its work on the overall analysis mentioned above, the views expressed on
the various proposals during the general debate on the
present item at the current session, as well as during
the thirty-second session of the General Assembly,
including a post of United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights;
2. Decides to consider these questions again after
the Commission on Human Rights has completed
and/or reported on the over-all analysis.
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
33/106.

Elimination of all forms of religious
intolerance

The General Assembly,
Recalling article 18 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, 62 proclaiming that everyone has the
right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion,
Noting that during the thirty years of its existence
many portions of the Declaration have been expanded
into various international instruments, while article 18
has thus far not been so elaborated,
Still desirous to see article 18 followed by a declaration on the elimination of all forms of religious
intolerance,
Recalling its resolution 3027 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, in which it decided to accord priority
to the completion of the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Religious Intolerance before
resuming consideration of the draft international convention on this subject,
Recalling also its resolution 3267 (XXIX) of 10
December 1974, in which it requested the Commission
on Human Rights to submit to the General Assembly,
through the Economic and Social Council, a single
draft Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of
Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion
or Belief, and its resolutions 31/138 of 16 December
1976 and 32/143 of 16 December 1977, in which it
urged the Commission to speed up its work so that
the draft Declaration might be finalized,
Noting with regret that the Commission on Human
Rights has reported, through the Economic and Social
Council, that it has as yet not completed the draft
Declaration,
Noting further the efforts undertaken by the informal
working group set up by the Commission on Human
Rights in elaborating a generally acceptable text of
the Declaration, taking into account the relevant
United Nations documents,
Taking account of the fact that, since the Commission on Human Rights has undertaken to draft the
62 Resolution

217 A (III).
