United Nations

S/PV.6094

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6094th meeting
Thursday, 19 March 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shalgham . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Jurica
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Rugunda
Sir John Sawers
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2009/135)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-27354 (E)

*0927354*

S/PV.6094

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2009/135)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Australia, Canada, the
Czech Republic, Germany, India, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway and Pakistan, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tanin
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/135, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.

2

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. I now give him the
floor.
Mr. Eide: I will start with some developments
that are not frequently reported and do not receive the
public attention that they deserve. Nonetheless, they
are important if we are to form a more complete picture
of developments in Afghanistan.
First, after all the changes that have taken place
over the past few months, the Afghan Government
today is better and more competent than ever before
and the quality of provincial governance is better.
Secondly, cooperation among key elements inside
the Government has improved; that applies most
prominently to the security ministries and institutions.
And the results are clear. We see an enhanced ability to
uncover terrorist networks and to prevent attacks from
taking place. Yes, there have been some spectacular
terrorist attacks in Kabul, but the overall number of
attacks in the capital has gone down, not least because
of this improved coordination. In addition, the
economic ministries are working in a more coherent
manner following changes in the leadership of the
ministries of Finance, Agriculture and Commerce. That
should enable the Government to develop more unified
economic policies.
Thirdly, these changes have enabled the
Government to better address some of our longstanding concerns. Let me just mention a few of them.
With regard to the police, a comprehensive
reform effort is under way to strengthen and clean up
the police force. That should lead to a more efficient
fight against the insurgency, greater respect for the rule
of law and an enhanced ability to fight corruption. A
significant number of police officers have been
removed and are being prosecuted.
A national agricultural strategy will be launched
in April. It will include all the major sectors of
agriculture and establish pool funding for donors. The
main objectives are, of course, to increase agricultural
production, to develop marketing capabilities and to
enhance rural employment.
The new team in the Ministry of Commerce is
addressing the challenges of private-sector development:
the establishment of a legal framework, the setting of
09-27354

S/PV.6094

investment promotion priorities, licensing reform and
trade and transit agreements with neighbouring countries.
And let me remind members that police, agriculture and
private-sector development have all suffered from neglect
for years. They are now being addressed as priority areas.
Fourthly, the improved internal cohesion that we
now see emerging in the Government will help us to
overcome the fragmentation that has so far hampered
coordination with the international community. A
stronger Afghan counterpart will allow us to make
better use of the main coordination body, the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board.
Fifthly, the prognosis for poppy cultivation in
2009 indicates that there is the potential for a very
significant decline in production across the country. We
could see a further increase in the number of poppyfree provinces, as well as serious reductions in poppy
production in the South. That could be a turning point
in our counter-narcotics efforts.
Those developments represent potential success
stories. However, I underline the word “potential”
because our ability to turn them into reality will, to a
large extent, depend on the ability of the international
community to respond quickly with support. There is a
need to provide trainers, mentors and equipment to the
police. There is a need to adjust and strengthen
agricultural assistance with a view to responding
flexibly to new priorities and new programmes. There
is a need to provide support for governors who are
determined to make their provinces poppy-free and to
farmers who are ready to switch from poppy to licit
crops.
If we could succeed in those areas, then we would
truly live up to the commitments that we all undertook
in Paris in June last year. And, for the first time, we
would be able to seriously address some of our most
serious, most long-standing and deepest concerns:
fighting corruption and crime, reducing the flow of
financial resources to the insurgency and improving
food security.
There are no quick fixes; it will take time. But,
for the first time in many years, there have been
promising developments. If we do not respond quickly,
then we may well face new stagnation and even
backlash in several of these sectors. That we cannot
afford. Progress in each of them will contribute to
political stability and economic growth and be a
critical component of any international exit strategy.

09-27354

Of course, the main credit for this progress goes
to prominent Afghan politicians and officials.
However, it would not have been possible without the
presence and commitment of the international
community, civilian as well as military. So this is not a
time to waver; it is a time to remain committed.
These positive trends are so often overshadowed
by dramatic events and political developments — at
this point, mainly the security situation and the intense
debate about the presidential and provincial elections.
Yes, the security situation has deteriorated over the
past few months. A mild winter provided a suitable
environment for maintaining high levels of violence,
and an early Ramadan allowed for a prolonged fighting
season. As a result, the overall number of security
incidents in December 2008 rose by 42 per cent
compared with that in the previous December; in
January 2009, it was 75 per cent higher than in January
2008. As I mentioned, the number of incidents in
Kabul has gone down, owing partly to the improved
performance of Afghan security forces, but we have to
expect an intense fighting season, starting only a few
weeks from now.
The election process has, of course, taken centre
stage in our efforts and has also been at the centre of
attention in the media. We now have an agreement on
the election date, 20 August, which means that we can
plan, from a financial, procurement, organization,
training and security point of view, on the basis of a
firm deadline. The main challenge now is, of course,
how to resolve the dispute regarding what will happen
between 22 May, when the current presidential term
ends according to the Constitution, and the beginning
of the next presidential term.
Our message to Afghan politicians and to the
opposition is clear. They must reach a political
consensus that ensures the legitimacy and strength of
Afghan institutions until the next presidential
inauguration. Reaching such a consensus is a matter of
vital political interest. Such consensus has been
reached in the past when national interests were
considered to be at stake. But when leaders have failed
to reach a national consensus, we know that the costs
for the country have been very high.
The international community has 70,000 troops in
Afghanistan operating alongside Afghan forces today.
Billions of dollars are invested. The summer months
represent the peak of the fighting season. We cannot

3

S/PV.6094

afford to see these months become a period of political
and constitutional instability. We need a Government
and we need institutions that can continue their work
with full strength and broad legitimacy.
We also have a message for the Government. The
opposition has concerns that are real and well-founded.
They relate to the transparency and fairness of the
election process. The Afghan Government must
demonstrate that it is ready to do its utmost to reassure
the opposition that elections will be fair and
transparent and that the resources of incumbency will
not be misused.
Finally, there is a message for the international
community. We must also do our outmost to establish
mechanisms with the very same objectives —
transparency and fairness — in cooperation with the
Afghan authorities and civil society. I urge those who
have been invited to send international observers —
the European Union and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe — to play their parts fully
alongside domestic observation efforts. The United
Nations and the Independent Electoral Commission
will establish an election complaints commission,
which will be as robust as possible under current
circumstances. A media complaint commission will be
established and the United Nations and the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission will monitor
respect for political rights.
All involved — the Government, the opposition
and the international community — must understand the
costs of a flawed and unfair election process. The result
would be prolonged political instability when stability is
required more than ever. The result would create doubt
in the minds of many Afghans about the value of
democratic processes when confidence is needed.
Civil-military cooperation is an important part of
our mandate. The relationship between the
International Security Assistance Force and the United
Nations Mission has continued to improve. Together
with the Afghan Government, we have come a long
way now in formulating the integrated approach that
we have been talking about for years. The aim is
simple: to allocate our overall resources — civilian and
military — in a way that would allow us to make the
best possible use of them; to strengthen development
efforts where they can proceed unhindered; and to
provide a better basis of governance in swing districts,
gradually attracting more civilian development where

4

such efforts have so far been difficult. We must learn to
work together in a different way than in the past.
The United Nations has taken a lead in addressing
civilian casualties and military behaviour that does not
adequately respect Afghan cultural sensitivities. This
follows from our obligation to protect and promote
human rights, but our engagement is also motivated by
the need to ensure strong Afghan support for a
continued international engagement. We have seen how
serious incidents have not only affected support for the
international military forces, but have also made the
humanitarian and development community more
vulnerable. The number of civilian casualties rose by
40 per cent last year, with the insurgency clearly
accounting for the majority of such casualties.
I am pleased to see that the commander of
international forces, General McKiernan — to whom I
pay tribute — is addressing this problem so strongly
and convincingly in his instructions to the troops: to
minimize the use of air power; to improve coordination
with Afghan security forces, giving them the lead
where possible; and to respect, as I said, the cultural
sensitivities of the Afghan population.
President Karzai has expressed his views strongly
and repeatedly. These are views shared by many
Afghans, and they are being listened to and addressed.
Unfortunately, I must add, insurgency groups continue
their indiscriminate and deliberate attacks on civilians.
I understand those who say that an increased
troop level may reduce the requirements to use
airpower and lead to a lower number of civilian
casualties, but we should also admit the danger of the
opposite happening. Additional troops will mean more
fighting, and that is the purpose. With more troops and
frequent troop rotations, the international military
forces must ensure that they operate in a way that
solidifies both the support of the Afghan public and of
public opinion in troop-contributing countries.
Inadequate donor coordination is a major concern
to all of us and a priority element of our mandate. We
have made progress in some areas. I believe political
coordination is better than before. With regard to donor
coordination, the picture is more complex and perhaps
less encouraging. There have, in recent months, been a
number of discussions of policy-shaping, which I hope
will eventually turn into policymaking. Furthermore,
some countries are channelling more resources through
national programmes and the Afghan budget. But I

09-27354

S/PV.6094

continue to have serious worries, as Council members
are aware, about a number of our practices.
First, we must, as much as possible, move away
from the use of contractors, who are often overpaid and
underqualified, whose aim is to finish projects quickly
before they move on to the next. The short-term costs
of such development policies are high and the longterm impact is low. We must be better at measuring our
achievements in terms of impact, cost-effectiveness
and effect on capacity-building.
Secondly, I know that some Council members are
tired of this, but I come back to what I have called the
donor-generated fragmentation of Afghanistan. I
understand the need to build where you fight, but the
balance is wrong and getting worse, despite constant
warnings, agreed commitments and urging by Afghan
authorities. An increasing number of donors are taking
an increasingly province-based perspective of
Afghanistan. A shared nationwide perspective is
required. If the current trends are not corrected, then I
fear turbulence where there is today stability, as well as
an increasing inability to implement national
programmes.
Thirdly, where possible, the international military
should channel development resources through civilian
authorities and institutions — preferably Afghan —
rather than do the development work themselves. I
would recommend that all Provincial Reconstruction
Teams channel, wherever possible, development
resources through often underfunded but successful
mechanisms, such as the National Solidarity
Programme. That would make projects less expensive
and more sustainable, and it would enhance the position
of the Afghan Government in the eyes of its public.
Fourthly, I now believe that the use of an amount
of between $500 million and $1 billion is never
reported to the Afghan Government. Consequently, the
Afghan Government does not know — and we do not
know — how much is being spent across the country
and for what purposes. As a result of the lack of
coordination and transparency, large portions of the
National Development Strategy will go unfunded. The
majority by far of all aid is spent outside the control of
the Government, and any attempt to influence how it is
spent is hampered by an extraordinarily complex
international donor system.
With the assistance of the World Bank, we will
soon set up a new, comprehensive and easily accessible

09-27354

database at the Ministries of the Economy and Finance.
I urge all donors to make full use of it. So many donors
I meet underline the importance of better coordination,
but so few, I must say, show a readiness to modify their
practices. Those practices have brought us into the
state of fragmentation and confusion in which we still
find ourselves.
The United Nations will also set up a new peer
review mechanism, the purpose of which will be to
bring together donors in certain priority areas so as to
ensure that they are not duplicating, but
complementing, each other, and that they have a
strategic perspective in accordance with the plans of
the Afghan Government. This initiative is supported by
the Afghan Government itself and by main donors.
I have mentioned the need to focus more on
capacity- and institution-building, which is one of our
priorities. It is the most important element in building
Afghanistan, and it is the most important element of an
international exit strategy. It has worked well in
building the Afghan army and it is starting to work
well in building the police. Why is that so? It is so
primarily because there are national programmes. It is
not enough to send people. So often we have seen how
a supply-based as opposed to a need-based approach
has failed. Often, I must admit, I have wondered whose
capacity is being built — the capacity of foreign
experts or of the Afghan institutions.
I firmly believe that a massive — I repeat,
massive — capacity- and institution-building programme
is required. It must be at the top of our priorities. This
includes ensuring that, wherever possible, capacitybuilding is an integrated part of every development
project. It includes a more strategic approach to education
and the building of institutions at a national and at a
subnational level. I am talking about the security
institutions, the judicial institutions, ministries and
provincial and district administrations.
But success will depend on the following aspects.
We must formulate a national vision and national
programmes: a fragmented and piecemeal approach
will not work. Programmes should include qualified
people, the technical assets required and financial
resources. Afghan ownership must be ensured. And
capacity-building should, where possible, include both
training and mentorship. Capacity- and institutionbuilding is not the kind of activity that lends itself to
ribbon-cutting events or to photo opportunities. But it

5

S/PV.6094

is the most critical element in enabling the Afghans to
run their own affairs.
Let me illustrate why I insist on more strategic
and long-term thinking. Recently I had a meeting with
the Minister of Education, the Minister of Higher
Education and the Minister of Labour and Social
Affairs. They are all responsible for education of all
sorts, including vocational training. They told me that
very, very soon millions of young girls and boys will
complete their secondary education — millions. That is
good news. But there is very limited capacity to absorb
them into higher education. Only 4 per cent of them
will be able to move on to vocational training. If this is
not soon corrected, Afghanistan will not be able to
make use of its intellectual resources, and the potential
for economic growth will be significantly limited. The
private sector will not have the qualified and educated
people it needs.
The readiness of donors to provide primary
education is very encouraging. One country is building
200 schools in its own province — I say “its own”
because it has a Provincial Reconstruction Team there.
But the neighbouring province lacks anything
resembling this type of generosity. And resources for
higher education and vocational training in the same
provinces are very scarce. So now is a time for strategy
and policy reviews. I therefore welcome those reviews
that are under way and believe that they can
re-energize our common effort in a meaningful way at
a critical moment.
However, I would also emphasize that we have
set priorities — we have agreed on them, in Paris and
elsewhere. The main problem is our limited readiness
to implement our priorities — to implement what we
have agreed on — and to be flexible enough to respond
to changes and to have a strategic, nationwide
perspective in our work.
I have touched upon our human rights mandate in
terms of civilian casualties, as well as the election
process. Allow me only to mention two other areas that
I believe are important and need our full attention: the
rights of women in Afghan society and freedom of
expression.
I have been disturbed by recent reports of
violence against women and brutal rape cases. The
Mission and I are speaking out consistently against
such phenomena, against the marginalization of women
in Afghan society, against the prevailing atmosphere of

6

impunity, and against the lack of access to the court
system and to adequate health facilities. Afghanistan is
today the only country in the world where the average
life expectancy for women is much lower than that for
men.
And we are speaking out to promote the
education of women and their ability to take part in
Afghan society. It is a matter of human rights, but it is
also a matter of making full use of the entire Afghan
population in building the country. Afghanistan cannot
afford to keep 50 per cent of its population
marginalized. There are women in prominent positions
today, but they are few. Many more are needed to serve
as role models for the young female population and to
use their resources for the benefit of their country.
We have also constantly raised the question of
freedom of expression, which is always important, but
even more so when an election campaign is
approaching.
When I last addressed the Security Council, I was
deeply concerned about the humanitarian situation and
the prospects of starvation occurring in large parts of
the country. That danger has not passed. But so far the
winter has not brought the humanitarian crisis that
many of us feared. The prospects for the next harvest
seem to be better than last year. In the middle of April
we will be better able to assess the situation and the
prospects than we are today.
Over the next few months, there will be several
conferences on the regional dimension of our work. I
very much welcome this wider focus. I hope that these
various conferences can be prepared in a way that turns
them into a process rather than a series of separate
events.
The improved relationship between Afghanistan and
Pakistan is encouraging. None of us underestimates the
challenges and the need to support this new relationship,
as illustrated by the appointment of so many special
envoys for Afghanistan and Pakistan.
The potential for regional cooperation is indeed
impressive. It ranges from huge infrastructure projects
that bring the wider region together to small-scale
cooperation in agriculture. The meeting in Paris in
December served to mobilize the attention and interest
of donors. As a follow-up to the Paris meeting, experts
met in Brussels two days ago to identify priority
projects in preparation for the regional economic

09-27354

S/PV.6094

cooperation conference in Islamabad. We are, I believe,
moving from a declaratory phase to an operational
phase. Already, the new electricity supply from
Uzbekistan to Kabul through other cities in
Afghanistan is a visible sign of the value of regional
cooperation.
I am convinced that in economic cooperation as
well as in capacity-building, all neighbouring countries
could and should play a significant role. For instance,
agricultural experts from neighbouring countries know
Afghanistan, know the climate, know the language and
in addition to that are less expensive than experts from
Western countries or elsewhere. They represent a
significant untapped resource that should be mobilized.
I have always insisted that military means alone
cannot bring an end to the conflict. A political process
will ultimately be needed. However, we should not
believe that such a process of reconciliation can be a
shortcut to peace or a replacement for other efforts to
build Afghanistan. Reconciliation is not a substitute,
but an indispensable final component.
Furthermore, a peace process will never succeed
if the Government and the international community do
not have confidence in themselves. We must address
reconciliation in a way that projects strength and
conviction and not weakness and doubt. If we do not
have confidence in ourselves then the Afghan people
will not have confidence in us and in their own future.
That would damage any reconciliation process.
I am coming to the end of my speech. In a few
days time, all of us and many more will meet in The
Hague. It will not be a donor conference. It will be a
political manifestation of support and commitment. My
hope is that the conference will provide new energy
and shared readiness not to re-examine all our agreed
priorities, but to demonstrate readiness to implement
them and to use our resources in a flexible and
coordinated way. For me, the Hague Conference is a
test of political will. It is an occasion to push aside the
doom-and-gloom atmosphere, roll up our sleeves and
support the positive trends that we now see emerging
in Afghanistan.
And let us all avoid the impression that we are
discussing what to do about Afghanistan. We must
discuss what we can do together with the Afghans. If
they feel that a debate is going on somewhere out there
about them — and not with them — then we will
deeply offend their sense of dignity and ownership.

09-27354

That sense of ownership is critical to the strength of
the Government in the eyes of its public, to its
confidence in itself and, ultimately, to our success in
defeating the insurgency.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Eide for his briefing and for the comprehensive
report.
I will now give the floor to Council members.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I wish to thank Mr. Kai
Eide, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan and head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his
comprehensive, down-to-earth and compelling briefing
on the situation in Afghanistan.
It will be recalled that during his last briefing to
Council, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral outlined key benchmarks which he hoped
UNAMA would meet in six months. These included
specific criteria to measure aid effectiveness,
strengthening the Government’s mechanisms for
combating corruption, determining the kind of police
force required, designing an agricultural reform
programme and improving the Pakistan-Afghanistan
relationship.
We would like to commend UNAMA for its
important role in promoting peace and stability in
Afghanistan. UNAMA has spearheaded the efforts of
the international community, in conjunction with the
Government of Afghanistan, in rebuilding the country
and strengthening the foundations of peace and
constitutional democracy. We know it is not an easy
task that UNAMA has, but the Special Representative
and his staff should be commended for pressing on
with the implementation of UNAMA’s mandate.
We have noted in the report before us
(S/2009/135) the serious challenges in Afghanistan, but
there has also been some progress. We commend the
Government and people of Afghanistan and the
international community for their tireless efforts.
We welcome the upcoming elections that have
shaped and dominated the political landscape in the
country. We note the decision of the Independent
Electoral Commission to extend presidential elections
to 20 August 2009, and we note that this may continue
to elicit mixed reactions. Uganda encourages a smooth
and transparent electoral process, which we believe is a
cornerstone of long-term stability. As the country

7

S/PV.6094

prepares for the August presidential and parliamentary
elections, every effort must be made to ensure that
calm
and
stability
prevail
in Afghanistan.
Reconciliation among Afghans of all shades of opinion
should be seen to be an important component of an
inclusive political process beyond elections.
We are concerned by the serious security
situation in Afghanistan today. The security situation
has continued to deteriorate, with the civilian
population bearing the brunt of the causalities. Security
remains key to progress in all areas of Afghanistan. We
welcome the integrated approach that is being put in
place by the international community and the
Government of Afghanistan to ensure a more coherent
and effective use of civilian and military resources.
More efforts have to be made to protect the civilian
population from attacks.
We also believe that, at the regional level, the
Government of Afghanistan, with the support of the
international community, should find a way to involve
regional stakeholders in a comprehensive regional
security strategy. We therefore welcome the joint
declaration on bilateral cooperation, signed in January
with Pakistan, as a significant step forward.
It is necessary for the rule of law to be
sufficiently institutionalized in order to ensure longterm peace and stability in Afghanistan. We urge the
Government to effectively address those issues which
are undermining the legitimacy of Afghan law
enforcement and judicial institutions, but which also
erode people’s confidence in Government and public
institutions. The Government will require increased
support from the international community in
institution-building, rather than pushing quick fixes.
We welcome the report that the drug eradication
campaign, conducted by the Government with support
from the international community, has yielded some
positive results. However, with poverty still
overwhelming, any long-term solution would, among
other things, have to address alternative sources of
income for those who, driven by poverty, indulge in the
drug trade.
The briefing has shown that Afghanistan still
faces social and economic challenges that require a
holistic approach. Durable peace and stability in
Afghanistan will be achieved faster after tangible
results have been achieved in governance, rule of law,
respect for human rights and economic recovery and

8

development. It is therefore important that resources
are used in a coordinated and comprehensive way to
empower Afghans to bear responsibility for their
future.
Uganda urges the international community to
fully align their efforts behind the financing and
implementation of the agreed development strategies
by delivering assistance in a coordinated way and
increasingly through the national budget. We call on
the Government of Afghanistan to play its role and
make progress in strengthening institutions and
introducing accountability mechanisms to provide the
international community with the confidence to
commit more assistance to the ongoing effort.
If our joint endeavours in Afghanistan are to
succeed, it is imperative that UNAMA has the
necessary resources to fulfil its mandate. We therefore
urge the international community, and the United
Nations Member States in particular, to support
UNAMA in its efforts to rebuild Afghanistan. In this
regard, we fully support the renewal of UNAMA’s
mandate.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Kai Eide for his work
and for the frank and exhaustive analysis of the
situation in Afghanistan and for his presentation of the
Secretary-General’s regular report.
We are seriously concerned that, despite the
efforts of the Afghan authorities and the international
military presence, the security situation in the country
continues to deteriorate. The terrorist activities of the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremists, whose
activities undermine the foundations of Afghan State
structures and statehood and hamper the process of
stabilization and recovery, are steadily increasing. A
special concern arises from the fact that terrorists
practically control a whole set of regions of
Afghanistan, on whose territory they are setting up
parallel organs of power. Today, as never before, it is
important that Afghan power structures and the
international military presence jointly reverse the
negative security situation.
Russia backs the activities of the International
Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan, implemented
on the basis of the mandate entrusted to it by the
Security Council. Our practical contribution to these
efforts is the implementation of agreements with
NATO regarding transit through Russian territory of

09-27354

S/PV.6094

non-military supplies for foreign military contingents
in Afghanistan. In the last few days, along the North
Route, the first shipment of our supplies was delivered
in Kabul.
In the context of armed conflict with the Taliban,
there is serious concern at the continuing instances of
deaths among the peaceful population as a result of the
operations of the foreign military presence. We view
the agreement between NATO and Afghanistan’s
Ministry of Defence on coordinating counter-terrorist
activities as an important step in preventing new
indiscriminate strikes.
We share the assessment of the Secretary-General
in his report that this year will be decisive for
Afghanistan as a result of the presidential and
provincial elections planned for August. The upcoming
ballot is especially important to make the democratic
changes and the development of State institutions
sustainable. We hope that the United Nations Mission
will, as in previous years, fully support the election
process.
The successful conduct of elections will
undoubtedly create additional opportunities for
promoting national reconciliation in Afghanistan. We
remain convinced that this process, including taking
into account the momentum of the military-political
situation in the country, must be implemented in strict
compliance with Security Council resolution 1267
(1999), which concerns the anti-Taliban sanctions
regime. Any attempts to flirt with extremists involved
in war crimes and gradually place them in power are
fraught with further destabilization.
Despite recent positive successes in countering
the Afghan drugs threat, the joint counter-narcotics
efforts must be further increased. That is especially
pressing, as drugs trafficking remains one of the main
sources of financing for terrorists.
Our country is actively backing the fight against
the Afghan drugs threat implemented at various levels.
At the beginning of this week, during the visit to Kabul
of Russia’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, Sergey
Lavrov, we signed a Russian-Afghan intergovernmental
agreement on cooperation in the fight against the illicit
trafficking in narcotic substances. We are convinced that
the implementation of that agreement will enable us to
step up joint efforts between Russia and Afghanistan to
counter drug-related crime.

09-27354

We believe that in the fight against terrorism,
drug trafficking and organized crime there is a need to
fully utilize regional organizations, which have shown
their effectiveness in the work in this field. These
include, for example, the Collective Security Treaty
Organization
and
the
Shanghai
Cooperation
Organization. Strengthening the counter-narcotics and
anti-terrorist security around the Afghan State will
enable us not only to significantly weaken the
financing of extremists but also to achieve rapid
stabilization in Afghanistan and in the region as a
whole.
We expect that a significant political impulse to
deal with the aforementioned tasks will be provided by
the convening in Moscow on 27 March of a special
conference on Afghanistan under the aegis of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization. We are grateful to
the United Nations Secretary-General for his readiness
to participate in that meeting.
We back the proposal of the Secretary-General to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan for another 12 months. It is
important that the United Nations continue to play a
central role in coordinating international efforts for a
post-conflict settlement in and the socio-economic
recovery of Afghanistan.
Russia is interested in turning Afghanistan into a
democratic, stable and flourishing State. We have
promoted that objective with practical actions. With the
assistance of our country, over 140 facilities in the
fields of industry, infrastructure, transport and
communications have been set up. In other fields,
including the training of professional staff, joint
projects are being undertaken today. Russia provides
the friendly Afghan people with humanitarian
assistance, and we will continue that assistance.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I wish first to thank Special
Representative Kai Eide for his very interesting
briefing this afternoon. A year ago in this Chamber, the
Council discussed the need for strong leadership for
the United Nations Mission in Afghanistan and
welcomed Mr. Eide’s appointment. The Council then
identified the priorities for the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
gave it a stronger role in coordinating the international
efforts in the country. We highly appreciate the efforts
of Mr. Eide and the dedicated staff of UNAMA, and
wish to assure them of our strong support.

9

S/PV.6094

When we look at the situation in Afghanistan, we
tend to see the glass as half empty. We should
recognize, however, that steady progress has been
made in the face of daunting challenges. To name but a
few positive steps during the reporting period, we have
seen improvements in civil-military coordination, a
continued decrease in poppy production, and renewed
momentum in the reform of the police and the Ministry
of Interior. Mr. Eide referred to many other positive
developments.

and democracy in Afghanistan. We are pleased that the
registration process was conducted smoothly, and we
pay tribute to the efforts and decisions of the
authorities and people of the country. We must ensure
that the entire electoral process is fair, smooth and
credible, with the widest possible popular participation
and observed by international monitors. We respect the
prudent choice of the Afghan people and are confident
that the Special Representative will make himself
available to provide necessary advice and support.

Acknowledging such progress by no means
suggests that we can afford to slacken our pace; rather,
we must redouble our efforts in order to focus on the
serious challenges, in particular improving the security
situation and strengthening the national security
capacity. In addressing those challenges, the
international community and the Afghan Government
must coordinate closely with one another, with a strong
emphasis on ownership by the Government and people
of Afghanistan.

In discussing the strategy, the regional dimension
is an important factor. Afghanistan’s stability and
prosperity hinge upon the stability of its neighbours,
such as Pakistan and Central Asian countries. Japan is
pleased to host a meeting of the friends of democratic
Pakistan group and the Pakistan donors conference in
Tokyo in mid-April. The international community
should spare no effort in supporting the region as a
whole, politically as well as financially.

For the past few months, many Governments
have been reviewing strategies to explore how we can
best assist Afghanistan. Many of them, including
Japan, have appointed special representatives for
assistance to Afghanistan and Pakistan to coordinate
and discuss the way forward with other partners from
the perspective of the regional approach and to address
Afghanistan and the neighbouring area as a whole in a
comprehensive context. Those moves are welcome, as
they reflect the continuing and ever-growing
commitment of the international community to the
stability of Afghanistan.
In this context, we welcome the forthcoming
international conference on Afghanistan on 31 March,
to be hosted by the United Nations, opened by the
Secretary-General and chaired by the Special
Representative, together with the Governments of
Afghanistan and the Netherlands. We hope that the
conference will provide an opportunity for countries
concerned to share their strategies and agree on the
future course of common action. I am certain that, at
the conference, the essential role of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in coordinating
the efforts of international actors on the ground will be
stressed in order to formulate common strategy.
The most important political event of the year is
the presidential election. It is crucial that the upcoming
elections be successful in order to consolidate peace

10

As we enter a critical phase for the future of
Afghanistan, Japan is committed to remaining a
staunch supporter of the country’s endeavours. To
steadily implement the pledge of $2 billion we made in
Paris and to meet the urgent needs of Afghanistan, we
will disburse $300 million by the end of this month,
including in support of the presidential election and
assistance equivalent to six months’ salary for all
80,000 Afghan police officers to meet the pressing
need for police reform.
I agree with the Special Representative that
stability cannot take root without economic
development and capacity-building. To that end, Japan
has assisted in the construction of infrastructure,
including more than 650 kilometres of roads and the
recently opened terminal building of Kabul
International Airport. Japan places priority on
agriculture and rural development. We have also
prioritized education, as noted by the Special
Representative, and the results of our support include
the construction or restoration of 500 schools and the
training of 10,000 teachers. I can assure the Council
that our assistance is not limited to certain areas. We
intend to expand our assistance in these fields.
Before concluding, let me reiterate the important
role of the United Nations in Afghanistan. With
international attention focused closely on the country,
expectations for the role of the United Nations are
higher than ever. A few months ago, Member States

09-27354

S/PV.6094

gave UNAMA increased resources to implement its
strengthened role. We look forward to tangible
progress in the country, facilitated through
coordination by the United Nations Mission and the
strong leadership of the Special Representative.
Japan, as the lead country on Afghanistan in the
Council, is pleased to submit a draft resolution
extending the mandate of UNAMA for a further
12 months. It is our sincere hope that the Council will
reaffirm its unwavering support for the United Nations
Mission by adopting the draft resolution unanimously
in the next few days.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I, too, wish to
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Kai Eide, for his briefing to the Council
today. We greatly appreciate his personal commitment,
which he has shown again today, and the leadership
that he provides at the head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would
also like to welcome the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, to this table.
We align ourselves with the statement that will be
made later in this debate by the Permanent
Representative of the Czech Republic on behalf of the
European Union. Let me also say that we support the
recommendation to extend UNAMA’s mandate for a
further 12 months with a view to fully implementing its
mandate in all its aspects.
For Afghanistan, the elections to be held in
August are a very important — indeed, essential —
step in the democratic process of State-building. For
the first time, Afghan authorities have the primary
responsibility for organizing the elections. We
welcome the successful completion of the voter
registration process; it will be of critical importance to
ensuring a fair, transparent and credible election
process, and UNAMA’s assistance will play a very
important role in that.
The ongoing reform efforts in the area of
governance are also very relevant, and we are grateful
to the Special Representative for drawing our attention
to some of these very positive developments today. The
reform of the Ministry of Interior and of the
Afghanistan National Police could have a positive
effect on a number of serious challenges to security on
the ground, including the creation of a positive security
environment for the elections, respect for the rule of
law, the fight against corruption, and counter-narcotics

09-27354

efforts. Austria is currently examining the possibility of
contributing to the police cooperation and demining
activities of the United Nations.
Another important development mentioned in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/135) and by
the Special Representative is the decrease in poppy
cultivation. We wish to commend the Afghan
authorities and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) for that achievement, which needs to
be further consolidated. We also welcome the
intensification of the activities of the International
Security Assistance Force in the fight against the
illegal processing and trafficking of drugs. Opium
production in Afghanistan remains a challenge, and it
is clear that is linked to the security situation and to the
corruption phenomenon. It is of particular importance
to ensure the sustainability of alternative livelihoods.
Furthermore, the regional dimension of drug
production and trade needs to be tackled. This is being
addressed, inter alia, under UNODC’s “rainbow
strategy” — a programme that my Government supports.
Regional cooperation is crucial to the
stabilization of Afghanistan. All of Afghanistan’s
neighbours need to be included in this process. We
welcome the new positive trend in economic and
political cooperation, in particular the renewed
relationship between Afghanistan and Pakistan, and
encourage UNAMA to provide further support to
regional cooperation, in accordance with its mandate.
We share the concerns expressed about the
deteriorating security situation in Afghanistan and the
intensification of the conflict, in some areas at least.
The impact of the conflict on civilians is of particular
concern. Anti-Government elements pose the greatest
threat to the civilian population in Afghanistan. The
situation of civilians is made worse by attacks on nongovernmental organizations and humanitarian workers.
We are also extremely worried about recent attacks on
schools. The prevention of attacks on children — in
particular, putting an end to the targeting of girls —
has to be a top priority. The ongoing recruitment of
children by the Taliban and the use of children as
suicide bombers are also of great concern and need to
be stopped.
We welcome the serious efforts undertaken by
pro-Government forces during past months to reduce
the impact of their operations on civilians and the
enhanced cooperation with the Afghan Government in

11

S/PV.6094

that regard. We hope that these efforts will be effective
in reducing civilian casualties. Further efforts to
minimize civilian casualties would be of critical
relevance.
We value the work of the human rights unit of
UNAMA and believe that the Mission’s mandate to
monitor the situation of civilians, to coordinate efforts
to ensure their protection and to assist in the full
implementation of human rights is an important aspect
of UNAMA’s work. Equally important is the
strengthening of national institutions, in particular the
judiciary, and full support for the work of the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission. Special
attention has to be given to the issue of human rights in
the administration of justice, including the
improvement of conditions in detention.
In recent months, as has been mentioned today,
there has been an increase in violence against women,
including against women working for the police,
provincial councils and local government. This trend is
clearly worrying in the light of the forthcoming
elections. We are convinced that women’s rights have
to be a priority in Afghanistan, and thus also in the
protection mandate of UNAMA.
In conclusion, let me assure the Council of
Austria’s full support for the commitments made in
Paris in June 2008. We need to work together to enable
UNAMA to perform its critical task of coordinating
international civilian activities in Afghanistan in an
effective manner. I must say that what the Special
Representative had to say on that subject today was
particularly impressive; it is clear that coordination is
particularly important. At a time when overall financial
developments make international contributions even
more difficult, coordination becomes ever more
important.
We also need to enhance Afghan ownership by
way of capacity-building and by complementing the
efforts of the people of Afghanistan themselves,
because one thing is certainly clear: whatever the
international community undertakes has to be done in
very close cooperation with — and for — Afghanistan
and the people of Afghanistan.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): I would first like to thank
Special Representative Kai Eide for his interesting and
comprehensive briefing. I also welcome our colleague
Ambassador Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan.

12

We very much appreciate the leading role of the
United Nations in coordinating the efforts of the
international community to assist Afghanistan. We
express our full support for the endeavours of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in that direction.
Afghanistan today is still passing through a
critical period. This period brings to the fore both
challenges and opportunities, which are in fact well
defined in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/135).
We fully agree with his observations and
recommendations.
Actually, there is not much divergence within the
international community as to what needs to be done in
Afghanistan to achieve our common objectives. But we
are still not where we want to be. For that, resolute and
concerted efforts are needed at the local, regional and
international levels. Given the critical period ahead of
us and the broad consensus on the way forward, it is
now high time to step up to the occasion and deliver
the expectations of Afghanistan.
While doing so, we should always bear in mind
that any further deterioration in that country would
have broad adverse effects reaching beyond
Afghanistan. Therefore, we must not be dismayed by
occasional setbacks and must always keep a clear
perspective as to what we can and should achieve
collectively. We must do so in a way that will further
strengthen the hopes and expectations of the Afghan
people. After all, we should not forget that, unless we
win the hearts and minds of the Afghan people, peace
and stabilization will always be a distant objective.
In that regard, there is certainly a need for a
comprehensive approach to be put in place,
encompassing security, governance, the rule of law,
human rights and social and economic development.
All these aspects are interlinked and, hence, the
following four areas of priority deserve equal and
special
attention:
comprehensive
economic
development with a visible impact on the living
conditions of the people; a strong Afghan military and
police to take the lead and assert ownership of the
nation’s security; inclusive national reconciliation that
will consolidate peace and stability in the country; and
a modern education and justice system to effectively
combat extremism of all sorts.
Furthermore, in the immediate future, the
presidential elections to be held in August will also be

09-27354

S/PV.6094

of critical importance. Those elections should help the
democratic process in the country rather than creating
new fault lines. For that, the elections should be well
prepared and should be carried out in a free and fair
manner. Needless to say, the United Nations has an
important role to play in this regard, and we support
UNAMA’s efforts to that end.
Likewise, regional cooperation is also a must to
accomplish our goals in Afghanistan. In the light of
recent promising developments in this context,
especially with respect to Afghanistan-Pakistan
relations, the international community should
encourage and help regional cooperation and the joint
endeavours of those countries.
As a country which has special ties with the
region, Turkey has contributed and will be contributing
to the improvement of the situation in Afghanistan in
every way it can. Apart from our continued support for
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and
the sizeable reconstruction assistance provided through
our Provincial Reconstruction Team in Wardak, a
multifaceted, extensive assistance programme is under
way. In this context, in 2008, we doubled our pledge of
development assistance to Afghanistan to $200 million.
Hence, we will focus on more visible projects of direct
impact, such as establishing a new university, building
a modern training and research hospital and paving
roads of Kabul.
We decided to contribute €1.5 million to the
Afghan National Army trust fund. Our existing training
programmes, both in Turkey and in Wardak, designed
to support the Afghan National Police will continue.
We will also contribute a total of $5 million for the
elections in Afghanistan.
Furthermore, as part of our efforts to enhance
regional cooperation, the Turkey-Pakistan-Afghanistan
trilateral process is geared towards helping develop
closer relations and mutually beneficial cooperation
among those countries. In April 2007, Turkey hosted
the first trilateral summit with the participation of the
Presidents of Afghanistan and Pakistan, which
culminated in Ankara Declaration. A joint working
group was established at the Ankara summit to work on
various cooperation projects. The second trilateral
summit was held in Istanbul on 5 December 2008. The
process has already come a long way and we are
committed to take it further. In this framework, we
intend to host a third summit.

09-27354

In conclusion, I would like to underline once
again that failure in Afghanistan is unthinkable. We
must succeed, and we are confident that we will.
Indeed, the sense of purpose and dedication around this
table and within the international community at large
gives us every reason to be optimistic. We also believe
that the high-level meetings to be held in Moscow and
in The Hague later this month will provide us with
excellent opportunities to demonstrate our collective
will and commitment once again.
Turkey is more than ready and willing to join in
this endeavour and to do its fair share. In other words,
we will not stop assisting the brotherly Afghan people
in their struggle to carry their country forward. After so
many decades of conflict, they deserve to live in
democracy, peace, prosperity and stability. We have
full confidence in the determination, resilience and
wisdom of the Afghan people in their struggle to
achieve that goal.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
wish to join previous speakers in thanking Mr. Kai
Eide, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan and head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his
briefing. I would also like to welcome the presence of
our colleague, the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, at this meeting.
The reports are clear. The situation in
Afghanistan is still of great concern both at the security
and political levels and in the economic field. Despite
the unprecedented mobilization of the international
community in support of the efforts of the Afghan
Government, peace and stability remain elusive. The
Security Council was able to become fully aware of
that during the important mission that it conducted
there in November 2008. The boldness and brazenness
of the insurgents and the resurgence of suicide attacks
are challenges that need to be met, particularly at a
time when the country is preparing to undertake
presidential and provincial elections. As the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2009/135) notes, the number
of incidents compared with the previous year increased
by 42 per cent in December 2008 and by 75 per cent in
January 2009, which is a negative trend, not to say the
opposite of what is sought by the efforts of the
international community to restore peace and stability
in Afghanistan.

13

S/PV.6094

The question is how credible, uncontestable
elections can be organized when insecurity and fear
risk excluding from the process a significant part of the
population as no census has been held. The Afghan
political class should, therefore, act as quickly as
possible to organize and above all achieve national
reconciliation, including by strengthening political
dialogue. For its part, the Afghan Government has
already committed itself to that approach by
establishing a dialogue with those moderate insurgents
who are ready to respect the Afghan constitution,
renounce violence and accept the rules of democracy.
We highly welcome those noble efforts. We
should encourage the Government in its struggle
against corruption, the real cancer at the heart of the
political and economic governance system, which will
hinder any recovery effort until it is removed. We must
also congratulate the Government on its decision to
organize elections on 20 August, although such a
decision was not easy given the high stakes. In that
regard, we welcome the technical assistance of the
United Nations and of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the
strengthening of international troop levels to boost the
capacity of the Afghan forces to secure the electoral
process and make possible a dialogue with the
opposition in a climate of trust.
The economic situation in Afghanistan equally
deserves special attention. We advocate maintaining a
cohesive approach in implementing the Afghanistan
National Development Strategy. While still modest, the
progress recorded in reducing poppy cultivation — a
key element of the Strategy — and the prospects for
the agricultural sector are encouraging. We call on
donors, as well as international partners, to mobilize
additional funds to help meet the challenges in priority
sectors such as agriculture, energy and infrastructure.
However, appropriate steps must be taken to ensure
that that assistance benefits the development and the
well-being of the people of Afghanistan.
The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan is still
an issue of concern. We welcome the measures already
undertaken to tackle it, including the establishment of a
new United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in Afghanistan, supported by a
humanitarian action plan that will soon be operational.
Likewise, we once again urge the international
community to step up its mobilization to help the

14

Afghan people overcome the food crisis and to
alleviate their suffering.
The other major concern remains the continuing
human rights violations, in particular extrajudicial
executions and sexual violence and discrimination
against women and girls, whose status remains
vulnerable. We call for more rigorous implementation
of the Action Plan for Peace, Reconciliation and
Justice.
Lastly, it is worth noting the significant asset that
international and regional cooperation represent for
Afghanistan. That is demonstrated by the agreement
with Uzbekistan on the provision of electricity and by
the forthcoming Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference, to be held in Islamabad in April, which
will consider Afghanistan’s various priority projects. In
terms of political cooperation, we welcome the new
vision adopted with Pakistan to fight against extremism
and terrorism, and we note the need to establish a
dialogue with opposition groups.
Regarding UNAMA, we reiterate its crucial role,
which must be to restore peace and stability in
Afghanistan. That is why, for it to carry out its mission
successfully, we are in favour of extending its mandate,
as recommended by the Secretary-General.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our belief in the
primary role that the United Nations must play in
restoring peace in Afghanistan and in ensuring its
economic recovery and national reconstruction.
Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I join other
Council members in thanking the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2009/135) and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kai Eide, for his
important updated briefing on the situation in
Afghanistan. I also welcome Ambassador Tanin to the
Council.
More than seven years since the overthrow of the
Taliban regime, a new Afghanistan has emerged.
Thanks to the convergence of the committed, generous
efforts from the international community and the
resilience of the Afghan people, certain progress has
been made in a number of areas, promising possible
subsequent positive results in coordinating security
activities, tightening poppy production control,
increasing agricultural output, implementing the Mine
Action Programme and cooperating with the outside
world, first of all with neighbouring countries.

09-27354

S/PV.6094

However, we remain deeply concerned about the
continued deterioration of peace and security and the
acutely difficulties faced by the population of
Afghanistan, as most notably reflected by the fact that
2008 was the most violent year since 2001, with more
casualties and suffering inflicted upon the Afghan
people, especially women and children. That is in
addition to the many other challenges described in the
Secretary-General’s report.
We therefore share the view that there can be no
purely military solution to these challenges. Instead, an
integrated approach and a comprehensive vision are
required, involving several key factors. In that
connection, we share many points raised by the
Secretary-General in his report and by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in his briefing,
and we wish to emphasize that, in social and economic
terms, it is essential to ensure the effective
implementation, under the ownership of the Afghan
people, of the Afghanistan Compact, the National Drug
Control Strategy and, especially, the Afghanistan
National Development Strategy, which identifies
agriculture, energy and infrastructure as priority areas.
Moreover, improving social welfare, including health
care and education services, should continue to be
among the main priorities of the Government of
Afghanistan. In that process, it is important that the
Afghan authorities and people are provided with the
necessary assistance to enhance their capacity and
proactive participation both in decision-making and in
implementing projects and programmes thereby
helping increase aid effectiveness.
In the political field, reconciliation, while not an
end in itself, needs to be part of an inclusive political
process in Afghanistan. We call on the leaders of
Afghanistan to place peace and the political stability of
their country at the centre of all calculations, overcome
divisions, renounce violence and advance dialogue and
cooperation in the common interests of the country.
As this year is a critical test for Afghanistan,
especially with the presidential elections scheduled for
August, we welcome all efforts by the international
community to further support the country. We
commend the upcoming special conferences on
Afghanistan to be convened in Moscow and The
Hague. We take special note of the recently
strengthened regional cooperation in support of
Afghanistan’s economic, political and security
improvement — especially the resumption of such

09-27354

regional initiatives as the Peace Jirga process — for we
are convinced that the challenges in Afghanistan,
interrelated and interconnected in nature as they are,
demand a greater role and contribution on the part of
regional partners in the quest for a comprehensive and
sustainable solution.
We reaffirm our support for the leading role of
the United Nations in coordinating international
civilian activities in Afghanistan. After their timely
allocation of additional financial, human and security
resources to UNAMA for 2009, the General Assembly
and its member States are looking to the Mission to
make further progress on the ground. We support
UNAMA in providing technical assistance, at the
request of the Afghan authorities, for the pivotal
upcoming elections and for continuing its coordination
with other international donors, agencies and
organizations to make the most of the available
resources. At the same time, UNAMA should continue
to intensify its cooperation with the Government of
Afghanistan, as well as with relevant organizations and
stakeholders, to fulfil its mandate.
So that UNAMA can carry out its duties in the
current situation, we endorse the extension of its
present mandate for another 12 months. We also
welcome all measures and steps being taken to avoid
casualties among civilians, who are the ultimate
beneficiaries of the peace process.
It is high time for the Afghan people to bear
responsibility for their own future. We expect that, with
renewed regional and international support, the coming
presidential elections will be conducted in a free, fair
and secure environment, thus paving the way for the
restoration of peace and security, which the country so
deserves. We sincerely wish the people and the
Government of Afghanistan every success in that
process, to which Viet Nam, for its part, stands ready to
contribute positively and constructively.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank Special
Representative Eide for his briefing.
Today, after more than seven years of war,
Afghanistan finds itself at a new crossroads. The
developments in that country have attracted the world’s
attention. On the one hand, the security situation
continues its downward slide, causing heavy civilian
casualties and exacerbating the humanitarian crisis. On
the other hand, the international community, including

15

S/PV.6094

the United Nations, has increased its attention and
input with regard to Afghanistan.
At the Paris Conference last June, the
international community reaffirmed its support for the
national reconstruction of Afghanistan and for the core
coordinating role of the United Nations in assisting the
country. Despite the current and future difficulties
facing Afghanistan, we have no reason to lose
confidence. This year’s election will be a major event
in the political life of the country. Afghanistan’s
Independent
Electoral
Commission
recently
reconfirmed the date of 20 August for the presidential
election. We believe that the Afghan people will be
able to use their wisdom to appropriately address
election-related issues and, through the election,
increase social cohesion and improve the effectiveness
of the Government’s functioning.
It is particularly important to ensure a secure
environment for the election. We hope that the increase
in the numbers of troops from the countries concerned
will help to ease the security situation in Afghanistan.
We also hope that, with the assistance of the
international community, the Government, the Afghan
security forces and the Afghanistan National Police
will continue to build their capacities so that they can
soon take up the heavy responsibility of maintaining
national security and social stability.
Experience has shown that military means alone
cannot reverse the situation in Afghanistan. In the long
run, it is essential to encourage various ethnic groups
and factions to achieve reconciliation through dialogue.
At the same time, in carrying out military action, the
parties concerned should take care to reduce civilian
casualties.
With a view to responding effectively to security
concerns, Special Representative Eide and the Afghan
Government have proposed to take an integrated
approach and undertake different targeted measures in
different areas of Afghanistan. In the northern and
western parts of the country, where the situation is
relatively stable, the focus will be on developing the
economy, whereas in the south and east the focus will
be on strengthening security.
In our view, promoting economic development in
the southern and eastern parts of Afghanistan is just as
important as stabilizing the security situation,
especially since those are the areas in which poppy
cultivation is most concentrated. It is only by

16

vigorously developing alternative-crop cultivation and
promoting economic growth that poppy cultivation can
be further reduced, thus diminishing the root causes of
social instability in the country. We call on the
international community to further increase its support
for Afghanistan’s agricultural production.
At the initiative of a number of countries, an
international conference on the question of Afghanistan
will be held in The Hague on 31 March to discuss the
direction of the country’s future development. We wish
the conference success and hope that the parties
concerned will reach agreement on such issues as
stabilizing the security situation and promoting
economic development and will point out a clear
direction for the next phase of work in assisting
Afghanistan. We have also noted that the countries
members of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
will be holding a meeting in Moscow, and we wish that
meeting success also.
We support the continued leading role of the
United Nations in coordinating the international
community’s assistance to Afghanistan, and we support
the extension of UNAMA’s current mandate for
another year. We are willing to continue to provide
help to Afghanistan to the best of our abilities.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to join others in welcoming Special Representative
Eide to the Council today and to thank him for his
briefing. My Government would like to express its
deep gratitude to him for his efforts to help stabilize
Afghanistan. His leadership and commitment remain
critical to the implementation of the expanded mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). We congratulate him and the
staff of UNAMA and offer them our full support.
I would also like to welcome Ambassador Tanin
today. I would like to assure him of the commitment of
the United States to a stable and secure Afghanistan
and of our continued cooperation.
The United Nations, NATO and other
contributors all have important roles to play in making
Afghanistan more secure, helping to build the
capacities of its Government, strengthening its justice
system and expanding the reach of economic
opportunity. My Government strongly supports
UNAMA’s leadership in coordinating international aid
efforts and improving cooperation between civilian and
military operations.

09-27354

S/PV.6094

We also welcome the decision of the General
Assembly to provide the crucial resources UNAMA
needs to fulfil its mandate. Approving UNAMA’s 2009
budget of $168 million and giving it the authority to
hire 437 new staff members and expand to four new
offices this year were important steps. But we have to
do more together.
My Government urges the United Nations to
speed up the process of funding to UNAMA and we
encourage Member States to provide highly qualified
staff to help fill these new staff positions. UNAMA’s
role is critical, and, of course, we strongly support the
renewal of its mandate.
I would like to touch on several of the issues
raised in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/135).
The United States agrees with the conclusion that the
problem of the Taliban’s resurgence and the spread of
extremism in the region cannot be solved by military
means alone. Civilian assistance is critical to success in
Afghanistan. We are therefore encouraged by the
formation of the integrated approach working group,
and we look forward to hearing about its progress in
delivering aid and completing needs assessments.
The United States sees the upcoming elections as
the key strategic event in Afghanistan this year. We
support an open, fair election in which the Afghan
people can choose their own leaders, free from
intimidation. We appreciate the efforts made by the
Independent Election Commission of Afghanistan, the
United Nations, international donors and security
forces and Afghan security services to confront the
difficult challenges in preparing for the upcoming
voting. The United States supports the Commission’s
decision to hold the elections on 20 August in order to
maximize the fairness, transparency and universality of
the voting. We call upon Afghanistan’s leaders to find a
solution within their constitutional framework that will
ensure the continuity, legitimacy and stability of their
Government throughout the election process.
We must also move urgently to ensure that the
elections are properly funded. The Commission has
presented a budget of $224 million to give the voting
process the resources it will require. We urge donors to
follow through on their pledges as soon as possible.
There will be no sustained progress in
Afghanistan no matter how many troops are deployed
or how much money is spent if we do not make
substantial progress on increasing the country’s

09-27354

capacity for good governance. First and foremost, such
actions must come from the Government and the
people of Afghanistan. But we will continue to work
together with them to provide ongoing support here.
Corruption remains one of the primary concerns
of the Afghan people. It undermines efforts to help
build an impartial, fair Government that delivers
services to all citizens equally, without regard for their
wealth or connections. We need to see progress from
the Afghan Government in fighting corruption,
expanding the reach of the central Government,
strengthening local governments and creating
economic opportunity.
We also share the concerns raised in the report
about the deteriorating human rights situation in
Afghanistan. We are particularly concerned by the harm
that discriminatory laws and practices are causing to
women and children. While we are encouraged by the
steps that the Afghan Government has taken to
implement the National Action Plan for the Women of
Afghanistan, we are in full agreement that much more
needs to be done. The United States has trained more
than 3,000 Afghan women as teachers over the past
year, and we continue to support higher education for
women through our programmes at the University of
Kabul. We are also helping to train more than 22,000
women to help carry out the upcoming elections. We
welcome the views of the Special Representative about
how UNAMA and the international community might
cooperate better with the Afghan Government to meet
the needs of women and girls for education, health care,
economic opportunity, justice and a chance to lead.
We are encouraged by the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime forecast of a possible further
decrease in opium cultivation in 2009, as steep a drop
as 30 per cent, according to these United Nations
estimates. But the drug threat in Afghanistan remains
unacceptably high. It will require a long-term
commitment by both the Government of Afghanistan
and the international community for us to meet this
challenge. We are particularly concerned by the
deteriorating security conditions in the south, where
the insurgency now dominates and where 98 per cent
of Afghanistan’s poppies are now grown.
I must address the issue of civilian casualties.
The United States, our NATO allies and our coalition
partners deeply regret any loss of civilian life.
International forces in Afghanistan take extraordinary

17

S/PV.6094

measures to avoid civilian casualties, in sharp contrast
to the Taliban, who deliberately attack and endanger
civilians. The International Security Assistance Force
issued a directive last December specifically aimed at
reducing the number of civilian casualties resulting
from its operations. I want to stress that our goal is to
avoid casualties. When events that may involve
civilians occur, joint Afghan and international teams
move quickly to investigate and, where appropriate,
compensate victims.
Finally, we appreciate the role of the United
Nations in co-chairing the forthcoming 31 March
International Conference on Afghanistan, along with
the Governments of Afghanistan and the Netherlands.
We look forward to reaffirming the broad international
consensus on supporting Afghanistan, as embodied in
the Afghanistan Compact of 2006, and we particularly
look forward to a productive dialogue on ways to
provide aid more effectively, to help meet the Afghan
Government’s priorities. These are improved security,
better governance and more robust economic growth.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to extend France’s condolences to
the families of the victims of the attack that today
killed the Afghan member of parliament Dad
Mohammad Khan and four other individuals. France
firmly condemns this assassination.
The Permanent Representative of the Czech
Republic will later make a statement on behalf of the
European Union, with which France, of course,
associates itself. At this stage, I would like to make a
few additional comments.
As others have done before me, I would like to
express my gratitude to Mr. Kai Eide for his briefing
and in particular for the untiring efforts he has
undertaken since his appointment to ensure better
overall cohesiveness in the international community’s
work in Afghanistan under United Nations auspices.
These efforts are beginning to bear fruit.
The international community firmly reiterated its
support to the people and Government of Afghanistan
in June 2008 in Paris. The following Moscow and The
Hague conferences will provide us with an opportunity
to reiterate this common and lasting commitment and
to take stock of the implementation of commitments
undertaken and of the priorities for the coming months.

18

These conferences are part of the general trend of
increased involvement by the international community.
This momentum is something that the Special
Representative has done a great deal to nurture by
actively contributing to the implementation of the
comprehensive approach, which brought together
political, security, reconstruction and development
efforts.
I would highlight in particular the essential issue
of aid effectiveness and coordination, where progress
unfortunately remains insufficient. The most pressing
issue in this regard is transparency in terms of aid. To
ensure that the United Nations is able to carry out its
coordination mission, it must be able ensure that it and
the Afghan authorities are in a position to have a clear
overall picture of the efforts of all donors. This is
something the Special Representative referred to earlier.
The United Nations must also continue, through
its Special Representative, to symbolize the voice of
the international community to the Afghan authorities
and people. Mr. Eide has been successful in playing
this role in an impartial manner. He has addressed a
number of difficult topics such as good governance,
corruption, human rights and the problem of civilian
victims with the political, democratic authorities and
civil society in Afghanistan and with international
stakeholders.
I would like to again reiterate France’s full
confidence in Mr. Eide in the period leading up to the
elections, which is particularly critical to the
democratic future of the country.
The upcoming presidential and legislative
elections are in fact a major step in the process of
Afghans taking ownership of their own democracy. All
Afghan political officials must work to ensure the
conduct of free and fair elections throughout the
country and to preserve stability and security
throughout the electoral process. The United Nations
has an important role to play, at both the technical and
the political levels, to help them.
But the elections should not distract us from the
other pressing problems facing Afghanistan. The
Special Representative has drawn up a convincing list
of these. Significant progress has been achieved in
various fields over the past year, progress that now
needs to be consolidated. In the field of security, the
Afghan National Army has been considerably

09-27354

S/PV.6094

strengthened and is increasingly in a position to take
over from international forces.
The police remain the weak point in the security
system. Since his appointment as Interior Minister, Mr.
Atmar has started an in-depth reform of the police that
the international community must back via initiatives
in keeping with the stakes. France is committed to
participating actively with its European partners in this
effort.
Encouraging developments have also taken place
in the fight against drug trafficking. They remain to be
confirmed, including in the fight against the diversion
of the chemical precursors of heroin, which is subject
of resolution 1817 (2008).
The situation in the field of human rights is a
serious topic of concern, especially because of the
increase in attacks against the media and civil society.
Significant progress made since 2001 remains
precarious. The authorities must, with the assistance of
the international community, act more firmly to
guarantee journalists and representatives of civil
society conditions that enable them to engage in their
activities freely and safely.
I would also like to reiterate our concerns
regarding the issue of civilian casualties, which — we
need to underscore this point — are mainly the result
of deliberate attacks by the Taliban and other extremist
groups that display thereby their absolute disdain for
human life. At the same time, France is aware of the
need to continue, with its partners and its allies,
significant efforts achieved by Government and
international forces to avoid civilian casualties.
The President of the French Republic,
Mr. Nicolas Sarkozy, has reiterated on numerous
occasions the priority that the stabilization of
Afghanistan and the region as a whole has for France.
Over the past two years, France has carried out a major
reinforcement of its military commitment in
Afghanistan. Anxious to ensure that we have a
comprehensive approach, we have also significantly
strengthened our civilian and political commitment
since 2008. But over and above that, the depth of the
Afghan crisis, the evolution of the international
commitment and the increasing interrelations among
the problems that affect Afghanistan and its neighbours
have led France to further integrate the regional aspects
of the problem in its approach.

09-27354

It is in this context that the President of the
Republic, on 26 February, appointed a Member of
Parliament, Mr. Pierre Lellouche, as his Special
Representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan. This
decision is in line with France’s belief that the Afghan
crisis cannot be dealt with in isolation from the
situation in the region, and primarily in Pakistan. Our
priorities are to promote the emergence of a stable,
prosperous and democratic Afghanistan, to contribute
to the stabilization of democratic Pakistan and to
reduce the terrorist threat of which this region has
become the epicentre.
It is also to lend political momentum to the theme
of strengthening regional cooperation that our Foreign
Minister, Mr. Bernard Kouchner, invited Afghanistan,
its neighbouring States and the key cooperation
partners of the international community to France in
December 2008 for a ministerial meeting, held in La
Celle Saint-Cloud under the co-chairmanship of the
United Nations. We welcome the will demonstrated by
Afghanistan and its neighbours during this meeting to
make concrete progress to strengthen their cooperation
against drug trafficking and terrorism, as well as to
develop regional economic cooperation. We hope that
the positive trends in relations between Afghanistan
and Pakistan will contribute to achieving concrete
results during the upcoming Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference in Islamabad.
UNAMA will have to face many challenges in the
coming year. It will require our full support. I therefore
welcome the proposal to hold Security Council
meetings every three months. That will enable the
Council to provide more active follow-up to the
implementation of the mandate entrusted to UNAMA
and thereby to provide more effective support for the
action of the Special Representative.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I would first like to thank Mr. Kai Eide,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, for presenting the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in that country
(S/2009/135) and for his remarks regarding the work of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, for
attending this meeting.
Mexico finds that the elections process to take
place next August in Afghanistan is both a major

19

S/PV.6094

challenge and an opportunity to achieve peace and a
political solution to a conflict that has been going on for
over eight years now. The elections should herald a new
chapter for national reconciliation and strengthening
sovereignty and democracy in Afghanistan.
That is why we support the work of the
Independent Electoral Commission and we hope that
elections take place in a free, impartial and transparent
fashion, in an atmosphere of security that will
guarantee the rights of the Afghan people. We call on
the United Nations system, and especially the Mission
in Afghanistan, to redouble their efforts and work with
the Electoral Commission, political parties, civil
society and other actors to encourage successful
elections this year.
Mexico believes that ensuring the security of the
population in the framework of the rule of law is one of
the main challenges that Afghanistan faces in the short
and medium term. The report is very clear in this
regard, bearing in mind the deterioration of the
situation in this area and the extremist violence that is
spreading in various regions. It is unfortunate that there
is an upsurge of victims in the civilian population, and
we trust that greater cooperation between the Afghan
armed forces and the international forces will make
itself felt through a reduction of damage to civilians
and an improvement of the general security situation in
the country.
Once again, we emphatically reject terrorism in
all its forms and expressions. We condemn the attacks
on innocent persons and express our condolences to the
families of the victims of the terrorist attacks and to the
people and the Government of Afghanistan.
For Mexico, the security of humanitarian workers
and of the most vulnerable sectors of the population,
such as children, calls for priority attention, in
accordance with the standards and principles of
international humanitarian law. Specifically, we believe
that all measures should be taken to prevent the
recruitment of children by armed groups and ensure
their return to a safe environment.
Moreover, we recognize the efforts of the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community to move forward in the removal and
destruction of mines, other types of explosives and
remnants of war in the country. Nevertheless, these
artifacts continue to be a serious threat to the civilian

20

population. For this reason, additional support should
be given to demining programmes.
We commend the efforts undertaken by the
Government to reform various ministries and police
forces and to reduce and fight against corruption.
These efforts contribute to the institutional
normalization of the country and to building the
population’s confidence in its authorities.
The fight against drug production and trafficking
is another priority area for Afghanistan’s stability. We
are gratified to see that the Government’s efforts to
bring down production in several provinces are starting
to show positive results. In this area, cooperation with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
regional focus on the problem are of particular
importance.
We agree with the Secretary-General that
UNAMA has the appropriate mandate to play a role in
coordinating the various efforts to promote stability
and development in Afghanistan. The additional
resources approved for the Mission will enable it to
strengthen its institutional capacity and extend its
presence in several areas of the country. The
establishment of an office of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is therefore
timely, and we trust that the Mission will continue to
strengthen its activities in the field of human rights
protection.
Stability in Afghanistan does not depend solely
on the success of military and security actions. In line
with national priorities, a comprehensive approach
should be maintained, which will strengthen
institutional capacity-building and promote socioeconomic development. This should take into account
the regional dimension of a number of problems
affecting the country.
The international conferences that will take place
in a few days in The Hague and in Moscow, where the
situation in Afghanistan and its linkage with
neighbouring States will be discussed, are a clear
demonstration of the firm commitment of the
international community to the country. Based on that
comprehensive approach and regional view, it will be
possible to reach a long-term solution that will be
consistent with the efforts made by the Government of
Afghanistan.

09-27354

S/PV.6094

Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to begin by thanking Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
for
Afghanistan and head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his briefing and
for the wealth of information he has provided the
Council this afternoon. I also welcome the presence of
Ambassador Tanin; it is a pleasure to have him among
us today.
For eight years the United Nations has been
strongly supporting the Afghan people and their efforts
to build a durable democracy, promote socio-economic
development
and
achieve
sustainable
peace.
Challenges remain today, and a difficult security
situation may be expected in the coming months. It is
important that the international community maintain
and strengthen its commitment to Afghanistan. Today,
my delegation recognizes the prime role of the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy and the
priorities established at the Paris Conference as the
foundation for peacebuilding and development for the
Afghan people.
As the Special Representative said, the situation
in Afghanistan calls for a comprehensive approach and
a national vision. Besides military measures, this
should include the promotion of good governance, the
rule of law and development and economic growth
opportunities for the population. We also believe that
the Government and the people of Afghanistan should
claim ownership of the processes to achieve those ends
and that international efforts should be strengthened to
improve security conditions and the capacities of the
Afghan authorities in those areas.
The presidential elections to take place in August
will be a key step towards strengthening democracy in
Afghanistan, and the international community must
support and be engaged in that process. My delegation
welcomes the establishment, as part of the UNAMA
political component, of an office which will work with
political actors to guarantee a favourable climate for
free, impartial and broadly participatory elections.
Among other positive signs, we recognize the
forecasted reduction in poppy production for 2009,
progress in security sector reform and the continuing
improvement in political relations between Afghanistan
and Pakistan.
My delegation is concerned by the increase in
civilian casualties, the attacks against humanitarian

09-27354

personnel and schools and the use of civilians as
human shields. In particular, we deplore the fact that
children continue to be principal victims of the
escalating conflict and that there are still attempts by
armed groups to recruit children. We call on all parties
to exert greater efforts to adopt measures to reduce
civilian casualties to a minimum, in accordance with
international humanitarian law, international human
rights norms and Security Council resolutions 1746
(2007) and 1806 (2008).
Costa Rica would like to see that concern
reflected in the draft resolution that is being negotiated.
The Council cannot allow UNAMA, the International
Security Assistance Force or the Afghan authorities to
be weakened by leaving out a commitment to protect
civilian victims of the conflict, in particular victims of
the insurgents. Still in the area of human rights, my
delegation trusts that greater efforts will be made to
protect women and to implement other gender policies.
Finally, we highlight the work of UNAMA in
coordinating the efforts of the international community.
We agree with the Secretary-General that the
coordination of those efforts under UNAMA’s
leadership is indispensable to achieve the objectives set
forth in the mandate. We reiterate our support for
UNAMA and support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that its mandate be renewed for 12
months.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I begin by
thanking the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/135) and Special Representative Eide for his
briefing today, which painted a picture which we
recognize: a difficult security and humanitarian
situation, but with some encouraging signs of progress
being made in areas such as the administration of the
elections, the performance of the key ministries,
counter-narcotics and civilian-military cooperation.
It is often said that every year is a crucial year for
Afghanistan, and that is probably even more true this
year than it usually is, because not only do we have the
presidential elections in August, but we have various
other issues which are on the cusp. This year will
determine whether we are going to move forward to
achieve the goals of the international community or
whether we are going to continue with the present
insufficient degree of collective progress.
Successful and credible elections will be vital to
Afghanistan’s future. We welcome the agreement

21

S/PV.6094

reached on the August date and we urge Afghanistan’s
political leaders to reach consensus on the way to
preserve stability and security in the run-up to the
elections, which means stable government during that
period.

play, and we are well aware of the tensions that
sometimes exist, but I commend UNAMA’s work in
this area, together with that of the International
Security Assistance Force and the Afghan authorities,
to deliver an integrated approach.

We must avoid a situation of continued
uncertainty and disagreement in Kabul during what
may well prove to be another difficult summer with the
insurgency in the south and the east of the country.
Elections have to be prepared properly in order to
ensure their credibility. The Special Representative has
set out the bodies and mechanisms that are being
established to support the electoral process. We are
encouraged that the Independent Electoral Commission
in Afghanistan was able to conduct the voter
registration process successfully and relatively
smoothly.

On civilian casualties, we all deeply regret them
whenever they take place, and it is important that we
continue to discuss the issue frankly and transparently.
There is no doubt as to the damage that reports of
civilian casualties do to perceptions of the international
effort in Afghanistan, but no one should be in any
doubt that those engaged in the international military
effort make strenuous efforts to ensure that they do not
occur, and we have tightened our rules of engagement
to this end. Where they do occur, we have improved
our investigation and reporting mechanisms.

There is a crucial role being played by the United
Nations Development Programme in providing
technical support to enable the Afghans to run those
elections, and the United Kingdom has provided more
than £16 million in funding for that. We look to others
to help address the current $100 million shortfall in the
elections budget.
Aid coordination and effectiveness constitute
another challenge facing Afghanistan this year and are
at the heart of UNAMA’s mandate. This was addressed
in the Special Representative’s briefing. It is vital that
in 2009, international assistance to Afghanistan
becomes greater than the sum of its parts. I took
careful note of Mr. Eide’s jibes against the
international community for some of our failings on
this, but we welcome the decision of the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board to focus on five
sectors, and UNAMA’s efforts to identify priority
projects and rally the donor community behind them.
Equally important is UNAMA’s work to develop a
single Government database to track international
contributions. There has been a major improvement in
the mechanisms for aid effectiveness over the last year
or so, and we paid tribute to the work that Mr. Eide and
his team have done on that front.
Our ability to continue to deliver a
comprehensive strategy depends in large part on
civilian-military
cooperation
and
coordination.
UNAMA provides a link between the international
civilian effort, the international military effort and the
Afghan Government. This is not always an easy role to

22

In contrast, and as the Special Representative
pointed out, the Afghan people and the international
community in Afghanistan face an insurgency that does
not care about civilian casualties. Civilians are used as
shields and are now increasingly the target of
deliberate attacks by the insurgents.
Despite all these challenges, we share the view of
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
that there are grounds for optimism. One of those, as
Mr. Eide set out, is the prognosis for poppy production
in 2009, which is encouraging. If, as he cautiously
predicted, we see a sharp decrease in overall
production and a further increase in the number of
poppy-free provinces, that would be a significant
achievement.
Another reason for optimism is the increase in the
resources available to UNAMA. For some time, there
was a gap between the scope of UNAMA’s mandate
and the resources available to implement it. UNAMA’s
new budget, agreed last year, means that gap has now
been closed, and we welcome the new posts that have
been filled and the additional offices that are being
opened.
However, this also means that expectations for
UNAMA are even higher and that it will be expected to
deliver even more. An important area of that delivery
has already begun, as I have set out. The reality of
Afghanistan in 2009 is that all of those involved in the
international effort, including the United Nations, are
going to have to up their game. We are confident that,
in Kai Eide, UNAMA has the leadership in place to
rise to that challenge.

09-27354

S/PV.6094

Let me conclude by expressing the United
Kingdom’s appreciation for UNAMA’s work over the
past year. UNAMA’s staff do vital work in difficult
circumstances, and they and the Afghan people can
count on the continued support of the United Kingdom.
Mr. Jurica (Croatia): Let me thank Mr. Kai Eide
for his briefing. In the same vein, I would like to pay
tribute to Mr. Eide for his determined leadership and to
all the staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their genuine
commitment and hard work undertaken in harsh
circumstances. I also welcome the presence of Afghan
Ambassador Tanin.
Croatia shares the concerns over the deterioration
of the security situation in Afghanistan, where
insurgents, extremists and other radicals are attempting
to destabilize previously calm areas and increasingly
relying on asymmetric attacks and advanced methods
of warfare. The direct targeting of international
organizations and aid workers is yet another obvious
indicator of the sort of enemy the Afghan Government
and the international community are confronting. As
stated in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/135),
most civilian casualties are the result of the actions of
anti-Government elements, which are increasingly
characterized by a total disregard for civilian lives.
There is a general consensus that this year will be
crucial for Afghanistan in more than one aspect. The
upcoming elections, scheduled for August, will be a
real test of Afghanistan’s democratic achievements.
The elections should further stabilize the democratic
process in the country and provide the highest
demonstration of its legitimacy. By providing adequate
technical assistance, financial contributions and
additional security, the international community is
doing its part to ensure free, fair, inclusive and
transparent elections. We welcome the completion of
the voter registration process, including in the most
volatile provinces, without major incident, which we
view as an important preparatory step in the electoral
process.
The stability of Afghanistan is intrinsically linked
to the stability of the region and cannot be achieved
without genuine cooperation from its neighbours,
especially Pakistan. In that context, we are heartened to
see the revival of economic regional cooperation
allowing for the restoration of extremely important
energy and water supply lines. Furthermore, the

09-27354

resumption of the Peace Jirga process with Pakistan, as
well as the recent meeting of the Tripartite
Commission, testify to the intensifying political
cooperation. We hope that the upcoming regional
economic cooperation conference on Afghanistan will
further strengthen relations between the countries of
the region and yield concrete and practical results. We
look forward to the international conferences on
Afghanistan to be held in the nearest future in Moscow
and The Hague.
Of course, there is no purely military solution to
the problems in Afghanistan; the solution must
therefore be of a political nature. In that regard, a
comprehensive approach unifying military, political,
humanitarian and development activities will be
needed. Croatia highly values the so-called integrated
approach aimed at making more effective use of
civilian and military resources in the country. We find
it extremely important to have the ability to perceive
the specific challenges, problems and needs which are
present in each and every part of that huge country, and
to deploy the resources available in the most efficient
and balanced way. Furthermore, we support stronger
civilian-military coordination based on respect for each
other’s distinctive mandates and in accordance with
Afghanistan’s specific guidelines on the coordination
of humanitarian and military actors.
Regarding aid coordination and ensuring aid
effectiveness as one of the main roles that UNAMA
should be playing in Afghanistan, we salute the
Mission’s follow-up on some of the benchmarks that
the Special Representative presented to the Council at
his last briefing in October 2008, especially on the
development of a single Government database for
information on donor contributions. We would like to
see further action on some other achievable targets,
particularly on the endeavour to set up a mechanism
for joint audits in order to enhance accountability on
each side, and on tangible, commonly agreed criteria to
measure aid effectiveness.
My country welcomes the ongoing improvements
in the Afghan National Army’s performance, reflected,
inter alia, in its ability to assume the lead responsibility
for the security of the capital city, as well as in some of
the provinces. Regarding the Afghanistan National
Police, we strongly support the Focused District
Development project. Finally, we see the fight against
corruption as an important and integral part of all
reform endeavours in Afghanistan, and we sincerely

23

S/PV.6094

trust that the increased efforts of the new minister in
that regard will soon bear fruit.

international partners towards achieving the final goal
of ensuring a stable, secure and peaceful Afghanistan.

Croatia received the Afghanistan Opium Winter
Rapid Assessment report that was jointly released by
the Ministry for Counter-Narcotics and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), and
welcomes projections of a possible further decrease in
opium cultivation in 2009, as well as the continued
increase in the number of poppy-free provinces.
Additionally, we strongly support the regional counternarcotics efforts being promoted by UNODC’s
“rainbow strategy”, and we welcome the significant
seizures of precursor chemicals in Iran, Pakistan and
Kyrgyzstan through the implementation of resolution
1817 (2008).

The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

Keeping the enormous humanitarian challenges in
Afghanistan in mind, Croatia welcomes the
establishment of an office of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in Afghanistan
and the development of the Humanitarian Action Plan.
We welcome the significant refugee returns in 2008, as
well as the completion of the first national profile of
internally displaced persons.
Human rights and the rule of law continue to be a
major challenge in Afghanistan. Allow me to mention
here only two of the many long-standing problems that
continue to weigh heavily on the country. The
entrenched impunity of discriminatory practices,
especially against women and girls – to mention but
two – is a good example. We strongly support decisive
actions in the field of the rule of law and human rights,
and we deeply believe that determined action in these
areas will help to promote the aforementioned
conditions and trends.
Croatia welcomes the decision of the General
Assembly to almost double UNAMA’s budget in order
to enable it to carry out its challenging mandate. We
strongly support the renewal of the UNAMA mandate
for a further year. We also support the request for the
Secretary-General to provide more frequent reports on
developments in Afghanistan, including adequate
benchmarks for measuring and tracking progress in the
implementation of UNAMA’s mandate.
Finally, let me reiterate that, while fully
cognizant of the challenges, Croatia stands ready,
through its military presence and financial support, to
continue to cooperate with the Afghan Government and

24

I wish to offer a few observations on the matter
before us. First, I express our thanks to the SecretaryGeneral for his detailed and comprehensive report
(S/2009/135), on which we were just briefed by Mr.
Kai Eide. I wish also to welcome the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan.
I commend the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), under Mr. Eide’s
leadership, for its efforts and excellent performance
with the purpose of rebuilding that sisterly country
despite all the security challenges the Mission faces.
Most of what is taking place in Afghanistan today
is the responsibility of the international community,
which neglected Afghanistan after the cold war. It is
regrettable that, despite all the tragedies suffered by
Afghanistan due to the civil war that raged for six
years between 1990 and 1996, the Security Council
took no action and adopted no resolutions attempting
to put an end to the war and the fighting there.
Paragraph 2 of the report of the SecretaryGeneral tells us that the situation in Afghanistan is
deteriorating. The report gives several reasons for that,
the most important among them being the lack of
security and the fact that the results of Government and
international assistance efforts have fallen short of the
Afghan people’s expectations. The report reaches the
logical conclusion that the situation in Afghanistan
cannot be addressed by military means alone, and it
affirms the need for a political process based on
comprehensive national reconciliation, as called for by
President Karzai and, previously, by the country’s
legislature and most other Afghan leaders. It is
important that this political process be accompanied by
a parallel effort in the sphere of development, with a
view to creating economic and social conditions that
can provide a dignified life for all Afghans and that
will not compel them to turn to illegal livelihoods such
as drug trafficking. This would put an end to corruption
and extremism and enable the Afghan Government to
regain the people’s trust in its ability to meet their
needs. That requires a strong international commitment
to support Afghanistan’s development strategy.

09-27354

S/PV.6094

Paragraph 23 of the report informs us that
insurgents continued to expand their presence in
previously stable areas. This is combined with the
deteriorating security situation, the poor economic
situation and the spread of unemployment and
corruption. The situation demands a solution based on
a comprehensive approach to addressing all of those
problems.

and indicates that UNAMA was unable to assess those
allegations. The report before us today makes no
mention of any progress in that regard; rather, it notes
that detention centres and prisons are in a serious state
of neglect. My delegation wishes therefore to indicate
its concern about the state of prisons in Afghanistan
and to call for respect for human rights, international
law and international human rights law.

The international community’s ultimate goal must
be to help the Afghan people build a democratic, stable
and prosperous State. Combating extremism is not a
goal in itself, especially because the use of force by
itself will not bring about stability and security; it must
be bolstered by a parallel dialogue aimed at achieving
national reconciliation among all sectors of the Afghan
people willing to engage in dialogue and accept the
national constitution as a basis for governance.

Some progress has been made in a number of
areas, including with respect to mine clearance,
counter-narcotics and preparations for the upcoming
elections. But shortcomings remain, despite all the
efforts and pledges that have been made. We must
study and review those shortcomings and try to
identify their causes.

My delegation remains gravely concerned about
the killing of civilians in defiance of all the appeals
and statements issued by Afghan authorities, by the
United Nations and by other international bodies and
organizations. In that context, we note that paragraph
66 of the report speaks of an increase in civilian
casualties of 40 per cent over the figures for 2007.
Thirty-nine per cent of these were caused by
international and national Afghan forces. We reaffirm
our conviction that this trend, if it continues, will not
help establish peace, security or stability. It can only
fuel animosity among Afghan citizens and will
ultimately serve the interests of the opponents of the
Government.
Libya expresses its deep concern over the food
crisis that the Afghan people could face as a result of
drought, as well as over rising food prices. We fear that
the world financial crisis could exacerbate the food
crisis in Afghanistan. We deeply regret the inadequate
response to the $404 million appeal issued by the VicePresident of Afghanistan and the United Nations to
address the crisis. We hope that the Afghanistan
National Development Strategy will soon be
implemented, and we hope that donors will fulfil the
pledges they made at the 12 June 2008 Paris
Conference.
The March 2008 report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/159) outlines human rights violations and
instances of torture and abuse of detainees. It notes
allegations of prolonged and arbitrary detention in
places of detention run by international military forces

09-27354

My delegation welcomes the progress that has
been made in bilateral cooperation between
Afghanistan and Pakistan, and we affirm the need to
strengthen that cooperation, because of the historical,
demographic and economic ties between the two
countries.
Finally, Libya supports the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to extend the mandate of UNAMA
and strengthen its role in coordinating international
efforts, as well as to guarantee it sufficient resources
and financing to enable it to establish regional offices
to bolster its activities, especially in the fields of
governance, justice and human rights.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Allow me, Sir, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month of March and to thank
you for holding this debate. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his latest report (S/2009/135)
on the situation in Afghanistan. I am also grateful to
my friend, Mr. Kai Eide, for his comprehensive
briefing here today and for his able leadership of the
work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). We have taken note of his
important points, the suggestions that he has made and
the concerns that he has raised.
The Security Council is discussing Afghanistan at
an important time. In two days, the people of
Afghanistan will celebrate our new year, so we begin

25

S/PV.6094

today from a new perspective of hope. The
preparations for our presidential and provincial
elections provide a chance to strengthen legitimacy and
national unity. The continuing insecurity in parts of the
country threatens those objectives but also gives us a
clear goal in the coming months.
There has been a welcome increase in
international focus on Afghanistan. Afghans are
pleased to note the many recent strategic reviews and
recommendations, including the upcoming conference
to be held in The Hague on 31 March. We hope that
that new spirit of engagement will help us proceed in a
constructive, unified and coordinated way.
The international community should join
Afghanistan in that spirit. In the past eight years,
Afghanistan has made progress. We can continue to
make progress. Afghans are fully invested in a
legitimate, inclusive democratic process, and we see
that in the strong engagement in the national debate
surrounding the upcoming elections. Afghans want to
ensure that their country’s future is a continuation of
the peaceful modernization that began in the early
twentieth century.
Afghans are eager to work with the international
community to eliminate the threat of the Taliban, AlQaida and other terrorist groups. The Taliban is not an
organic part of Afghan society. It is a product of the
violence, cross-border madrassas and foreign
indoctrination that disrupted our stable society. Today,
a mere 4 per cent of Afghans want to see the Taliban in
power.
The international community should also be
encouraged by the reminder that Afghans supported the
United States-led intervention in 2001. Afghans
welcomed the defeat of the terrorists and extremists
who had invaded and corrupted our homeland. As long
as the international forces provide safety, security and
the promise of a democratic future, Afghans will
continue to be staunch allies. But Afghans are
simultaneously driven by the urgency of keeping the
dark days securely behind us. The devastation of the
Taliban is a constant reminder of the effects of
neglecting the destruction of war. The greatest blunder
of our time is to forget that the ruins of war breed
angry, desperate and radicalized people.
The world has an obligation to act so that the
Taliban and Al-Qaida do not return to power. That
obligation is both moral and practical. Morally, the

26

horrific abuse of civilians, particularly children and
women, anywhere is a threat to freedom everywhere.
In practical terms, terrorism knows no borders. Attacks
in New York, London, Mumbai and Kabul by the same
groups show that the threat in Afghanistan is, indeed, a
global threat. Global action is the answer to a global
threat.
Afghans have seen the significance of our
partnership with the international community. Our
biggest accomplishments — our constitution, the
elections, the improvements in the Afghan National
Army, infrastructure, education and health — are the
projects that have received the strongest international
commitment. International dedication bears fruit.
But we have only just begun. In the areas where
Afghans received less international attention — the
Afghan National Police, governance, corruption and
judiciary reform — we have not achieved all we
should. After the Bonn Conference in 2001, the
international community’s light-footprint approach
brought minimal engagement in Afghanistan. We have
only recently refocused, so we cannot expect results
immediately. It takes time to build a stable, prosperous,
democratic society after more than 30 years of war.
Progress is a process, completed only over time. Thus,
we must stay the course. There is still important work
to be done.
That work should focus on the priority of a selfsustaining, functioning State that serves Afghans, for a
functioning State is the strongest bulwark against
terrorism. Only a democratic, stable Afghanistan will
stop terror and destruction. Democracy should be
strengthened, not weakened.
In strengthening the Afghan State, we must have
a comprehensive strategy. Today, I would like to
highlight a few areas for focus.
First, we should ensure that there are free, fair
and transparent elections in August. That process
should encourage a protective, inclusive debate that
strengthens the legitimacy of the institutions that we
have already created through the Bonn process.
Secondly, Afghan ownership must continue to be
the linchpin of international efforts. We understand that
the ultimate responsibility for our country lies in our
own hands. We will do our own work. Therefore,
economic development should continue to be
implemented through the framework of the Afghanistan

09-27354

S/PV.6094

National Development Strategy and the Paris priorities.
We must ensure that aid and expertise are available
promptly and delivered effectively, efficiently and
transparently. Every penny in Afghanistan should be
delivered to Afghans. We should also continue to build
the Afghan army and police so that Afghans can take a
stronger role in the fight against terror. There should be
greater Afghan oversight over joint operations with our
international partners and an increased focus on
preventing civilian casualties.
We want to stress, too, that reconciliation can
take place only under the leadership of the Afghan
Government. The Government of Afghanistan
recognizes the importance of a political solution. We
negotiate with those elements of the Taliban who are
willing to be reconciled, but any talks must be held
with full respect for the constitution of Afghanistan and
must be conducted from a position of strength.
Thirdly, Afghans appreciate the new regional
focus on our challenges, which protects the sovereignty
of our State. We welcome the new trilateral process
involving the United States, Afghanistan and Pakistan
that started recently in Washington, D.C., and we look
forward to a future of increased cooperation. Our
neighbours will be the first to benefit from a stable
Afghanistan: fewer refugees, less narcotics, more trade.
Today, Afghans hope that the Security Council
will continue its newly developed and refocused efforts
to help us regain our footing after decades of war.
Afghans still look with great hope to the international
community and fully approve the extension of
UNAMA’s mandate in support of the Government of
Afghanistan.
Despite the continued challenges of terrorism and
violence, despite the critics, despite the resignation and
despite the doubts, we know our better history.
Afghanistan began its journey towards modernization
in the 1900s. Our first constitution, in 1924, made
modern education available to all. By the 1960s, we
guaranteed equal rights for men and women. Afghans
then survived and persevered through three decades of
foreign intervention, a bloody civil war and the brutal
rule of the Taliban. If we could do all of that, we can
succeed in Afghanistan today, for Afghanistan has
been, can be and will be once again a peaceful,
democratic crossroads of our region and a contributing
member of the world community. We begin the new
year in that spirit of hope.

09-27354

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now call on
the representative of Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada): I thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to speak on this important subject.
Canada continues to support the Government and the
people of Afghanistan in forging a stable country and a
peaceful future. I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for his honest
and insightful briefing today and for his deep
commitment to Afghanistan and the United Nations
Mission.
Canada also welcomes the Secretary-General’s
recent report (S/2009/135), which offers a frank
assessment of the situation. The report outlines some of
the progress made, with Afghans and the international
community working together to strengthen institutions,
fight terrorism, stem narcotics production and improve
lives by providing education, health services and
agricultural assistance.
For its part, Canada has restructured its own
efforts — military and civilian — to focus on six
priority areas with clear objectives, making our
engagement more focused and effective. We view those
priorities as key to the progressive transfer of authority
to Afghans.
In particular, Canada is helping to improve the
capabilities of the Afghan national security forces. We
are also continuing to rehabilitate the Dahla dam and
irrigation system in Kandahar, which will improve the
lives of thousands of Kandahari farmers and their
families, and we are building and rehabilitating
schools. Canada has also facilitated an AfghanPakistani dialogue on border security, and we are
working with the United Nations to help Afghans to
prepare for the presidential and provincial council
elections this year.
The Secretary-General reminds us of the many
challenges ahead, including rising violence and
widespread corruption. Those challenges must continue
to be met by the Afghan people, the Afghan Government
and the international community with determination,
unity of purpose and a will to act swiftly.
Canada welcomes Special Representative Eide’s
pledge to strengthen the United Nations presence
throughout the country. In our view, that means
strengthening existing regional and provincial offices
and opening new ones where necessary.

27

S/PV.6094

Canada looks forward to positive results
stemming from the new integrated approach, which
brings the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF), the Government of
Afghanistan and others together in the planning and
coordination of security, development and governance
initiatives in key districts. Canada stands ready to work
closely with UNAMA on that new approach. We are
also committed to working with Special Representative
Eide to ensure that UNAMA continues to deliver on its
mandate, fulfilling its role as adviser, coordinator and
leader of the civilian international mission.
In that context, we note with appreciation
UNAMA’s progress over the past year in streamlining
coordination structures in Kabul, as well as in creating
an aid-effectiveness unit. We also look forward to
enhanced coordination on the ground to ensure that
immediate humanitarian needs are met effectively.
UNAMA’s mandate is sufficiently robust to address the
challenges that Afghanistan faces, and its increased
resources will now allow for more action. We look
forward to receiving regular reports on the progress
that UNAMA is accomplishing in implementing its
mandate.
The Government of Afghanistan, UNAMA and
the international community must now demonstrate
results to the people of Afghanistan in order to restore
their faith in their own institutions and in their own
capacity to build a better future.
In order to demonstrate those results, the United
Nations must ensure a strong presence throughout
Afghanistan. That is particularly important in the area
of humanitarian assistance. Canada welcomes the
deployment of additional United Nations humanitarian
officers to Kabul and hopes that that will soon be
followed by a reinforcement of the United Nations
humanitarian presence in the provinces, where it is
most needed. To maintain credibility with the Afghan
people, the United Nations must broaden its reach and
ensure the timely and appropriate delivery of
humanitarian aid.
Expanded civilian-led humanitarian action —
notably in aid delivery — is increasingly challenging,
given the rise in violent incidents involving civilians
and the targeting of civilian aid workers. Advocating
for international humanitarian law and the importance
of respecting humanitarian space will remain a priority.

28

In that respect, we urge increased coordination
among the United Nations, ISAF, the Government of
Afghanistan and the international community. Full,
safe and unhindered humanitarian access throughout
Afghanistan for neutral and impartial humanitarian
actors is critical to ensuring that emergency needs can
be met.
The Secretary-General has noted that 2009 is a
critical year for Afghanistan, with the upcoming
elections of particular significance. The international
community has a crucial role to play in helping
Afghans to conduct those elections. Successful
elections will be a result of national and international
coordination and cooperation, including international
monitoring, as well as voter access and security. First
and foremost, in cooperation with the Independent
Electoral Commission, we must help to ensure that the
elections are credible in the eyes of the Afghan people.
The
Secretary-General
has
noted
some
encouraging news in Afghanistan: institutions are
being strengthened, and the Afghan National Army is
being expanded and is becoming more autonomous.
The fight against illegal narcotics is progressing, with
the crop of poppies expected to be reduced
substantially this year. That is indeed heartening, but
the fight against narcotics production must not end
with poppy eradication. It is also important to
emphasize alternative livelihood programmes to
provide increasingly diverse economic opportunities.
(spoke in French)
Canada is working with the Afghan Government,
the United Nations, ISAF and the international
community to resolve the many problems still
threatening Afghanistan. Most of those problems,
including narcotics and the lack of legitimate economic
opportunities, can be sustainably addressed only
through regional cooperation.
We welcome the fact that the international
community recognizes the regional dimension of the
challenges facing Afghanistan. We urge all regional
partners to cooperate on economic and security issues
as a top priority. Given the challenges facing Pakistan,
mutual efforts by Afghanistan’s neighbours are more
essential than ever to the stability of the region.
Canada would appreciate greater United Nations
leadership on regional coordination issues, as such
coordination is essential to the coherence of regional
and international efforts.

09-27354

S/PV.6094

The efforts of the international community are
aimed at helping the Afghan Government to assume
responsibility for rebuilding the country. Afghans must
be able to have confidence in their institutions and
their Government. In order to inspire and nourish such
hope, the international community’s efforts must be
swift, effective, ambitious and responsible.
Finally, Canada takes this opportunity to
commend the hard work and dedication of United
Nations personnel and other civilian workers in
Afghanistan. Their courage and commitment in the
face of dangerous working conditions is a source of
inspiration. Permit me to conclude by reaffirming
Canada’s commitment to the people of Afghanistan and
to the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Kaiser (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Montenegro and Serbia; as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.
Allow me to begin by thanking Mr. Kai Eide, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing, his excellent leadership of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and his cooperation with the EU Special
Representative, Mr. Sequi. I would like to also extend
my thanks to Ambassador Tanin, the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, for his contribution to
today’s debate.
The EU commends the Secretary-General for his
recent comprehensive report on the UNAMA mission
in Afghanistan and the identification of priorities
(S/2009/135). The EU endorses the recommendations
on UNAMA and the strengthening of its central role in
coordinating the overall international efforts in close
cooperation with other partners, including the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and the
EU.
The EU also welcomes the fact that the report of
the Secretary-General will be submitted every three
months. Additionally, the EU fully supports the crucial

09-27354

coordinating role of UNAMA and its head, Mr. Kai
Eide. In this regard, and due to the forthcoming
presidential and provincial elections, the EU supports
the extension of the UNAMA mandate for a further 12
months, as suggested by the Secretary-General in his
report.
The year 2009 will be crucial for Afghanistan and
for the engagement of the international community.
The security situation in Afghanistan remains
challenging, with insurgents increasingly employing
asymmetric tactics and targeting civilians, Government
institutions, international aid organizations and nongovernmental organizations. Despite these challenges,
some important progress has been made, and the EU
reiterates its long-term commitment to working
towards a better future for Afghanistan and its people.
In this regard, we support efforts by the
Government of Afghanistan to reach out across the
political spectrum to build a broad-based political
settlement. Politically led solutions based on dialogue
and settlement are key to achieving a durable solution
in Afghanistan. The EU welcomes efforts by the
Government to bring disaffected Afghans into society’s
mainstream.
Over the past year, we have seen progress in the
strengthening of the Afghan National Army and the
Afghan National Police, the launch of the Afghan
National
Development
Strategy
and
positive
developments regarding economic and social
development.
Nevertheless,
the
international
community needs to devote greater efforts to ensuring
better and more effective coordination of development
and reconstruction activities throughout the whole of
Afghanistan. Coordinated and effective support to the
build-up of the Afghan national security forces is a key
element. It is also of crucial importance to strengthen
Government institutions and actively combat
corruption. Even a legitimate Government will face
challenges with a weak State and poor governance.
There is no stability without sustainable governance.
While the narcotics trade still poses a continuing
cause for concern, the EU welcomes the fact that, after
reaching another record level in 2007, poppy
cultivation was in decline this past year and a further
decrease is expected in 2009. The prognosis of a 20 to
30 per cent decrease in opium production indicates a
potential increase in the number of poppy-free
provinces to 22. Also, the reinforced international

29

S/PV.6094

cooperation in controlling the chemical precursor
needed to produce heroin contributes to the fight
against drug trafficking. The EU also encourages the
Afghan Government, with the assistance of the
international
community,
to
accelerate
the
implementation of the National Drug Control Strategy,
including through alternative livelihood programmes.
The main challenges Afghanistan will face over
the next year are the forthcoming elections, which are
essential to further political development. It is
important that the elections reaffirm the Afghan
people’s faith in their future. In this regard, we support
efforts by the Afghan Government to reach out across
the political spectrum to build a broad-based political
settlement.
The EU attaches the greatest importance to the
holding of free and inclusive elections in Afghanistan
and welcomes the confirmation of the date of
presidential and provincial elections by the
Independent Electoral Commission. It is now up to the
Afghan authorities, all the political parties and other
stakeholders to work for transparent, fair and credible
elections in order to ensure the legitimacy of the next
Government and provide it with a strong mandate.
EU Special Representative Sequi will continue to
monitor political and security developments, and the
EU is willing to work alongside the Afghan
Government, the United Nations and ISAF to support
elections across the country, including by providing
substantial financial assistance and, subject to security
and other conditions being met, through the
deployment of an electoral observation mission.
During the period from 22 May to the inauguration of
the next presidential term, stability, security and a
functioning Government must be ensured.
On behalf of the EU, I would like to underline its
continued engagement in Afghanistan, including
through the bilateral cooperation programmes of EU
member States and the European Commission
assistance strategy. The EU is looking urgently at how
to enhance and improve its engagement. The EU is the
second largest financial contributor. The collective
pledged contribution of the EU amounts to €8 billion
for reconstruction during the period 2001-2010. The
European Commission has pledged €700 million for
Afghanistan from 2007 to 2010, and member States
currently provide approximately half of ISAF troops.

30

The EU is strongly committed to the
improvement of Afghan State structures and has
channelled approximately 30 per cent of its assistance
budget through multi-donor trust funds, such as the
Afghan Reconstruction Trust Fund and the Law and
Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan, which essentially
contribute to the reconstruction of the Afghan police
forces.
In the framework of its comprehensive approach
towards Afghanistan, the EU launched an EU police
mission in Afghanistan in mid-June 2007. The mission
includes contributions from non-member States
Norway, Canada, New Zealand and Croatia. The
mission aims at contributing to the establishment of
sustainable
and
effective
civilian
policing
arrangements under Afghan ownership and in
accordance with international standards. More
particularly, the mission monitors, mentors, advises
and trains at the level of the Afghan Ministry of
Interior, regions and provinces. The area of deployment
includes Kabul and some 15 provinces of Afghanistan.
The EU would like to reaffirm its long-term
commitment to contribute to peace, security and
development in line with its mandate, supporting the
development of the Afghan police under local
ownership. In this regard, it decided to significantly and
progressively increase the number of mission personnel
starting in December 2008, which will enable the
mission, on the basis of a renewed mandate, to
reinforce its activities in support of the Afghan National
Police and contribute to its reform. However, this will
require additional resources from contributing States.
The European Union is committed to the
improvement of governance and the rule of law in
Afghanistan and reiterates its commitment to capacitybuilding in the justice and rule of law sectors. The fight
against corruption, impunity and human rights
violations, especially violence against women, is
central to good governance, and the European Union
looks to the Afghan authorities to uphold the
fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution of
Afghanistan and under international law. In this regard,
the European Union encourages UNAMA to pursue its
monitoring mandate, in particular with regard to the
human rights situation of women.
Regarding the grave humanitarian situation in
Afghanistan, the European Union welcomes the
strengthened presence of the Office for the

09-27354

S/PV.6094

Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in Afghanistan in
order to further improve humanitarian coordination.
The European Union underlines the importance of
freedom of expression and diverse media in
Afghanistan and, in this regard, calls upon the Afghan
Government to pass the media law approved by the
lower house of the parliament.
It is certain that stability and security in
Afghanistan are closely linked to overall regional
stability. The European Union strongly supports the
development of a coordinated approach at the regional
level and enhanced cooperation between Afghanistan
and its neighbours against threats such as terrorism and
drug trafficking. The European Union calls upon the
neighbouring countries to constructively work together
to ensure sustainable development embedded in a
stable region.
Fostering stability in Afghanistan is in the interest
of all countries in the region and the wider
international community. In this respect, the European
Union welcomes the upcoming Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan, to be held in
Islamabad, and the Outreach Session of the Ministerial
Meeting of the Group of Eight (G-8), to be held in
Trieste on 26 and 27 June 2009. The European Union
also welcomes the conference entitled “International
Conference on Afghanistan: a Comprehensive Strategy
in a Regional Context”, to take place in The Hague on
31 March.
In closing my remarks, I would like to assure the
Council that the European Union will continue to play
an active role in supporting Afghanistan, in close
cooperation and coordination with other international
actors on the ground, including the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Unfortunately,
time is running out, and I therefore request all
delegations to limit their statements to five minutes in
length.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Norway.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): Thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to speak.
The situation in Afghanistan must be judged
against the depths from which that country is
emerging. Honouring its commitments made at the
Paris Conference last year, Norway remains fully
committed to rebuilding Afghanistan. At the

09-27354

Conference, Norway pledged some $650 million for
the time period covered by the Afghan National
Development Strategy. More than 600 Norwegian men
and women in uniform are helping to bring security to
the people of Afghanistan and to train the Afghan
National Army. No other country receives more
development assistance from Norway and no other
country is seeing more Norwegian military and
development personnel. That is the measure of our
commitment to Afghanistan.
We thank Special Representative Kai Eide for his
leadership and for his forceful presentation here today.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/135) also
presents a precise picture of the many challenges we
are facing. We share the concern that the Taliban is
destabilizing previously stable areas and is showing
increased disregard for civilian lives.
But we must look beyond the horrific incidents of
violence and see the long-term achievements that form
the building blocks of a better Afghanistan. To mention
a few of the positive trends, Afghan security forces,
trained by their international partners, have increased
their reach, poppy production has been curbed in many
parts of the country, and the Government and donors
are working together to energize the agricultural sector.
I would like to raise three issues here today:
elections, the situation of women and our joint
international effort.
First, with regard to elections, free and fair
elections are to be held in August. The next six months
will test Afghan democracy. Well over 4 million voters
were registered earlier this year, and 1.6 million of
these new voters are women. They come in addition to
the nearly 12 million voters already registered. Some
argue that Afghanistan is not ready for democracy. The
more than 4 million Afghans who recently registered
clearly think that Afghanistan is ready and that they
should have their say. There must be no doubt in the
mind of any Afghan that elections will be held as
scheduled by the Independent Electoral Commission.
Norway has supported the election process with
$12 million given through the United Nations
Development Programme. Freedom of expression,
media and assembly must be guaranteed to ensure free
and fair elections.
Secondly, the situation of women overall in
Afghanistan has taken a worrying turn for the worse.
We remember the story of Latefa, who had acid thrown

31

S/PV.6094

in her face while on her way to school but who said
that the attack would not stop her from learning. The
most senior policewoman in Kandahar was killed
before she could become a role model to many young
girls. Women’s rights are enshrined in the Afghan
Constitution, but it takes political leadership to protect
those rights. Increasingly, the men of Afghanistan must
change their mindset, too, and, increasingly, luckily,
they understand that their children lose opportunities
when they grow up with illiterate mothers. Poor
countries remain poor when they repress women, and
Afghanistan will not succeed without the active
participation of its women.
Thirdly, I recently conducted an Internet search
for the website of the Afghan National Development
Strategy. What I found was a page telling me that the
site was under construction. Nearly a year after the
Paris Conference, that still seems true for the Strategy
itself. Both we the donors and the Afghan Government
need to work still harder to fulfil the pledges we made
in Paris. We must explain what we are doing and let
ourselves be coordinated. The Afghan Government
must fulfil its pledge to fight corruption and narcotics.
The coordinating role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) is
central to our efforts in Afghanistan. UNAMA will play
a crucial role in supporting the elections ahead of us.
We welcome the extension of UNAMA’s mandate. We
pay tribute to the men and women of UNAMA and will
continue to support their vital mission.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I next give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Ney (Germany): I would like to join my
colleagues in thanking Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his report (S/2009/135) and Special Representative
Kai Eide for today’s briefing. In addition, I would like
to thank in particular Ambassador Tanin for his
intervention.
Germany fully supports the statement of the
presidency of the European Union and shares the
analysis it presented on the situation in Afghanistan. As
an important contributor to civilian reconstruction and
development programmes for Afghanistan and as a
major troop contributor to the United Nationsmandated International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) operations, Germany would like to highlight
four points.

32

First, the electoral process in Afghanistan is an
important
step
for
consolidating
democratic
development in Afghanistan. The international
community, in particular through the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), is successfully
supporting the Independent Electoral Commission in
preparing these elections. We are looking with keen
interest to the political process in Kabul to ensure a
stable environment for the upcoming elections. We
trust that our Afghan partners will work to ensure a
viable and stable process that leads the country from
May to August.
Germany has continuously supported the United
Nations Development Programme Enhancing Legal
and Electoral Capacity for Tomorrow project by
donating $10 million in 2008. Germany will provide an
additional $12 million for that programme in 2009.
Especially with regard to the election process, security
remains a critical concern. In that context, Germany
will, as indicated earlier, increase the number of troops
on the ground in order to assist in safeguarding free
and fair elections in Afghanistan. Germany strongly
condemns recent attacks on political candidates in
Afghanistan.
With regard to the wider build-up of Afghan
national security forces, Germany has again stepped up
its efforts in police training by providing additional
trainers and mentoring teams and has recently begun
the implementation of the Focused District
Development programme in Mazar-e-Sharif. We intend
to further expand focused district development to other
districts in the course of this year.
Secondly, Afghan
ownership
and
good
governance remain key for the success of the efforts of
the international community in supporting development
in Afghanistan. We encourage the Afghan Government
to fight corruption and the trade and production of
narcotic drugs with further increased dedication.
Thirdly, Germany will continue to support
reconstruction and development in Afghanistan. The
year 2009 is seeing yet another increase in German
contributions, to $220 million overall. We strongly
believe that UNAMA must continue to play the leading
role in coordinating all the civilian efforts of the
international community, as agreed last summer in
Paris. In that respect, we strongly support the process
of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board as the
core consulting mechanism. As a major contributor to

09-27354

S/PV.6094

the United Nations budget, we openly supported the
considerable increase of UNAMA’s budget for 2009,
and we are looking forward to seeing tangible results.
Against that background, Germany fully supports
the extension of the UNAMA mandate and welcomes
the increase in UNAMA personnel on the ground. We
are pleased to note that, from our point of view, the
increased presence of UNAMA in the regions already
starts to add value including in the areas of Mazar-eSharif, Kunduz and Faizabad.
Fourthly and finally, we would like to emphasize
the importance of a regional approach to solving the
problems we are facing, not only in Afghanistan, and
we encourage an increased level of cooperation in all
fields. That cooperation remains essential for a
peaceful and sustainable future for Afghanistan and
will thus benefit the development of the whole region.
Against that background, we are looking forward
to the conference to be held in The Hague later this
month as an opportunity to signal the readiness of the
international community to continue its support for
Afghanistan and the region.
Let me conclude by thanking Kai Eide for his
tireless efforts and his successful leadership of
UNAMA.
The
international
community
and
Afghanistan have come a long way. Despite all the
challenges ahead, we have been able to help improve
living conditions in Afghanistan and to build schools
for boys and girls, hospitals, bridges, streets, et cetera.
That success was only possible thanks to all of
the women and men from all over the world who are
willing to serve in Afghanistan. Let me seize this
opportunity to thank them all for their relentless efforts
and their personal commitment. We would like to thank
all the teams working under the umbrella of UNAMA,
including UNDP and OCHA, as well as the many
non-governmental organizations, members of the
diplomatic corps and, last but not least, all personnel of
the security forces for their efforts to improve the life
of the Afghan people. Germany will live up to its
international responsibilities and continue to support
the Afghan people.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. de Klerk (Netherlands): Thank you,
Mr. President, for allowing the Netherlands to take the
floor in this important debate on the situation in

09-27354

Afghanistan. We fully align ourselves with the
statement made by our colleague from the Czech
Republic on behalf of the European Union. In the light
of our longstanding commitment to Afghanistan, allow
me to make a few additional remarks, in particular on
the international conference on Afghanistan to be held
in The Hague on 31 March, to which many have
referred in this debate.
Before turning to the conference, let me
re-emphasize our appreciation of and continued
support for the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) under the able leadership of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kai Eide. We welcome his presence here and his
comprehensive and inspiring briefing today. We cannot
overemphasize our collective responsibility to provide
the Special Representative with the support that he
needs to enable UNAMA to fulfil its broad mandate as
defined by the Security Council.
We are particularly pleased that UNAMA has
established a presence in Uruzgan province, where the
Netherlands, together with other partners, is providing
significant
assistance
and
cooperation,
both
development and military. We see UNAMA’s presence
in Uruzgan as recognition of the progress achieved by
the Afghan authorities together with international
partners and hope it will further contribute to the
development of stronger civilian structures in the south
and to increased capacity of the Afghan authorities in
that area. In Uruzgan and elsewhere in Afghanistan, the
Netherlands is guided by the principle that
development, diplomacy and defence must go hand in
hand.
In our view, the Afghan authorities and the
international community, with a central role for the
United Nations, are all set in place to make progress
towards our common objectives of security and
development, increasingly under Afghan ownership
and leadership. But we are also mindful that the
security situation, economic development, governance,
the rule of law and the humanitarian situation all
continue to pose challenges. And we recognize that the
regional dimension needs to be addressed. In that
respect, we welcome the initiative of the Pakistani and
Japanese Governments regarding the conference on
Pakistan to be held in Tokyo next month.
Many speakers have referred to the upcoming
elections and the crucial importance of the coming

33

S/PV.6094

years for Afghanistan. It is against this background that
the Netherlands has agreed, after consultations with
Afghanistan and the United Nations, to host the
“International Conference on Afghanistan: A
comprehensive strategy in a regional context”, to be
held in The Hague on 31 March 2009. We are truly
honoured that President Karzai and Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon will address the conference, together
with Prime Minister Balkenende of the Netherlands,
and that subsequently Special Representative Eide,
Afghan Foreign Minister Spantâ and Dutch Foreign
Minister Verhagen will co-chair the ensuing ministerial
discussions.
The Government of Afghanistan and the United
Nations are closely involved in the preparations, which
are ongoing as we speak. It is our hope that the
conference will reaffirm the solid and long-term
commitment of the international community, as defined
during the Bonn, London, and Paris conferences, to
shaping a better future for Afghanistan and its people.
We share the view of Special Representative Eide that
the conference will provide a timely opportunity to
take a comprehensive look at the current political,
security and development situation in Afghanistan and
will thereby give new impetus to our common efforts.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Cornado (Italy): I wish to thank Ambassador
Kai Eide, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan, for his frank, complete and
thoughtful briefing on the situation in Afghanistan. I
agree with the points made to that effect by
Ambassador Tanin, the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan. Italy fully supports the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of the
Czech Republic on behalf of the European Union. I
would like to add just a few remarks drawing on our
national experience and our civil and military
commitment to Afghanistan.
First of all, let me reaffirm my country’s full
support for the leading role of the United Nations in
coordinating the overall international effort in
Afghanistan in order to ensure greater aid
effectiveness, transparency and secure Afghan
ownership. We share the Secretary-General’s
assessment that the current mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and the 2009 budget provide the Mission with the

34

necessary tools to implement the tasks assigned to it by
this Council and reaffirmed by the Paris Conference of
June 2008. We therefore concur with the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation to extend UNAMA’s
present mandate for a further 12 months.
The first priority in 2009 — a critical test year —
is to hold free, fair and inclusive presidential and
provincial elections in accordance with the Afghan
Constitution. These elections are essential to winning
back the hearts and minds of the people and to
ensuring that the next Afghan Government has
legitimacy and a solid mandate. We thus welcome the
Independent Electoral Commission’s confirmation that
the election will be held in August 2009, and we
encourage the Afghan institutions to find a solution in
order to ensure a functioning Government between 22
May and the inauguration of the next president. My
Government has already made a contribution to the
United Nations Development Programme Enhancing
Legal and Electoral Capacity for Tomorrow, and will
also provide support for security on the ground through
our participation in the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF).
The many challenges facing Afghanistan and the
broader region require renewed international
engagement, a comprehensive approach and a longterm commitment to working with the people and
institutions of the country. Overall security has
deteriorated in the past month and the insurgency has
staged stronger attacks. In his report (S/2009/135), the
Secretary-General has identified two disturbing trends
on the rise: attempts to destabilize new areas and
increased use of more sophisticated and asymmetric
attacks by the insurgents, with an increasing cost in
civilian lives. The announced military surge should
help to provide better security, ensure free and fair
elections and create a safe environment for good
governance and development.
We should also continue to use every means
possible to further reduce civilian casualties. ISAF has
done a great deal in this respect through improved
tactical guidelines and transparency. We should also
increase Afghan ownership and responsibility in
military action.
Simply increasing the military effort, however,
will not be enough. We must step up the international
community’s assistance to the Afghan authorities in
strengthening their military and police forces through

09-27354

S/PV.6094

training, mentoring and empowerment. Italy already
has six operational mentoring liaison teams embedded
in various Afghan National Army units, and a seventh
will be fielded shortly. Through our Carabinieri, we
also provide training and support for the reconstruction
of the Afghanistan National Police. Italy is also one of
the largest contributors to the European Union Police
Mission in Afghanistan, and the Italian Government is
considering further contributions.
Military efforts must be complemented by
stepping up civilian and economic assistance. Our
interventions are directed to the health and
infrastructure sectors and to other cross-cutting areas,
such as women’s rights, assistance to refugees and
internally displaced persons, food security, demining
and fighting child trafficking. We are also committed to
improving governance in Afghanistan and to building
up the civil administration capacity of the country at
the central and local levels.
We followed with great interest the remarks made
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
especially on the recent positive developments in the
crucial
sector
of
governance.
The
Special
Representative again highlighted the importance of
cooperation between key elements inside the
Government, which has improved such critical sectors
as security, finance, agriculture and commerce.
Our efforts in the justice and rule of law sector
since the initial post-conflict phase are well known.
The full programming sequence and planned
implementation of an Afghan national justice
programme remain of crucial importance. Coordinated
action by all relevant Afghan institutions is needed in
all the provinces.
The situation in Afghanistan is a regional issue.
To an increasing and more urgent extent, it therefore
requires an inclusive approach. We thus welcome the
ongoing efforts of the Government of Afghanistan and
its neighbouring and regional partners to foster trust
among and cooperation with each other. Following
previous G8 presidencies, Italy wishes to continually
reinforce the G8’s engagement in favour of
Afghanistan. To this end, we intend to organize a
ministerial outreach meeting with the participation of
partners, neighbouring countries and other key
stakeholders, to be held in Trieste on 26 and 27 June.
We intend to focus attention on four areas in which
multilateral cooperation is significant and should be

09-27354

further enhanced: border management, drug trafficking
and money-laundering, cross-border projects and
confidence-building measures at the civil society level.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I call on the
representative of India.
Mr. Sen (India): I thank you, Sir, for scheduling
today’s debate on Afghanistan and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). This is
of immediate and abiding interest to India. We also
welcome the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/135), while thanking Special Representative
Kai Eide for his comprehensive briefing.
The latest report paints a bleak picture of the
situation in Afghanistan. We accept these facts. We
cannot but recognize that the Afghan people continue
to be confronted by the twin challenges of deteriorating
security and a sense that the peace dividend is being
reduced. At the same time, the international community
is simultaneously challenged by a renewed security
challenge from the Taliban and Al-Qaida and by
increasingly vocal questions over the utility of our
collective effort.
And yet the report also holds out elements of
hope. We see steady progress in the United Nations
effort to ensure greater coordination and cohesion in
our aid and assistance programmes. It also praises
efforts to reform the Ministry of Interior and the police,
the work of the various economic ministries and the
steady gains in reducing poppy production. It also
notes as a sign of progress the fact that the Independent
Electoral Commission of Afghanistan will organize the
forthcoming elections.
Furthermore, the fact that elections are being
contested hotly is a good augury. We are hopeful that
the elections will be free, fair and transparent and that
the Afghan people will exercise their rights in such a
manner. At the same time, we in the international
community must ensure that, during the run-up to the
elections, the gains secured collectively in Afghanistan
are built up, not eroded in any manner. In that context,
we condemn today’s terrorist attack on representatives
of the Afghan people.
While the report, in our view, correctly identifies
these positive developments as a window of
opportunity to consolidate progress, there is a need to
address misgivings over our collective purpose. Let us
be clear — the world cannot afford to abandon

35

S/PV.6094

Afghanistan again. Despite the strains, this mission
remains vital not only to the aspirations of the longsuffering Afghan people, but to the security and
stability of the region and beyond. Doubts, hesitation
and divergences in our approach to the Taliban and AlQaida weaken our collective will. They also invigorate
our foe. Therefore, apart from continued application of
force wherever terrorist groups are active, we must
work together to deny them safe havens, financing and
political and material sustenance, whether within
Afghanistan or across its borders. The application of
force wherever terrorists gather must harmonize with
the larger political objective, and UNAMA must play
an important role in this essentially political task. Since
messaging is important, it is also essential to have
greater clarity regarding the ideas being discussed in
the public domain. Reconciliation is one of these.
The Secretary-General’s latest report subjects this
discussion to important caveats. Not the least of these
is the idea that reconciliation must be an Afghan-led
process, within the parametres of the Constitution of
the land. Further, it must be pursued from a position of
political and military strength. To this, I would add that
the process needs to be undertaken with strategic
clarity and unity of purpose. In the absence of
consensus amongst concerned international parties
over the key questions of reconciliation — with whom
and how — such a process runs the risk of opening up
divisions amongst us, rather than amongst the elements
with whom we seek to reconcile. Furthermore, we must
move beyond attempts to distinguish between “good”
and “bad” Taliban; such efforts are totally unworkable.
From this standpoint, it is helpful that the
international effort is moving towards a more cohesive
and integrated approach. We fully endorse the notion
that coordination must be based on genuine Afghan
leadership and on recognition of the fact that there is
no purely military solution. It is precisely for this
reason that India strongly supports efforts to build
Afghan capacity. It is not only appropriate but essential
to invest in such capacity. Without this, we run the risk
of assigning responsibility without ensuring that our
partners have the means to shoulder it.
In this context, India welcomes the continuation
of the useful role provided last year to UNAMA via
resolution 1806 (2008). We see that as a logical
corollary of the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy, adopted formally last year, which is a
guidemap for the international assistance effort in

36

Afghanistan. UNAMA and the Government of
Afghanistan have made commendable progress
together since UNAMA received that new mandate,
and it is essential to build upon those first promising
signs resolutely. That effort needs to be supported with
greater resources for the United Nations Mission and
with greater commitment to alleviating the
humanitarian challenge in Afghanistan, especially
given the impact of rising food prices and adverse
climatic events. India is working to mitigate the
humanitarian impact, including through our recent
decision to send a quarter of a million tons of wheat to
Afghanistan, although, most regrettably, we continue to
face political difficulties in overland transport and
transit to Afghanistan.
Taking those points as a reference, I should like
to underscore India’s firm and unshakeable
commitment to the international effort in Afghanistan.
For India, the stabilization of Afghanistan is integrally
connected with our security. It is for that reason that
while we are outraged by attacks upon our people and
symbols of our friendship with Afghanistan, we cannot
be deterred by such criminal acts. Not only has our
commitment to Afghanistan exceeded $1.2 billion, but
we have attempted to the best of our ability to expand
the range and variety of our projects. Thus, Indian
assistance spans the gamut of operations from
infrastructure projects, such as the Zaranj-Delaram
highway, to institutions, such as the parliament
building in Kabul. We have also simultaneously
targeted local projects that will provide a peace
dividend in the shortest possible period of time,
ranging from cold storage plants to equipment for
schools and hospitals. Through these efforts, we
maintain capacity-building as a core element of our
work in Afghanistan. It is in support of that core task
that India has agreed to increase the current allocation
of 500 seats each in capacity-building and scholarship
programmes.
Turning to the regional aspect, we need greater
efforts to embed the stabilization of Afghanistan within
regional processes for this country to regain its key role
as the crossroads of South, West and Central Asia — a
phrase that was also used in the statement today by the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan. That includes
regional economic processes, such as the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation. Such efforts are
in the collective interest of the entire region. Hindering
that not only affects Afghanistan, but equally each of us

09-27354

S/PV.6094

in the region. We therefore need efforts to expand,
rather than hinder, trade, transit — especially transit in
that context, as I mentioned earlier — and transport ties.
That is, in our view, the best way of bringing the
regional dimension into the discourse on Afghanistan.

Permanent Representative of Afghanistan. Improving
security is critical to reconstruction and development.
That will require the Afghan Government forces to take
the lead. To assist that, Australia has provided an
operational mentoring and liaison team to Afghanistan.

In conclusion, India believes that challenges in
Afghanistan need to be seen in their totality. We must
analyse where we are today from the perspective of the
past eight years. Every step forward has been hard won
but each step is a measure of distance away from the
destruction of the past. It is for that reason that we
must continue to emphasize the progress achieved,
rather than bemoan the challenges that remain. It is
also for that reason that we should set our sights on
realistic and achievable goals, not expectations that are
unrealistic in the local context. If we are truly
committed to an Afghan-led process of prioritization of
tasks, we should concentrate on where Afghanistan has
come from rather than on where we individually would
like it to be.

Political reconciliation and, ultimately, a political
settlement will also be critical elements of a lasting and
durable solution for Afghanistan. Constructive
engagement by regional countries will be very
important.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): Australia is
grateful for the opportunity to participate in this
debate. In the interests of time, I will skip some parts
of my distributed statement. We agree with the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/135), and with
other speakers that have referenced it, that 2009 will be
a critical year in Afghanistan. Ensuring the credible
conduct of elections will be important for
demonstrating that Afghanistan’s emerging democracy
will not be disrupted by the Taliban insurgency.
Australia welcomes the August date for elections
announced by the Afghan Independent Electoral
Commission. That timing provides an opportunity for
the necessary logistical preparations to be carried out
to allow the people of Afghanistan to exercise their
democratic right. We also support efforts to find a
solution to constitutional issues in a manner that would
ensure the legitimacy and stability of government until
the inauguration. Moreover, we are committed to
supporting the conduct of the elections. We recently
announced $3 million for the United Nations
Development Programme to establish an independent
electoral complaints commission, and we had
previously supported the electoral registration.
Afghanistan and its international partners face
enormous challenges, as outlined eloquently by the

09-27354

But Australia also recognizes the magnitude of
the humanitarian challenges in Afghanistan, and we are
doing our bit — some 600 million dollars’ worth since
2001. I would particularly highlight the work that is
being done by my compatriots in the areas of mine
action and also through the food assistance being
delivered by the World Food Programme.
We welcome the importance attached in the
Secretary-General’s
report
to
ensuring
that
development assistance is applied intelligently
according to coordinated and comprehensive plans
with clear goals. In that context, Australia very much
values the efforts of Special Representative Kai Eide
and his team in the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to achieve better unity of
effort in international donor activity. Australia stands
ready to be coordinated.
We also support the expansion of UNAMA’s
reach through new provincial offices. That sends a
clear signal of the United Nations commitment to
provide more direct assistance through programmes
and outreach at the community level, where help is
most needed. We particularly welcome the opening of
an UNAMA provincial office in Oruzgan, where our
military and civilian personnel are deployed. We look
forward to working with the new office to improve
conditions in that part of southern Afghanistan.
Australia will, of course, participate in the
Afghan conference to be held in The Hague. That
meeting will be a key opportunity to look critically at
what is working and what is not in Afghanistan and
how we can make our collective efforts more effective.
We welcome the United Nations role in co-chairing the
meeting, and, of course, we thank the Netherlands, our
valued partners in Oruzgan, for hosting it.
Australia strongly supports UNAMA and the
extension of its mandate. We will need to continue to

37

S/PV.6094

ensure that this operation is properly resourced. We
also wish to record our deep appreciation for the
invaluable efforts of Mr. Kai Eide and for his
leadership of his courageous team at UNAMA.
Continued progress in Afghanistan depends on
strengthened and expanded engagement by the United
Nations and the international community, in concert
with the Government and the people of Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I am very
grateful to the representative of Australia for having
shortened his statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me, Sir, to thank you for having convened this meeting
and to congratulate you on your skilful stewardship of
the Council’s work this month. I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kai Eide,
and his colleagues in the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their valuable
and tireless efforts in Afghanistan at this crucial
juncture. As we have stressed in the past, the Islamic
Republic of Iran supports the central role of the United
Nations in Afghanistan, and that commitment has been
displayed yet again in the recent fruitful visit of
Mr. Kai Eide to Tehran.
We have carefully studied the latest report of the
Secretary-General on Afghanistan (S/2009/135) and
share the view that the year 2009 is very important for
Afghanistan and for its partners in the international
community. In the past several years, many efforts
have been made by Afghan officials and the Afghan
people, assisted by the international community, to
foster and strengthen their newly established
democratic mechanisms, to bring about peace, stability
and development and to take their destiny into their
own
hands.
Undoubtedly,
much
has
been
accomplished. Yet, a great deal more remains to be
achieved.
We are concerned that, despite all the efforts
made, insecurity has increased over the past two years
in Afghanistan, and terrorist activities, which are
perpetrated mostly by Al-Qaida and the Taliban, have
inflicted many losses and costs on the great nation of
Afghanistan.
Heightened insecurity, poppy cultivation, drug
production, drug trafficking, a spike in food and

38

commodity prices and the consequences of drought are
among the challenges that Afghanistan continues to
face today. As the report at hand indicates, 2008 ended
as the most violent year in Afghanistan since 2001, and
the attempts by extremists and terrorists to destabilize
previously stable areas have, unfortunately, worsened.
Nevertheless, we are confident that despite the
gravity and magnitude of the various challenges facing
them, our Afghan brothers and sisters will maintain
their commendable efforts to seriously address these
threats and will continue their journey towards peace,
stability and development. If history is any guide, as
grave as these challenges are, they will not be able to
break the determination of the Afghan people and
Government, who are resolutely striving to surmount
these problems.
As an immediate neighbour with deep historical,
religious and cultural ties with our Afghan brothers and
sisters, we share and feel their pain in their difficult
times as we share their joys in their successes. We have
a vital interest in an Afghanistan that is stable, secure
and prosperous — an Afghanistan at peace with itself
and with its neighbours.
In our view, incorporating terrorist elements into
the political structure of Afghanistan runs counter to
the agreement reached among the members of the
international community and will in no way help to
resolve the current situation. Categorizing extremists
as “good” or “bad” is not helpful. Any efforts to bring
about reconciliation should be purely Afghan-led and
under the full control and ownership of the Afghan
Government. In addition, only those groups that
recognize, respect and adhere to the constitution of
Afghanistan can be considered in that process.
We believe that if the insecurity in Afghanistan is
to be effectively addressed, more serious and concrete
efforts should be made to strengthen the Afghan
National Army and Police, and Afghans should be
given the chance, through the Afghanization process, to
have full ownership and control over all issues related
to their own country. Moreover, as mentioned in the
report, at this time of hardship the people of
Afghanistan need to and expect to feel the results of
the international community’s assistance in their dayto-day lives. It is a bitter fact that the results of aid
efforts continue to fall short of popular expectations.
Poppy cultivation, drug production and
trafficking in narcotic drugs in Afghanistan continue to

09-27354

S/PV.6094

be among the most serious and immediate threats about
which we have been constantly and gravely concerned.
The narcotic-drugs-related menace has hugely
damaged the stability, security and development of
Afghanistan and has also had appalling consequences
for the entire region and beyond. We appreciate the
efforts made by the Afghan Government to fight this
threat, but we are of the view that their efforts and
those of the international community — particularly
those of countries with a military presence in
Afghanistan — continue to fall short of what is needed.

We have excellent bilateral relations with
Afghanistan. The Presidents of our two countries have
visited each other’s capitals, and President Karzai just
recently visited Tehran to attend the tenth summit of
the Economic Cooperation Organization. On the
sidelines of the summit, very constructive bilateral and
trilateral meetings were arranged at the level of heads
of State, including a trilateral meeting among Iran,
Afghanistan and Pakistan and another meeting that
included the presence of Iran, Afghanistan and
Tajikistan.

Iran has fought a costly and deadly war, with
utmost determination, against the drug traffickers
originating in Afghanistan, and we will continue to be
unwavering in our fight against this menace. Neither
the gravity of the task nor the enormous human and
material costs inflicted on our nation have been or will
be able to break our determination in this important
fight. We, however, expect others in the international
community to join us more seriously in this endeavour
and to pay more attention to this threat. As mentioned
in the report at hand, such initiatives as effective
eradication efforts, coupled with alternative-livelihood
programmes, increased incentives for good governance
in the relevant provinces, the destruction of drug
laboratories, the countering of corruption and more
serious prosecution of drug traffickers are among the
measures that can help counter this daunting challenge.

Iran is actively engaged in the reconstruction
process in Afghanistan. We have spent hundreds of
millions of dollars in building basic infrastructure,
roads, railroads, bridges and telecommunication
facilities, in capacity-building and on educational
services and facilities. Iran has hosted 3 million
Afghan refugees over the past three decades and has
shouldered a heavy burden in that regard. Fifteen
thousand Afghan students are currently studying at
Iranian universities, while 250,000 students are
attending Iranian elementary and secondary schools as
well as high schools. They are enjoying the same
facilities and opportunities as those from which our
own students and children benefit.

The coming elections for the presidency and the
provincial councils, planned for the summer of 2009,
are of paramount importance on the Afghan political
scene. We hope that the State-building process that
started with the Bonn Agreement will continue to move
forward with the help and support of the international
community.
We in the international community need to
coordinate our endeavours, to learn from our past
experiences and to redouble our efforts in order to help
complete the journey that we started by helping the
Afghan people and Government seven years ago. For
its part, the Islamic Republic of Iran has spared no
efforts to extend its full and sincere cooperation in that
regard, and we stand ready to continue on that path. We
have been an important part of the international and
regional efforts to help Afghans over the past several
years. Iran attaches great importance to regional
initiatives in that regard, and we have also contributed
to the international efforts aimed at helping to alleviate
the Afghans’ suffering.

09-27354

Finally, as members may know, at this very hour
we are approaching the Iranian new year, or Nowruz, as
we call it. This traditional occasion is celebrated not
only in Iran, but also in some other parts of the world,
particularly Afghanistan. Nowruz means a new day, a
new beginning. On this occasion, let us think of a new
beginning in our serious efforts within the international
community to help the Afghan people and Government
to continue their journey towards peace, stability and
prosperity. They are a great nation. They will make it.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now call on
the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): All day, we have had the
pleasure of hearing many countries state their intent
with regard to Afghanistan. At this time in the evening,
it must be said that Ambassador Tanin has done a great
job, as evidenced in the immense feeling of goodwill
that has been expressed throughout this meeting for
him and for his country. I offer him my
congratulations.
Allow me to thank the Council for the
opportunity to participate in this discussion, as this
issue is of vital importance for my country and peace

39

S/PV.6094

in the region. We feel the pain and untold suffering
endured by our brothers in Afghanistan, who have been
the victims of history, circumstances and unrelenting
conflict for many years.
For three decades, Pakistan has suffered with our
Afghan brethren, and the fallout of the instability and
conflict has affected us grievously. The refugee influx
into Pakistan remains of amazing proportions, and this
is only one side of the reality. We have a vital stake in
the peace and stability of Afghanistan. The destinies of
our two peoples are as closely interlinked in the future
as they were in the past. It is with this perspective and
deep commitment that we participate in this debate on
Afghanistan.
The United Nations has a central role in
mobilizing and coordinating international action in
support of Afghanistan, and the challenging
circumstances of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), led by Special
Representative Kai Eide, cannot be underestimated. It
is a major contribution and will remain crucial to any
settlement that will be defined in conferences around
the world for many months to follow. I would like to
thank the Secretary-General and Mr. Eide for the most
recent report (S/2009/135), which, to my mind,
provides an objective overview of the situation in
Afghanistan.
The challenges are well-known, from security to
political, humanitarian and development issues. The
challenges are multifaceted, daunting in scope and
closely
interlinked.
They
require
a
truly
comprehensive, substantial and integrated response
that is fully owned and led by the Afghans, with the
sustained and long-term attention and support of the
international community. The ongoing concern remains
the increased violence and insecurity, which continue
to be rooted in the complex interplay of Taliban,
Al-Qaida, warlordism, factional rivalries and the
activities of illegally armed and criminal groups and
are fuelled by the illicit drug trade. Popular grievances
arising from various causes, ranging from civilian
casualties to socio-economic hardships and lack of
governance and development, are further compounding
the situation.
Terrorism remains a major challenge. It has roots
in all parts of the world. Together with Afghanistan,
Pakistan faces the brunt of the terrorist and extremist
threat. In 2008 alone, nearly 2,000 Pakistanis lost their

40

lives in over 600 terrorism-related incidents in
Pakistan. Pakistan’s economy has suffered directly and
indirectly, with losses in the billions. However, this has
not diminished our commitment to curb and reverse the
menace of terrorism and extremism. To deal with this
menace, the Government is pursuing a comprehensive
and multi-pronged strategy, partly through a resolution
of parliament structured around democracy, dialogue
and development. This approach is being pursued with
the support, cooperation and ownership of both
populations. Our message is unequivocal. The territory
of Pakistan will not be allowed to be used for terrorist
activities, while our sovereignty and territorial integrity
must also be fully respected.
We are doing our utmost to control and interdict
illegal movement across the difficult border with
Afghanistan. We have established approximately 1,000
checkpoints and deployed more than 120,000 troops on
our side of the border. Reciprocal measures on the
other side of the border can complement and reinforce
this effort. Cooperation under the tripartite military
commission has proven useful, and we wish to see this
mechanism further strengthened. We are concerned
about the financing and arming of militants and recent
incursion of militants into our territory. There is an
additional security risk posed by the millions of
refugees remaining within Pakistan.
I am sure that as the international community
reviews its strategy to achieve the common objective
of peace in Afghanistan, we will be guided by lessons
of history and past mistakes in this dispassionate stocktaking. We should assess why, seven years on, despite
having made some notable gains in Afghanistan
through heavy investments and sacrifices, the situation
does not give rise to much optimism. Are the
underlying causes of insecurity being effectively
addressed? Are militancy and terrorism being reined in,
or are they spreading? How successful are the military
strategies? How adequate and effective is the nonmilitary component? Has international assistance
brought about a tangible improvement in the lives of
the ordinary people? Are we winning the hearts and
minds of the people of Afghanistan? If there is to be a
rule of thumb to follow in answering these questions, it
should be to ask why so many millions remain refugees
in appalling conditions in neighbouring countries.
Afghanistan can best cope with its challenges
without intervention or interference. However, this
should not mean disengagement and abandonment. As

09-27354

S/PV.6094

many speakers have mentioned, this has happened in
the past. What is required is a fuller understanding of
the needs and priorities of the Afghan people and
respect for their traditions, values, culture and religion.
We agree with the Secretary-General that the strategy
must be to prioritize, rationalize and Afghanize. In our
view, the following should be the elements of any
constructive engagement.

of the Economic Cooperation Organization, which
earlier this month held its tenth summit meeting in
Tehran, which also hosted the first Afghanistan-IranPakistan trilateral summit. The second trilateral summit
of Afghanistan, Pakistan and Turkey took place earlier
in Istanbul in December 2008. Pakistan will host the
third Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan in Islamabad in May.

First, we must ensure a comprehensive,
coordinated and balanced approach. It is evident that
reliance on military means alone cannot deliver peace.

Building on the Kabul and Delhi conferences, the
Islamabad meeting will focus on five major themes —
mining, health, trade and transit, labour movement and
human resources development, and energy and
infrastructure, including the Turkmenistan-AfghanistanPakistan-India gas pipeline project. We also look
forward to other forthcoming international engagements
on Afghanistan, in Moscow on 27 March, The Hague on
31 March and Trieste on 26 and 27 June.

Secondly, for durable stability, people must
assume ownership. There should be enhanced focus on
indigenous and national capacity-building in all fields,
from governance to security, in order to reduce reliance
on external support.
Thirdly, a massive investment in reconstruction,
development and social welfare is required with the
participation of all segments of Afghan society. The
benefits of development, rather than insecurity, chaos
and deprivation, should become the talk of the town.
The drug problem must be dealt with comprehensively
in the context of development through the provision of
alternative livelihoods.
Fourthly, in the battle for hearts and minds,
persuasion must override force and coercion. An
inclusive process based on dialogue and broad national
reconciliation can catalyse the consolidation of gains
from the international efforts in Afghanistan. The
forthcoming election offers an excellent opportunity to
harness reconciliation and promote inclusion through a
democratic process. Pakistan will provide all possible
support for the successful conduct of elections.
Fifthly, any strategy should accord priority and
allocate resources for the repatriation of the millions of
refugees from Pakistan. A pull factor needs to be
created inside Afghanistan to encourage the voluntary
return of refugees.
Regional cooperation is the key to sustainable
peace and development in Afghanistan. A regional
approach has to take into account the interests, the
capacities and the aspirations of sovereign States and
their peoples. It should build solid stakes in lasting
peace.
Afghanistan’s integration in regional mechanisms
is encouraging. It is a member of the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation, it is a member

09-27354

Pakistan attaches high priority to close, friendly
and cooperative relations with Afghanistan. The new
democratic Government of Pakistan has made a
promising beginning with Afghanistan. There have
been a number of bilateral interactions at the highest
level. We are making steady progress in building a
relationship of deeper trust and understanding. The
reinvigorated Jirga process provides a useful means for
promoting dialogue and development.
During the visit of President Zardari to
Afghanistan in January 2009, the two sides signed an
historic joint declaration on future directions and
bilateral cooperation. The declaration provides a
comprehensive framework to take the Pak-Afghan
partnership to higher levels in the political, economic,
security and social fields.
I may mention that, despite our constraints,
Pakistan is also making a significant contribution to the
reconstruction and development efforts in Afghanistan.
We have pledged $320 million for that purpose, of
which $170 million have already been spent on various
projects in diverse socio-economic sectors, training,
capacity-building and infrastructure.
Let me conclude by saying that Pakistan will be
the primary beneficiary of peace and stability in
Afghanistan, which is also the collective objective of
the international community. We hope that today’s
debate will further promote this objective, to which
Pakistan remains deeply committed.

41

S/PV.6094

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Mr. Eide to make some further observations
and respond to comments made by delegations.
Mr. Eide: I will try to be brief in responding to
some of what has been said. There has been repeated
mention of civilian casualties, which is a very complex
issue. Nobody is saying that there has been an intention
to cause civilian casualties. Of course we all want to
avoid them, and I would also say that the Commander
of International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
really has made a very strong effort to move in that
direction. I admire him.
We also face two other problems in that regard.
First of all, I think we will face increasing propaganda
from the insurgency over the next year in parallel with
an increase in the number of troops. Secondly, we will
face the problem that we have constantly seen, namely,
the problem of disinformation provided to the military.
That can be the result of community disputes or other
things, which are sources that contribute to this
phenomenon. It is very difficult.
The representative of Pakistan said that we need
hearts and minds. It is interesting, for if we say, “we,
the international community”, we must also, on the
other hand, be striving for Afghanization. I believe that
only the Afghans can really win the hearts and minds
of their population, and therefore this Afghanization is
so important.
There were some comments on the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
First of all, the gap between resources and mandates is
now closing, so more should be expected of us. There
is every reason for that. It may take a few more months
before we have the staff in place that we should, but I
do expect it.
But I have to ask, “expect what of whom?” I say
that because we have only the power of persuasion.
That is what the United Nations has. If I try with gentle
persuasion, I am told that I am too mild-mannered. If I
raise my voice, the media say that it has been a stormy
conversation. Ministers come to me and say, “We do
not like what you are saying about us”, and that is
absolutely right. I will continue to say things that they
do not like when I see that the required level of
coordination is lacking.
It is a difficult situation because it is, in the end, a
question of political will. The situation is not one in

42

which donor countries are sitting there waiting for us
to come and say, “Would you please do this or that?”.
They have their national strategies that they are
unwilling to adjust. That is the main problem we face.
We are strengthening our presence where we have
offices and are establishing new ones. We have opened
and will inaugurate the office in Tirin Kot, and we will
open others, as well. I mentioned Helmand as one
possibility. I would like to say to those who argue that
we should move faster and that we should establish
offices, particularly in the south, that most troop
contributors to ISAF do not want to send armed
military to the south. But those around the Council
table ask us to send unarmed civilians to the same
places. I just leave members with that little remark,
because I think it is important to keep in mind.
On the humanitarian side, I think it was the
representative of Canada who said “Please strengthen
the humanitarian dimension”, and I would answer
“yes”. I do really deplore that that part of the overall
United Nations activity has gone so slowly, really
slowly. As many participants know, that is the result of
a debate that we have had for some time. Fortunately,
and hopefully, we have been saved by a mild winter.
Finally, with regard to conferences and regional
perspectives, I hope that there is a breakthrough now
with regard to the regional dimension and regional
cooperation. That will really be important. What I hope
is that, starting with the conference in Moscow next
week, a momentum could be built where attention is
not spread over too many projects, too many
initiatives, and that we try to establish a momentum on
this and carry that momentum through the various
conferences that are planned. If that happens, I believe
that there could be success.
I thank the Council for all the support it has given
to me and to the Mission. And I thank the President for
giving me the chance to speak again.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Kai
Eide for his frank, candid comments to us.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 7.10 p.m.

09-27354
