S/2020/914

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 September 2020
Original: English and French

Letter dated 18 September 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. David Shearer, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for South Sudan
and Head of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan; Mr. Mark Lowcock, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; and
Ms. Nyachangkuoth Rambang Tai, Gender and Social Justice Manager, Assistance
Missions for Africa, as well as the statements delivered by the representatives of
Belgium, China, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, France, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines (on its own behalf and on behalf of the three African members of the
Security Council — the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia), the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam,
in connection with the video-teleconference regarding “Reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the Sudan and South Sudan”, convened on Wednesday, 16 September 2020.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the
briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Abdou Abarry
President of the Security Council

20-12266 (E) 210920 281020

*2012266*

S/2020/914

Annex I
Statement by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for South Sudan and Head of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, David Shearer
I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief the Security Council
today. I will start with an update on political and security conditions and then
touch upon changes to the operations of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) in response to the evolving situation in the country.
Most critical right now is progress on the peace process. On the positive side,
the transitional Government continues to function, and activities are progressing
well within the clusters of ministries headed by the five Vice Presidents. The
appointment of state governors has dampened tensions in the regions, with the
exception of the historically volatile Upper Nile state, where a deadlock remains
with the Government’s unwillingness to appoint the opposition’s preferred candidate,
General Johnson Olony. State ministerial positions were recently agreed, but the
appointment of county commissioners — the level below governors — has been
delayed by disagreements over the number of counties.
Elsewhere, however, progress has been painfully slow. Cabinet meetings
occur irregularly, and South Sudanese want to see the President and Vice Presidents
meeting and working collectively. There has been almost no movement on the critical
area of security sector reform. Force personnel brought together for training have
yet to graduate, and those remaining are abandoning the camps owing to food and
other shortages. Despite the urging of the Heads of State of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development in July, the Transitional National Legislative Assembly
has yet to be reconstituted, and therefore necessary new laws are not being passed
and progress on the Constitution has been delayed.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has slowed the implementation of
the 2018 Revitalized Peace Agreement in South Sudan, including meeting key
benchmarks, but the pandemic is not entirely to blame. We are seeing a reversion
to business as usual, where progress on the peace agreement itself limps along. The
continuing delays risk pushing elections out well beyond the timeline prescribed in
the agreement. That will add to the growing disillusionment among communities
about whether the political will exists to give South Sudanese citizens the opportunity
to choose their own leaders. Our experience has been that, without significant
international pressure, political will does wane. Momentum is therefore urgently
needed, particularly to maintain confidence among the signatories.
South Sudan is also facing other pressures. Falling oil prices, a lack of
financial accountability, delays in paying civil servants and a near doubling in the
street exchange rate since March is adding additional pressure on the Government
and on families struggling to survive. With high rainfall and the Nile River at
60-year highs, flooding has devastated the centre of the country, with 500,000 people
affected, particularly in Lakes and Jonglei states. Humanitarian workers are working
incredibly hard to help people living without shelter, food, water and sanitation in
the middle of the rainy season. But this humanitarian work has not come without a
cost. This year, seven aid workers tragically lost their lives, and another 144 have
been evacuated because of subnational violence.
There has been an upturn in this conflict resulting from splintering between
and within groups. The difference this year is that external political actors are
fuelling these local conflicts with military advice and heavy weapons. From
January to July, UNMISS documented 575 incidents of subnational conflict — an
increase of 300 per cent in comparison to the same period last year. In Jonglei alone,
2/27

20-12266

S/2020/914

600 people were killed in six months, women and children were kidnapped and
thousands fled their homes as they were looted and torched. The Nuer, Murle and
Dinka communities were all victims. But all three groups are also guilty of carrying
out crimes against others.
While the situation has now been calmed, tensions remain high, and every
effort must be made to stop a resurgence. The Government has appointed a high-level
committee on Jonglei. Last week, UNMISS also organized a meeting with senior
leaders to chart a way forward. We were encouraged by the leaders’ willingness to
engage with all participants, showing that they understand the cost of going back
to war. UNMISS will provide political and logistical support for peacebuilding in
Jonglei, including peacekeepers to monitor buffer zones, increasing police capacity
and helping with infrastructure development.
In Central Equatoria, the National Salvation Front has launched a series of
politically motivated attacks. Despite claims that its actions are defensive, civilians
and humanitarians are among the casualties of their ambushes. The heavy-handed
response of Government security forces has also taken its toll. All parties are
signatories to the ceasefire. They should respect this commitment, stop fighting and
pull back. In response to local appeals for help, UNMISS deployed peacekeepers
to the area, but our troops were blocked by Government forces, despite earlier
agreements for the deployment.
In the past three weeks, the usual mechanisms through which UNMISS
coordinates its movement have seriously deteriorated. COVID-19 can be partly
blamed, but the influence of hardliners in the security forces is the principal obstacle.
We continue to work cooperatively with the security forces, but we are impressing
on the Government that their restrictions on our ability to carry out our mandate are
unacceptable. To avoid future confrontation, it is critical that this issue be resolved.
The political violence of the past has largely subsided despite delays to the
peace agreement. The ceasefire holds, and the unified transitional Government is up
and running. UNMISS is looking at this evolving situation and examining how it can
better support peace and protect civilians.
One area of change springs from last year’s report to the Council on the future
of protection of civilians sites (S/2019/741). As the report noted, external threats
that led to the establishment of protection of civilians sites no longer exist today.
For example, the protection of civilians site in Juba has become more of an outer
suburb of the town. Residents move back and forth daily to attend schools and
university, to shop and go to work. Therefore, in consultation with the Government,
non-governmental organizations, donors and internally displaced persons
themselves, we have gradually withdrawn troops and police from static duties at
the protection of civilians sites in Bor and Wau. That is also likely to occur at the
remaining three sites.
The spike in subnational violence is occurring in remote areas, not near
protection of civilians sites. We therefore have to deploy our forces to provide
protection where there is the greatest need. For example, freeing up troops from the
protection of civilian sites in Wau and Bor has allowed us to redeploy our forces to
hotspots such as Tonj and Jonglei, where people are in immediate danger. Following
the gradual withdrawal of peacekeepers, the protection of civilian sites will be
redesignated and sovereign control will be with the South Sudanese Government,
not the United Nations.
Let me be clear. No one will be pushed out or asked to leave when that
transition occurs. Humanitarian services will continue. The South Sudanese police

20-122663/27

S/2020/914

will be responsible for law and order. The United Nations police work closely with
them to build capacity and, in some areas, are co-locating with them.
Responsibility must lie with the Government to help its citizens to return home
or find other land to settle. The Government also holds the primary responsibility for
protecting the country’s citizens and respecting the rights of the displaced.
UNMISS, of course, maintains its clear mandate to protect civilians and will
intervene if necessary. With our need to respond to isolated outbreaks of fighting
across the country, our forces need to be robust, nimble and proactive. To do that, we
are looking at innovative ways of deploying our troops to overcome the challenging
environment, such as riverine patrols, rapid air transport and all-terrain vehicles.
That does not mean more resources. In fact, without tying down large numbers
of peacekeepers at protection of civilian sites, we can be more effective, with less. It
is about working smarter with the right mix of troops and the right logistics.
The foundations for change are under way, including reconfiguring our
military, police and civilian components. That is why we welcome the independent
strategic review of UNMISS requested by the Security Council. It is an opportunity
for us to review our mandate and implement better ways to meet the future demands
of South Sudan more effectively and efficiently.
No matter where they live, no matter who they are, all South Sudanese hope
for peace and prosperity. Our job is to do everything we can to make that dream
a reality.

4/27

20-12266

S/2020/914

Annex II
Statement by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mark Lowcock
Let me complement David Shearer’s briefing today by focusing on three
main areas: first, the humanitarian situation and the outlook in the coming months;
secondly, the protection of civilians and aid workers; and, thirdly, the support that
humanitarian agencies need to ensure their work can continue.
Despite some encouraging developments since the signing of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan in
September 2018 and the formation of the Revitalized Transitional Government of
National Unity this year, humanitarian needs, already high after years of conflict,
are again now rising due to more violence, flooding and the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19), which is bringing a host of health and wider consequences, including
increasing food insecurity.
Nearly 6.5 million people — more than half the population — faced severe
food insecurity at the height of the annual hunger season a few months ago.
COVID-19 has made this worse. Another 1.6 million vulnerable people, mainly in
urban settings, have been pushed to the brink.
Overall this year, 7.5 million people now need humanitarian assistance,
which is close to the levels in 2017, when we warned of famine. One million three
hundred thousand children under the age of five are forecast to be malnourished.
That is the highest in four years. To put it another way, about 10 per cent of the entire
population of South Sudan will be malnourished children who have not yet reached
their fifth birthday.
The risk of famine is emerging again in areas suffering localized violence.
Famine-like conditions — Integrated Food Security Phase Classification phase 5 at
the household level, in the jargon — are reported in Jonglei and the Greater Pibor
Administrative Area. The violence in those areas has destroyed livelihoods, forced
people to flee their homes and driven down food production.
A 19-year-old woman from Pibor recently told United Nations staff:
“We have been living a miserable life. This all started in February, and we did
not expect this situation to last for so long. I ran into the bush with my threemonth-old daughter. She was sick and died in July. Today is the first time that
I have had access to a health-care facility since February.”
South Sudan’s economy is contracting, affected by lower global oil prices and
the wider global recession. The Government has little money to respond to the health
and socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic. The price of basic commodities has
increased sharply. For example, the price of maize flour, which many people rely on,
increased by 50 per cent between March and July.
COVID-19 is also adding to the pressure on an already fragile health
system. Years of conflict have devastated basic services, including the health-care
system. South Sudan has one of the highest under-five mortality rates in the world.
Approximately 75 per cent of all child deaths in South Sudan are due to preventable
diseases, such as diarrhoea, malaria and pneumonia, with malnourished children
succumbing where the better fed would not.
The Council of Ministers has decided that schools, closed since March, can
reopen, but 2.2 million children were already out of school before COVID-19.

20-122665/27

S/2020/914

Two consecutive years of severe flooding have exacerbated food insecurity,
malnutrition and displacement. Last year, nearly 1 million people were affected.
The floods started earlier this year, and more than 500,000 people have so far been
affected. We fear the worst is yet to come, with the peak of the flooding season
normally in November and December.
Humanitarian access has been challenging in South Sudan for years, but the
pandemic, along with increased violence in some areas, has magnified pre-existing
access challenges. The capacity of humanitarian agencies to reach people who need
aid is now limited in some areas. The authorities imposed a range of restrictions
early in the pandemic, including on humanitarian agencies. They are being addressed
through ongoing negotiations, and domestic travel restrictions for humanitarian
workers have recently been lifted.
However, other challenges continue to limit on-the-ground presence in some
conflict-affected areas, such as Jonglei. Humanitarian agencies are looking at how
to set up small humanitarian hubs in remote areas to enable aid workers to deploy
more rapidly. Stocks are also being pre-positioned ahead of the rainy season, when
transport access will deteriorate, and larger distributions of rations are taking place.
I am also concerned about the safety of civilians and aid workers. This year’s
violence has resulted in hundreds of people killed, another 157,000 displaced and the
abduction of large numbers of women and children.
Although the peace agreement in 2018 has allowed an expansion in humanitarian
coverage and enabled some 1.1 million displaced people to return, about 1.6 million
remain internally displaced. In order to address that, what is needed is sustainable
peace, land allocation and the presence of basic services in areas of return or where
people choose to settle, including in urban areas.
An additional 2.2 million South Sudanese are still refugees in neighbouring
countries, mainly in Ethiopia, the Sudan and Uganda, where the generosity of
host communities is being stretched and tested due to limited funding for the
refugee response.
The violence continues to take its toll on women and girls, who face extreme
levels of sexual and gender-based violence. Most incidents between May and July
this year occurred during waves of local violence, with survivors unable to access
timely medical or psychosocial assistance.
South Sudan also remains one of the most dangerous places in the world
for humanitarian workers. At least 122 aid workers have been killed since 2013.
While we saw an improvement in the operational environment in 2019, it is now
deteriorating again as a result of increased violence.
This year, seven aid workers have been killed. Another 144 have had to be
evacuated and relocated as a result of threats to their security. Aid supplies have
been looted on at least 17 occasions, and a number of health centres have been forced
to suspend activities, interrupting life-saving services.
Notwithstanding an extremely challenging operating environment, the
humanitarian response in South Sudan is keeping millions of people from sliding
into famine. Despite COVID-19, humanitarian workers continue to deliver aid and
help save lives. Aid agencies have assisted more than 5 million people across South
Sudan in 2020.
But continued funding is needed to sustain health services and other lifesaving programmes. As a result of the fighting, flooding and COVID-19, funding

6/27

20-12266

S/2020/914

needs continue to grow. The South Sudan Humanitarian Response Plan is now larger
than ever, at $1.9 billion, funded to the tune of approximately one-third to date.
Let me conclude by seeking the Security Council’s support in three areas.
First, the Council should continue its backing for efforts to find political
solutions to end the violence. South Sudan needs a stable political and security
environment to recover from the impacts of prolonged conflict. Humanitarian need
will persist as long as conflict and underdevelopment persist. Secondly, the Council
should use its influence to ensure that humanitarian relief operations are facilitated
and aid workers are protected. Thirdly, I call on the Council to provide additional
resources for the Humanitarian Response Plan.

20-122667/27

S/2020/914

Annex III
Statement by the Gender and Social Justice Manager, Assistance
Mission for Africa, Nyachangkuoth Rambang Tai
My name is Nyachangkuoth Rambang Tai. It is an honour for me to sit before
the Security Council today as a feminist and a peace activist. I work for Assistance
Mission for Africa, a faith-based organization that promotes peace, transitional
justice, gender equality and sustainable livelihoods.
Like many South Sudanese, my parents were displaced during the war with the
Sudan. We returned home when South Sudan gained independence in 2011, unaware
that two years later violent conflict would begin again. In between the bullets and
destruction, I got married and had two children. I do not want my children to face
the same insecurity that I, and my parents before me, have faced. For more than three
generations now, we have been denied real peace.
I thank the Security Council for supporting the implementation of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. On this second anniversary of the Agreement, my remarks will focus
on addressing the ongoing intercommunal conflicts and ensuring that women
meaningfully participate in governance and peacebuilding.
Unfortunately, both intercommunal conflict and fighting among political
actors have increased, especially over the past six months in Jonglei, Lakes, Unity,
Western Bahr el-Ghazal, Central Equatoria and Warrap states, as well as the Greater
Pibor Administrative Area — that is, most of the country. Such an increase in
fighting has taken place despite the call for a ceasefire by the Secretary-General
and the subsequent adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) by the Security Council.
Meanwhile, flooding, locusts and the coronavirus disease pandemic have already
strained resources and humanitarian access. Hundreds of people have been killed
and women and girls are increasingly targeted for sexual violence.
The political violence has resulted in widespread poverty, hunger and the loss
of livelihoods. That, combined with the availability of weapons among civilians, has
contributed to the increase in intercommunal conflict. Communities now see the
opportunity for cattle raiding to afford the bride price, feed their families and gain
status in society. Years of conflict have also reinforced tribalism, which inspires
people to kill easily. The absence of accountability leaves communities to take
justice into their own hands and contributes to revenge attacks in cycles of violence.
Local human rights and peace organizations, including particularly women’s
groups, play a vital role in preventing and managing intercommunal conflict. Over
the past seven years, my organization has overseen a range of peace initiatives to
resolve conflicts between neighbouring communities in Lakes and Unity states. We
have facilitated multiple peace conferences, resulting in a network of local peace
committees that monitor potential violence and serve as mediators.
Through my experiences engaging with communities in conflict, I have seen
that empowered communities can build peace from the bottom up. Too often, people
say that the South Sudanese do not have the capacity to deliver change, but my fellow
citizens and I know the potential of national organizations to end conflict. As my
sister, Angelina Nyajima, shared in her briefing to the Council in March 2019, “[w]e
understand the complexities of what troubles our communities ... because we live
there” (S/PV.8480, p. 6).
I request the Member States and the United Nations agencies represented here
today to urgently provide more funding to local organizations, particularly womenled civil society, to continue important local peacebuilding initiatives. That funding
8/27

20-12266

S/2020/914

should be long-term and flexible to enable us to respond to the changing dynamics
and sustain any progress.
Another way to help address the cycle of violence is to ensure that transitional
justice is made a priority. We cannot expect citizens whose loved ones have been
killed to forgive and move on without healing and accountability. That is unrealistic
and will only encourage conflict. Instead, we need the three transitional justice
mechanisms provided for in chapter V of the Revitalized Agreement, especially
the Hybrid Court for South Sudan. I echo my sisters who have briefed the Council
in the past in urging it to work closely with the Government, the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development to fully implement all peace
agreement provisions, particularly those related to transitional justice.
Given the ongoing conflict and lack of justice, I would like to emphasize the
important role of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) in ensuring
strong protection for civilians. The withdrawal from protection of civilian sites
feels at odds with the UNMISS mandate. In Bor, the withdrawal took place without
proper notice or preparation, leaving families feeling vulnerable to attack. Internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in Wau, Bentiu and Juba protection of civilian sites fear
that they too will be abandoned and wonder how their safety will be guaranteed.
Simon, an IDP in Juba, stressed that the consequences of withdrawing the protection
of peacekeepers will be dire. It would be better, he said, for the United Nations to
first consider safe returns.
For residents in the protection of civilian sites, the threat of violence is
still real. Let me remind Council members that weapons are widely available and
intercommunal attacks continue. The implementation of the peace agreement is
slow. The Parliament is not yet in place, and the security arrangements are yet to
be completed.
I urge the Council to hold UNMISS accountable for its mandate to protect
civilians. UNMISS should consult with the communities in the protection of civilian
sites, inform them of specific timelines and alternative arrangements for their
security and partner with local organizations to ensure that any return, relocation or
integration efforts are safe, dignified and voluntary.
Before I conclude, I want to emphasize that gender equality and an end to
sexual violence must be realized for sustainable peace in South Sudan. Women are
raising their voices to achieve that. Recently, on social media under the hashtag
#SouthSudanesesurvivor, many young women and girls shared their experiences of
gender-based violence. For too long, survivors have been silenced, with perpetrators
able to target women and girls with a sense of impunity. I applaud their courage in
drawing attention to such violations.
Women are also campaigning for their full, equal and meaningful participation
in all levels of decision-making in South Sudan. I, along with other women leaders,
am challenging gender norms to collectively convince all South Sudanese that
women are born to lead. Unfortunately, parties to the peace agreement continue to
deny women the space and platform that they deserve. The Revitalized Transitional
Government of National Unity should be 35 per cent women. Yet today only 26 per
cent of Ministers, 10 per cent of Deputy Ministers and one out of 10 governors
are women.
This is unacceptable and a violation of the Revitalized Agreement. We want
a South Sudan where women’s and girls’ opinions and concerns are valued, and
where their right to participate in governance is respected. I urge the Council to
continue to demand the 35 per cent quota for women’s participation in all South
Sudan’s Government institutions be met.
20-122669/27

S/2020/914

Finally, I want to thank the 10 brave South Sudanese sisters who came before
me to brief the Security Council over the past six years. Unfortunately, many of their
recommendations remain unaddressed, so, in closing, I also urge the Council to
revisit their statements and ensure implementation on the ground.

10/27

20-12266

S/2020/914

Annex IV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Belgium to
the United Nations, Karen Van Vlierberge
Let me start by thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Shearer, Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Ms. Tai for their insightful briefings.
I will address three issues: first, the deteriorating security situation; secondly,
the problem of impunity and the need for transitional justice; and, thirdly, the
protection of civilians sites.
At our last meeting in June, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Shearer expressed alarm about the overall increase in violence. He added that the
violence could “no longer be pigeonholed as intercommunal” (S/2020/582, p. 3). As
we just heard from the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, this trend
has clearly continued in large parts of the country.
Belgium is deeply concerned about this violence, and we are alarmed by the
political and ethnic dimensions it has taken on.
We urge the Government to step up its efforts for dialogue and we ask the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to support initiatives that could
lower the tensions. We encourage the Mission to continue protecting civilians,
including through the establishment of temporary operating bases.
All too often, we receive reports about unspeakable human rights violations,
widespread sexual violence, grave violations against children and other atrocities
in South Sudan. Our first, collective concern should be to create the conditions to
prevent such crimes. Yet the persistent failure to address violations and abuses —
past and ongoing — and a profound lack of political will to hold individuals and
groups accountable, perpetuate the violence.
Some positive steps have been taken. Most recently, there were convictions by
the district court martial in Yei of a number of soldiers, including on rape charges.
This is commendable.
Still, the lack of accountability often remains, quite frankly, shocking. The
Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/890) illustrates this in a particularly painful way.
In June, senior military commanders of the South Sudanese army were promoted,
despite having been identified by UNMISS as involved in serious human rights
violations. Two of them are even on the United Nations sanctions list. In July, at least
two individuals allegedly involved in serious human rights violations, including
sexual slavery, were appointed to state governorship positions.
With regard to sexual violence, we have not forgotten Special Representative
Patten’s words of last July (S/2020/727):
“We must keep these crimes and their perpetrators in the spotlight of
international scrutiny. As the well-known legal maxim reminds us, justice
must be done, and be seen to be done. Survivors must be seen by their societies
as the holders of rights that will, ultimately, be respected and enforced.”
(S/2020/727, p. 4)
In South Sudan, as in other places, transitional justice is indispensable to
achieve sustainable peace, national reconciliation and healing, and the rule of law.
an entire chapter of the 2018 peace agreement is dedicated to transitional justice. It
needs urgent implementation, including through the establishment of the African
Union Hybrid Court for South Sudan. We urge the Government to finally make
justice a priority.
20-1226611/27

S/2020/914

As a final point, Belgium takes note of the announcement by UNMISS of
the gradual redesignation of the protection of civilians sites in Wau and Bor. It is
imperative that any return or relocation of internally displaced persons happen on a
safe, voluntary and dignified basis.
The protection of civilians remains at the core of the UNMISS mandate,
so mitigating measures should be put in place. Pending meaningful progress on
security sector reform, there is reason to act very prudently when handing over
United Nations control of the protection of civilian sites to sovereign actors. In all
scenarios, close coordination between UNMISS and all relevant actors, including
humanitarian organizations, will remain crucial. This is even more important in light
of the increasing humanitarian risks signalled in the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs white note of 4 September.
It is clear now that the positive developments of the start of this year have not
lead to a sustainable improvement of the situation in South Sudan. It is high time for
all parties to return to the spirit of compromise and to reaffirm their commitment to
the peace agreement. The people of South Sudan deserve peace and stability.

12/27

20-12266

S/2020/914

Annex V
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative China to the
United Nations, Dai Bing
[Original: Chinese]
I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Shearer and Deputy
Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings.
China is closely following the development of the situation in South Sudan.
Due to the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic and falling global crude oil
prices, the economic and humanitarian situation in South Sudan has deteriorated and
the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan faces many challenges. I would like to take this
opportunity to emphasize the following points.
First, China welcomes the positive progress made by South Sudan on issues
such as the appointment of governors. We encourage all parties in South Sudan
to bear in mind the overall interests of national unity and development, continue
to advance dialogue and consultation, and take steps to solve outstanding issues
of the Revitalized Agreement. The international community should fully respect
the ownership of the South Sudan Government, strengthen coordination with the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, and support
them in continuing their mediation efforts.
Secondly, peace in South Sudan has not come easily. The ceasefire stipulated
in the Revitalized Agreement has generally held of late. China hopes that all parties
will work together to sustain this positive momentum. The Secretary-General’s
report (S/2020/890) also notes that there are still sporadic intercommunal conflicts
that may undermine the progress of the current ceasefire. This deserves great
attention on the part of all parties in South Sudan. We call on all parties in South
Sudan to respond to the Secretary-General’s call for a humanitarian pause and jointly
maintain a peaceful and stable environment.
Thirdly, South Sudan’s economic foundation and health system are weak,
economic development and food security are under pressure, and the county is
currently facing practical difficulties caused by the pandemic. The international
community should actively provide assistance to South Sudan, especially targeted
assistance in the economic and health sectors, scale up investment in agriculture,
energy, infrastructure and health care, and help South Sudan implement the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. China has recently helped build a cervical
disease screening centre in South Sudan and sent a team of medical experts to South
Sudan to assist in the fight against the pandemic. These moves have been welcomed
by all sectors in South Sudan.
Fourthly, China appreciates the contributions of Special Representative
Shearer and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to peace and
stability in South Sudan. It is crucial to improve the safety and security of UNMISS
peacekeepers. We appreciate the corresponding measures taken by the Secretariat
and the Mission to that end. China notes that UNMISS has done a lot of work to
protect civilians. It must be pointed out that the fundamental solution for protecting
civilians will ultimately depend on progress in the political process and economic
reconstruction. Only in this way can we create a peaceful and stable environment
that will allow the displaced to return home and generate employment opportunities
for the people. China has noted the restrictions faced by UNMISS in delivering
its mandate. We hope to see strengthened communication between the South
20-1226613/27

S/2020/914

Sudanese Government and UNMISS, and believe that the relevant issues can be
properly resolved.
China will continue to support South Sudan’s political process and contribute
to its fight against the pandemic and its efforts towards economic development. We
are ready to work with the international community to promote the early realization
of peace, stability and sustainable development in South Sudan.

14/27

20-12266

S/2020/914

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
[Original: English and Spanish]
I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Shearer, Mr. Lowcock
and Ms. Rambang Tai for their briefings.
South Sudan is looking towards a better future, the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan constitutes an
important first step. In this regard, we welcome that President Kiir and Vice-President
Machar reached an agreement on the sharing of gubernatorial and state positions,
ending the impasse on state allocations. However, these political arrangements are
indivisible from the security issues. Although the ceasefire has mainly held, the
increased intercommunal violence continues to have devastating consequences on
communities and pose a threat to peace.
In this regard, it is highly concerning that women and children continue to be
disproportionately affected by the indirect effects of conflict, particularly in cases
of sexual violence reported in the context of intercommunal violence. We therefore
urge the parties to work harder to ensure that the guns are silenced and to ensure
accountability for cases of sexual violence, including compliance with the provisions
prohibiting sexual violence by all parties.
We urge the Government to establish a specialized court for crimes of sexual
and gender-based and to advance the work of the hybrid and mobile courts. We
welcome the initiative of President Kiir to address this spike in violence by launching
a dialogue with communities affected and appointing a high-level committee to
investigate such incidents and engaging community stakeholders to contain them.
On another positive note, we are encouraged by recent court decisions
sentencing members of the security forces to terms of imprisonment for serious
crimes, including sexual violence.
The cycle of intercommunal violence, combined with the threat of coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the seasonal floods, has further exacerbated
humanitarian needs in South Sudan. According to reports, hunger affected over
6 million people and millions of people are experiencing acute food insecurity.
With regard to the COVID-19 response, we are concerned that health facilities
are already overwhelmed by common cases such as malaria. In this sense, we
appreciate the critical role played by the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) and regional partners supporting the challenges that South Sudan faces
during this pandemic. We also call for respect to the right to health of all people and
access to medical treatment to those affected.
With regard to humanitarian efforts, we strongly condemn the attack and
killing of a humanitarian worker in a marked ambulance, as well as the killing of two
aid workers in Pajut town. We urge the parties to the conflict to end such violence
and remove access restrictions placed on UNMISS and humanitarian partners.
Although the Revitalized Agreement requires 35 per cent participation of
women in all institutions of governance, only one woman has been appointed as a
governor. On this issue, the Dominican Republic adds its voice to that of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of South Sudan, Beatrice Khamisa Wani-Noah, in urging women
to participate more in every area of governance, and urging the parties to comply
with the gender quota.
20-1226615/27

S/2020/914

Likewise, during the open debate held in April under the presidency of the
Dominican Republic on accelerating implementation of the youth, peace and security
agenda (S/2020/346), the Security Council had the privilege to hear from to Gatwal,
a young South Sudanese peacebuilder, who continues to contribute to a peaceful
future in the country.
As Gatwal reminded the Council, young people in South Sudan shaped the
peace process through their participation in the High-level Revitalization Forum,
increasing youth participation in broader governance structures, the naming of a
first Minister of Youth Affairs and the creation of a youth-led civil society coalition.
However, despite those achievements, young South Sudanese people continue to face
structural barriers to political, social and economic processes and already-restricted
civic spaces for youth participation are shrinking even more amid COVID-19. In this
regard, we echo Gatwal’s remarks and call on the Government to ensure the full,
equal and meaningful participation of young people in decision-making at all levels,
including political processes and democratic practices.
After two years, we must insist on the full implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement. People want to live in peace and the leaders are the ones that must strive
for it.

16/27

20-12266

S/2020/914

Annex VII
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Estonia

to

the

I thank Mr. David Shearer, Mr. Mark Lowcock and Ms. Rambang Tai for
their briefing.
Two years ago, we witnessed the signing of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. Unfortunately, we are still
far from a satisfactory situation. Despite the formation of a Transitional Government
in February, the full implementation of military unification and Government
institutions is totally behind schedule. In June, we welcomed the compromise
reached by President Kiir and First Vice-President Machar on the allocation of
states. We were hoping for a new momentum, which would help resolve the slow
movement on transitional security arrangements and ideally bring the country closer
to fully implementing the peace agreement. That, sadly, has not materialized. We
urge President Kiir and First Vice-President Machar to come to an agreement on the
governor of Upper Nile and finally move on to other pressing issues.
We remain very concerned about the increase in intercommunal violence,
which has increased significantly compared to the same period last year. The
ceasefire between the parties to the agreement continues to hold, which is the biggest
positive for us, but if the ongoing subnational violence continues, things might take
a turn for the worse, possibly, given the additional pandemic and floods, leading
to a humanitarian catastrophe. It saddens us to see that high-ranking politicians
and military commanders are also fuelling this violence. The current situation
gives us a timely reminder about the necessity of the sanctions and the territorial
arms embargo.
We truly hope that the South Sudanese authorities continue to prosecute and
sentence members of the security forces to terms of imprisonment for serious crimes,
including sexual violence. It is unacceptable that individuals who have committed
grave human rights violations to be appointed to political office without any form
of accountability. Attacks against the civilian population cannot be rewarded with
various official positions. Impunity must stop.
The overall humanitarian situation in the country remains dire, and has
worsened due to the pandemic. During the rainy season, the humanitarian situation
becomes more problematic, which is why the Government of South Sudan must do
everything in its power to help the citizens. This requires keeping the humanitarian
assistance and protection flowing, which, during the floods, is a question of life or
death. The pandemic should not be used as a pretext to curb the implementation of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) or to slow down
the implementation of the peace agreement. It is equally sad to see that violations of
the Status of Forces Agreement continue.
While supportive of the Mission’s efforts to adjust its force posture by
redesignating protection of civilians sites, we emphasize the need to ensure the safe
and a voluntary return and relocation of displaced persons currently in a protection
of civilian sites.
Last, but not least, I want to thank UNMISS personnel and Mr. David Shearer
for all their work in a very testing environment.

20-1226617/27

S/2020/914

Annex VIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
[Original: English and French]
I, too, would like to thank the Special Representative, Mr. David
Shearer; Mr. Mark Lowcock; and Ms. Nyachangkuoth Rambang Tai for their
insightful briefings.
I would like to emphasize three points in particular: the indispensable
furtherance of an inclusive peace process, the continual increase in intercommunal
violence and the response that must imperatively be given to humanitarian needs in
South Sudan.
France calls on the Transitional Government to continue its efforts decisively
to implement the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan. The agreement on the allocation of gubernatorial and
state positions of 17 June and the appointment of almost all of them are important
steps forward. Those steps must be followed by the appointment of the governor
of the Upper Nile and by the constitution of the Transitional National Legislative
Assembly. France recalls that the full participation of women and youth must, in this
regard, be effective and significant.
Concrete progress must be made as well on the other chapters of the transition,
particularly on the reform of the security sector and the fight against impunity,
through the establishment of a hybrid court, but also on full respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all citizens. Without justice and good governance,
there can be no lasting peace.
Furthermore, the continued fighting between signatory and non-signatory
groups to the peace agreement, in violation of their commitment to respect the
ceasefire, represents a grave threat to the peace process.
Secondly, the increase in intercommunal violence, particularly in Jonglei, is
an issue of major concern. The vicious circle of violence and impunity fuels human
rights violations, in particular those targeting women and children. The increase
in sexual and gender-based violence is unacceptable and must be met with a firm
legislative and judiciary response. We welcome the adoption last February of the
action plan on children affected by armed conflict and call for its full implementation.
France calls furthermore on the authorities of South Sudan to observe a moratorium
on the application of the death penalty with a view to its definitive abolition. In the
context of the coronavirus disease pandemic, France underlines the necessity for all
actors in South Sudan to fully implement the ceasefire demanded by the Council in
its resolution 2532 (2020).
In that context, the efforts of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) remain vital to ensure the protection of civilians located not only in
protection sites but also outside of them. I would recall that UNMISS must be able
to move freely in order to be able to implement its mandate. The full respect of the
Status of Forces Agreement provisions must, in this regard, be ensured.
As Mr. Lowcock recalled, the humanitarian situation in South Sudan remains
dramatic and is only worsening. More than 1.6 million people have been forced to flee
within their own country, and nearly 2.2 million have taken refuge in neighbouring
countries. Hunger affects 6 million people in South Sudan. It is therefore urgent that
all parties facilitate, in accordance with international humanitarian law, the swift,
safe and unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance.
18/27

20-12266

S/2020/914

Moreover, the murders of humanitarian workers in Jonglei, Central Equatoria
and Lakes are intolerable and must be investigated in order to fight relentlessly
against impunity for such acts. I commend the responsiveness of UNMISS, which
announced the establishment of temporary bases in the county of Lobonok in
response to renewed armed attacks against civilians and humanitarian convoys. The
protection of civilians, including humanitarian and medical personnel, must be an
absolute priority.
Finally, I would like to recall the full support of France for all UNMISS
personnel as well as for the humanitarian and medical actors present in South Sudan.
Their courage and determination contribute, day after day, to peace.

20-1226619/27

S/2020/914

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
At the outset, permit me, on behalf of the Niger, South Africa, Tunisia
and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1), to thank Mr. David Shearer,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General; Mr. Mark Lowcock, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs; and Ms. Nyachangkuoth Rambang
Tai, Gender and Social Justice Manager, Assistance Mission for Africa, for their
detailed presentations.
As a sovereign nation in its nascent stage, South Sudan continues to navigate
turbulent waters in its quest for a prosperous future. Today South Sudan is faced
with a plethora of complex challenges, both internally and externally, as are evident
in the Secretary-General’s recent report (S/2020/890).
The A3+1 welcomes the positive developments in South Sudan, in particular
the formation of the executive arm of the Revitalized Transitional Government of
National Unity.
We are steadfast in our view that the full implementation of the provisions of
the 2018 Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan, especially key elements such as the filling of the position of governor
in the Upper Nile and adherence to the 35 per cent quota participation of women in
all Government institutions is imperative to establish a peaceful environment and
improve the protection of civilians.
We further echo the appeal made by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) for the dissolution of the current Transitional National
Legislative Assembly and for the parties to reconstitute the Assembly in accordance
with the Revitalized Agreement.
The maintenance of the ceasefire is also crucial to advancing the dialogue
processes, specifically with the non-signatories to the Revitalized Agreement. To
that end, we call on all parties to continue respecting the ceasefire. We welcome the
overall decrease in political violence and appreciate President Salva Kiir Mayardit’s
determination to tackle lingering security issues, specifically the escalation of
intercommunal violence in Jonglei, Lakes, Warrap, Unity and Western Bahr
el-Ghazal. We also applaud the decision for the disarmament of civilians and the
formation of a national task force to address enduring intercommunal challenges
and pastoralist conflict, as well as the establishment of an investigation committee
on atrocities committed against civilians. In addition, we urge the authorities to
redouble their efforts and strengthen the State’s security apparatus to ensure the
safety of its citizens.
South Sudan continues to demonstrate political growth as a maturing
democracy, not only domestically but regionally and internationally. The admirable
approach to convening successful peace talks in Juba are a testament to this truth.
At the same time, South Sudan continues to face a dire humanitarian situation
that has been exacerbated by the coronavirus disease pandemic. This, together with
the economic challenges stemming from plummeting oil prices in the global market
and acute food insecurity whereby an estimated 6 million people are food-insecure,
remain extremely worrying. We acknowledge the support of the international
community to complement the Government’s humanitarian response efforts, but
much, much more needs to be done. We therefore encourage the international
community to assist in filling the deficit and achieve the $1.9 billion required for
South Sudan’s Humanitarian Response Plan for 2020.
20/27

20-12266

S/2020/914

Similarly, we call on South Sudan leaders to assist in facilitating humanitarian
access and urge the authorities to protect humanitarian personnel in the exercise
of their duties. We strongly condemn the killing of two humanitarian aid workers
and urge thorough investigation into those acts of violence. Equally, we are worried
about the ongoing violence against the groups made most vulnerable and stress the
need to respect international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Beyond the headlines of South Sudan’s humanitarian challenges, the tale of
climate change also needs considerable attention and action, as its deleterious effects
are underscored by severe weather events including seasonal floods, causing loss
of lives and livelihoods. Changes in weather patterns also create a fertile breeding
ground for desert locusts, which have infiltrated Eastern Equatoria, threatening the
livelihoods of many who depend on subsistence farming.
In closing, the A3+1 remains in solidarity with the people and the Government
of South Sudan. We take this opportunity to reiterate our appreciation and support
for the constructive efforts of UNMISS, IGAD, the African Union, the European
Union, the Community of Sant’ Egidio and all other relevant stakeholders in seeking
to bringing peace and stability to South Sudan.

20-1226621/27

S/2020/914

Annex X
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, James Roscoe
I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Shearer
and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings, and I am particularly
grateful to Ms. Tai for bringing her story and her pragmatic and clear vision to
the Council. Between them, they illustrated the dire and deteriorating humanitarian
situation faced by millions of South Sudanese and the urgent need for the full
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan.
I also want to convey the United Kingdom’s gratitude for the work of the
humanitarian community in South Sudan. We have heard today how challenging the
humanitarian environment is; with seven aid workers killed this year alone, it is a
sad fact that South Sudan remains one of the most dangerous places in the world to
be an aid worker. But we know that without them, countless more lives would have
been lost.
I should like to touch on three issues.
The first is the implementation of the peace agreement. Two years ago the
Council welcomed the leadership shown by all sides in signing the peace agreement.
Despite significant delays, we also welcomed in February the leadership by the
parties in forming the Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity.
Since then, we have seen some positive steps taken to build state-level institutions.
However, the people of South Sudan need to see the dividends of peace. We have
heard this a lot from colleagues today. Implementation of the peace agreement must
now be accelerated, and we stand ready to support further progress.
But ongoing violence is the key driver of humanitarian need in South Sudan.
We are deeply concerned by the increased violence that has led to so many civilian
deaths in recent months. We call on the Government in Juba and all those involved
to make concerted efforts to stop the killing and address the root causes of conflict
through effective governance and dialogue at the national and local levels. This
includes addressing outstanding issues under the peace agreement, notably the
appointment of a governor in Upper Nile state. We also call on non-signatories to
engage in the Rome process and for all sides to respect the cessation of hostilities.
With thousands of South Sudanese lives at risk, compromise and collaboration is
needed now more urgently than ever.
Secondly, on the humanitarian situation, the stalled peace process and
increasing subnational violence have exacerbated the stark deterioration of the
humanitarian situation. As we have heard today, the situation is desperate: 7.5 people
million in humanitarian need, economic deterioration and a growing risk of famine.
That has been amplified by the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic, by desert
locusts and by flooding. Already, more than half the population faces acute food
insecurity, and some areas now face the very real prospect of famine-like conditions.
This must be addressed without delay. I was impressed by Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock’s innovative approach to dealing with those challenges. But the bottom line
is clear: they need more resources.
The other impediment is the limits of humanitarian access that hurt those
who need it most. Again, it was good to hear that the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs is innovating to deal with challenges and provision, but it
is also vital that South Sudan’s Government ensure that humanitarian workers can
22/27

20-12266

S/2020/914

access communities in need and that the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) can carry out its mandate unhindered.
Finally, on the protection of civilians, it was incredibly worrying to hear about
the spike in violence, particularly the presence of actors from outside South Sudan
exacerbating the problem. Ultimately, the primary responsibility for protecting
South Sudan’s citizens rests with the Government of South Sudan, including with
respect to those currently living in United Nations protection-of-civilians sites. The
Mission’s plan to re-designate protection-of-civilians sites should be implemented
through close consultation with the communities affected and with humanitarian
actors in a transparent process that prioritizes safety and security. Again, we were
encouraged to hear Special Representative of the Secretary-General Shearer talk
about how the Mission can adapt to its operating environment and find new ways to
deliver on its mandate.
As others have said, it is also critical that South Sudan cooperate with rather
than inhibit UNMISS and ensure that the Mission can deliver on its protectionof-civilians mandate. I join Christoph and others in saying that we hope that the
representative of South Sudan can join us in December to give us the Government’s
perspective on these issues and also to hear directly the Council’s concerns and
the briefings.
The South Sudanese people deserve lasting peace and stability. We call on
all parties to redouble their efforts to realize that aim in the spirit of cooperation
envisaged in the 2018 peace agreement.

20-1226623/27

S/2020/914

Annex XI
Statement by the Political Coordinator of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Rodney Hunter
I thank Special Representative Shearer for his dedication to South Sudan
and for his informative briefing today. I also thank Under-Secretary Lowcock for
updating us on the dire humanitarian situation in the country.
The United States commends Ms. Tai’s dedication to building peace in South
Sudan. We echo her call for the full, effective and meaningful participation of women
in all spheres and at all levels of political leadership and in the peace process, and
we thank her so much for her briefing today. We really hope to hear more from her
in the days and years to come.
September 12 marked the two-year anniversary of the signing of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. South Sudan’s leaders have taken courageous steps to form the Government
of National Unity and to begin establishing provincial and local institutions. The
process of building a unified military has started. Negotiations with non-signatory
armed groups yielded a renewed cessation of hostilities agreement, albeit one that
remains imperfectly implemented.
The United States fully recognizes the efforts — domestic, regional
and international — that support achieving those benchmarks. We applaud the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and other regional partners that
continue to play a key role in achieving progress. We also recognize and welcome
South Sudan’s role in brokering peace agreements for the Sudan.
Now, however, is the time for South Sudan’s leadership to redouble efforts to
accelerate the implementation of their own peace agreement and to deliver stability
and security for the Sudanese people. South Sudan’s people have yet to see tangible
benefits from the political commitments made by their leaders. That will continue
to be the case until South Sudan’s leaders fully embrace the letter and spirit of their
own peace agreement.
When Ambassador Craft met with women in Malakal last year, she asked
them when they would believe that peace had finally come to South Sudan. Those
women told her they would believe when they were able to visit the market and
collect firewood without fear of violence. They would believe when they could
provide enough food for their family so that their children could go to school and not
be hungry. They would truly believe when they saw former soldiers from the various
warring parties walking side by side and working together to protect the people.
Unfortunately, we remain far from that point when the people of South Sudan
can believe that peace has come to the country. Violence in South Sudan remains
widespread and has increased from last year. More than 1,000 civilians have been
killed this year. Sexual and gender-based violence is committed with impunity, and
the abduction of women and children continues unabated.
As Under-Secretary-General Lowcock explained in his briefing (annex II),
the humanitarian situation in South Sudan remains among the most dire in the
world and is directly linked to ongoing conflict and violence in the country. Hunger
affects an estimated 6 million people in South Sudan. Over 157,000 persons have
been displaced since February. Nine humanitarian aid workers have been killed this
year. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic creates additional fiscal and
humanitarian needs, exacerbating challenges for those seeking to govern effectively
in South Sudan.
24/27

20-12266

S/2020/914

But through these challenging times, the United States continues to stand
with the people of South Sudan. Our Special Envoy just returned from Juba, where
he urged President Kiir and South Sudan’s Vice Presidents to undertake immediate
reforms and make meaningful investments in the peace agreement. All three Troika
Special Envoys were in Juba together for the first time since 2017, delivering joint,
face-to-face messages to leaders, humanitarian workers and civil society.
The United States remains the largest provider of humanitarian assistance,
which increased during the COVID-19 pandemic. To date, we have provided over
$40 million in virus-related assistance. That is in addition to past investments in
South Sudan totalling $6.4 billion over the past 20 years.
We continue to be a steadfast supporter of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) and its life-saving work to protect civilians in conflict.
We welcome and encourage continued UNMISS rapid deployments in Jonglei and
elsewhere to provide protection and deter violence against civilians.
Protecting civilians in protection-of-civilians sites remains an essential task.
As UNMISS continues to transition its role in those sites, we urge meaningful
coordination and transparency with the humanitarian community and with displaced
persons. We also look forward to the results of the Organization’s independent
strategic review of UNMISS.
In the months to come, the United States will judge progress in South Sudan’s
peace process in a few key areas.
First, there should be an end to South Sudan’s restrictions on UNMISS patrols
and movement. UNMISS is a critical component of the peace architecture in South
Sudan, and its operations have saved many thousands of lives. South Sudan’s leaders
need to start treating UNMISS like a partner, not an enemy.
Secondly, all parties and armed groups should adhere to cessations of
hostilities or ceasefires. Given the recent violence in the Equatorias, we call on
parties to abide by their commitments, including their renewed commitment under
the auspices of Sant’Egidio, to end conflict and expeditiously resume their dialogue.
Finally, we call for efforts to hold accountable those responsible for violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights abuses, including through
progress on implementing the hybrid court for South Sudan; ensuring that civil
society institutions, the media and opposition political parties can operate without
intimidation; and reducing corruption through the implementation of provisions
on joint governance, fiscal transparency and accountability in the Revitalized
Peace Agreement.
These areas for progress are not new. They reflect commitments already made
by South Sudan’s leaders and endorsed by the region and the international community.
We are simply asking South Sudan’s leaders to honour their own commitments.
If these leaders are able to step up now, put aside differences and accelerate
the implementation of the peace agreement, we believe that South Sudan’s people
will start to experience increased stability, security and prosperity. They will be able
to believe that peace has come.
The United States remains committed to the people of South Sudan and to
working with the transitional Government and the Council to enable peace and
prosperity for the country and the region.

20-1226625/27

S/2020/914

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I would like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under Secretary-General and
Mr. David Shearer, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for their
insightful briefings. We reiterate our full support for the work of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and Mr. Shearer in this challenging time of
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I also thank Ms. Rambang Tai for
her briefing.
Viet Nam welcomes the continued relatively positive developments in South
Sudan since the formation of the transitional Government. We commend the efforts
of relevant parties in implementing the 2018 peace agreement and upholding the
permanent ceasefire. That is greatly encouraging given the fact that the country has
been facing various challenges in recent months due to the COVID-19 pandemic,
heavy floods and rising food insecurity. We are also pleased to see the active role of
South Sudan as mediator of the peace process of its neighbour, the Sudan.
At the same time, we note that progress has remained slow on issues such as
joint security arrangements and the formation of the transitional national assembly.
Inter-tribal and community violence continue to be issues of particular concerns.
In the light of recent developments, allow me to highlight several points.
First, we reiterate the importance of the full implementation of the 2018 peace
agreement. We call on the South Sudanese parties to spare no effort in advancing the
joint security arrangements and establishing a transitional national assembly. We are
encouraged to see female representation in the Government and the local leadership
and look forward to seeing their increased participation.
We commend the tireless efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), the African Union (AU), UNMISS and other relevant parties
in promoting peace and stability in the country. At the same time, the international
community should take into account the current difficulties and challenges in South
Sudan. In that regard, we encourage IGAD, the AU, UNMISS and the neighbouring
countries to strengthen their support for the South Sudanese parties, including
through confidence-building measures and technical assistance. The role of IGAD
as mediator will continue to be critical.
Secondly, we emphasize the importance of continuing to uphold the permanent
ceasefire. Further effective measures are also greatly needed to address inter-tribal
and community violence in order to prevent the current peace process and the
sustainable development of the country from being adversely affected. Given that
UNMISS is beginning to withdraw from various protection-of-civilians sites, the
Government must continue to strengthen its primary responsibility — the protection
of civilians.
Thirdly, it is vital to address the economic and humanitarian challenges in
the country. We express our sincere condolences to the families of the victims of the
recent floods. We are particularly concerned about the high level of food insecurity,
which affects more than half of the population. We call on the Government and
other South Sudanese parties to continue to do all they can to promote sustainable
livelihoods for the people. We also urge the international community to strengthen
humanitarian assistance for South Sudan in this difficult time.
Fourthly, we commend the role of UNMISS, especially its women
peacekeepers, in this difficult period of the COVID-19 pandemic, and will continue
26/27

20-12266

S/2020/914

to support the work of the Mission. We would also like to commend the efforts of
the United Nations Mine Action Service in addressing the humanitarian challenges
in South Sudan.
Finally, Viet Nam reiterates that sanctions are a tool to be applied by the
Security Council only in a temporary and case-by-case manner in order to facilitate
the maintenance of international peace and security. Those measures should not
adversely affect the livelihoods of the people, the essential functioning of the
Government or the legitimate development of the country concerned, and should be
lifted when certain conditions are met. As Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015), concerning South Sudan, Viet Nam
will continue to work closely with the relevant Member States, the United Nations,
IGAD and the AU in advancing the implementation of the agreements among the
South Sudanese parties, thereby facilitating the midterm review of the sanctions
regime in December.

20-1226627/27
