United Nations

S/PV.6705 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6705th meeting
Thursday, 19 January 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Sangqu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Ms. Guo Xiaomei
Mr. Quintana
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen
Mr. Huth
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez
Mr. Choudhary
Mr. Chekkori
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Madureira
Ms. Taratukhina
Mrs. Balli
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Simonoff

Agenda
The promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on the rule of law and transitional justice in
conflict and post-conflict societies (S/2011/634)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-21054 (E)

*1221054*

S/PV.6705 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Philippines to participate in this
meeting.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The European Union and its member States very
much welcome the opportunity to continue the
discussion on this important topic here in the format of
an open debate.
The acceding country Croatia; the candidate
countries the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro and Iceland; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova align
themselves with this statement.
The rule of law has become a topic of discussion
in all relevant organs of the United Nations and is a
part of all United Nations activities. The rule of law is
a core principle for the internal legal and political order
of the European Union and for its external policy. The
importance of the rule of law in relation to the work of
the Security Council is no longer questioned. Rule of
law components are regularly incorporated into the
Council’s work in various situation-specific contexts.
In the interest of a more coherent and systematic
approach, thematic debates such as these are important.
We are deeply committed to upholding and
developing an international order based on the rule of
law, where international law, including human rights
law, humanitarian law and refugee law, is fully
respected and implemented. International law and the
rule of law are the foundations of the international
system, with the United Nations at its core. We
therefore remain staunch supporters of the activities of
the Organization in this field.
We take note of the Secretary-General’s recent
report (S/2011/634*) and of the progress made in

2

implementing the Secretary-General’s recommendations
made in his 2004 report (S/2004/616). With regard to
conflict and post-conflict situations, we believe that the
promotion of the rule of law is also essential. Ensuring
the rule of law before, during and after open conflicts,
and in peacekeeping operations themselves, is the most
tangible way to shoulder the Council’s responsibility in
upholding international standards. That is a task that
requires presence and resources over time.
In that regard, we support the recommendations
set out in the Secretary-General’s latest report. In
particular, we fully support the idea of enhancing our
existing dialogue and cooperation. We encourage the
Secretary-General to pursue his efforts aimed at
approaching rule of law initiatives in a comprehensive
and multidimensional manner, recognizing the
importance of the economic and social rights
dimensions of conflict to ensuring long-term peace and
security.
The European Union and its member States
support the forthcoming convening of the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law, to
be held at the beginning of its sixty-seventh session,
and looks forward to participating in that debate.
The rule of law is of critical importance for the
European Union’s external policy. Respect for justice
and the rule of law is an essential condition for peace
and stability in the consolidation and support of
democracy and in the fight against impunity. For the
EU and its member States, respect for the rule of law is
essential to conflict prevention, conflict resolution and
post-conflict reconstruction. It is inextricably linked to
the protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, and needs to be pursued at both the national
and international levels. We therefore strongly support
the role of the International Court of Justice as the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations, and call
on all States that have not yet done so to consider
accepting the jurisdiction of the Court in accordance
with its Statute.
Furthermore, the European Union is a staunch
supporter of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
By referring the situations in Darfur and Libya to the
ICC, in resolutions 1593 (2005) and 1970 (2011), the
Security Council took decisive action in combating
impunity, furthering the rule of law and bringing
justice to the victims. The EU and its member States
call on all States Members of the United Nations that

12-21054

S/PV.6705 (Resumption 1)

are not yet parties to the Rome Statute to ratify or
accede to it, call on all States parties that have not yet
done so to implement the Statute in their national legal
orders, and call on all States to cooperate fully with the
Court by enforcing its decisions, including through
relevant Security Council resolutions. The Rome
Statute serves as a prime example of the interplay
between international and national efforts in the area of
rule of law. The ICC is complementary to national
jurisdictions and is an important catalyst for the
development of domestic systems of justice. Security
Council support for national capacity-building for
justice is an important investment in peace and
security.
Special attention should be paid to giving women,
children and other vulnerable groups greater access to
justice. Specialized courts, for example family courts
or mobile courts, are tools to help to bring justice
closer to women and children.
With regard to the Secretary-General’s initiatives
to support the creation of national judicial capacities to
prosecute perpetrators of serious international crimes,
we would like to make reference to the European
network of contact points in respect of persons
responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes, which was set up in 2002.
With regard to conflict and post-conflict
situations, we emphasize the need to bring about
greater quality, coordination and coherence in the
engagement of the United Nations and its Members.
The United Nations should devote special attention to
the strengthening of mediation activities; such
activities should duly factor in justice issues, including
the prosecution of the perpetrators of atrocities, and
reject amnesties and immunities for the most egregious
crimes. We also encourage the Secretary-General to
proceed in ensuring that the United Nations responds
to requests for assistance in constitution-making and
legislative reform processes.
Finally, through the Instrument for Stability,
developed in large part by supporting initiatives of
United Nations agencies, the European Union provides
assistance in the field of the rule of law to countries
going through or emerging from a crisis. Timely
support has been provided to support constitutional
processes in countries emerging from political turmoil
and moving towards re-establishing national unity and
a democratic future. Support has also been provided to

12-21054

legislative processes key to the implementation of new
Constitutions, for example, in Bolivia, Zimbabwe and
Kyrgyzstan. Also, many of the civilian crisis
management operations carried out by the European
Union in the context of its Common Security and
Defence Policy focus on the rule of law.
The most prominent example is the EU’s Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo under the general framework
of resolution 1244 (1999). More than 2,000 EU civilian
experts are assisting the Kosovo authorities, in
particular in the police, judiciary, customs and
correctional services, in all areas related to the rule of
law, in order to ensure the adoption of best practices.
Through the EU Integrated Rule of Law Mission for
Iraq, the European Union also contributes to the
establishment of a professional Iraqi criminal justice
system.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Ms. Intelmann (Estonia): First of all, let me
congratulate South Africa upon its assumption of the
presidency this month and thank it for organizing
today’s debate.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union (EU).
We welcome the increased focus that the United
Nations is placing on the rule of law and justice
through discussions here in the Security Council, in the
General Assembly and through the concrete activities
that the United Nations system is undertaking. In the
light of recent profound political changes in many parts
of the world, and of new threats to international peace,
it is even more important that the rule of law remain on
the agenda of the United Nations.
My statement today is mainly about the
International Criminal Court (ICC). The relationship
between the Court and the United Nations is of crucial
importance in many ways. The year 2012 marks the
tenth anniversary of the Court. By now, the institution
has an established reputation and a respected role in
the international arena. In 1998, States agreed to create
a permanent International Criminal Court as the court
of last resort to end impunity for the most heinous
international crimes. They also agreed to assume, on a
national basis, primary responsibility for bringing
perpetrators of such crimes to justice. At present,
120 States are parties to the Rome Statute. The

3

S/PV.6705 (Resumption 1)

campaign for the universality of the Statute is ongoing;
it is supported by the States parties, regional actors and
the United Nations.
As efforts towards achieving the universal
ratification of the Rome Statute continue, the need to
work on strengthening national jurisdictions to be able
to prosecute crimes under the Rome Statute is
becoming more and more acute. The Court and States
parties are carrying out important activities in support
of countries in need. It is clear, however, that, if we
want to succeed, the ability to prosecute international
crimes must become an integral part of the broader rule
of law activities of all major development actors. The
United Nations system is well placed to play a major
role in that endeavour. Our joint efforts to provide
assistance for developing national capacities to cope
with crimes under the Rome Statute would strengthen
national justice systems as a whole. I am very glad to
say that there is an ongoing dialogue between the
Court, the Assembly of States Parties and the United
Nations concerning that issue. While combating
impunity, the ultimate goal is preventing the
commission of crimes in the first place.
The ability of the Court to fulfil its functions also
depends on the ability and resolve of States parties and
other States to offer their cooperation. There are still a
number of outstanding arrest warrants. States parties
are constantly working through their Bureau and their
President to ensure full cooperation with the Court,
especially in the crucial area of the execution of arrest
warrants. The Security Council has referred two cases
to the ICC, and in these cases, too, arrest warrants are
outstanding. Recently, two findings of non-cooperation
were referred to the Security Council by the Court.
Continuing international focus on cooperation with the
International Criminal Court and international tribunals
is of the utmost importance if the quest to end impunity
is to be credible and successful.
The face of those suffering from atrocious
international crimes is very often that of the most
vulnerable — women and children. Addressing the
plight of victims through broader community
programmes, including education, is one of the
activities the Court has undertaken. These activities,
funded by voluntary contributions, target affected
communities and help in healing, while making a
contribution to a deeper change in society by helping
them regain their dignity and rebuild their

4

communities. Here again, interaction with the United
Nations system is of great value.
Resolution 1325 (2000) and other Council
resolutions on women, peace and security and on
children in armed conflict should remain high on the
agenda of the United Nations. We are concerned by
continued reporting about mass rapes as a method of
war and the very low numbers of perpetrators who
have been brought to justice. The only way to remedy
this situation is to ensure that all national jurisdictions
are able to investigate and prosecute the worst crimes
under international law.
Considering that the Council has recognized that
conflict-related sexual violence is a legitimate threat to
international peace and security, we hope that it will
remain actively engaged with the matter. It is important
to maintain focus on gender equality and the
empowerment of women in broader rule of law
activities. I hope that the high-level meeting on the rule
of law to be held by the General Assembly in
September will provide new impetus to these
discussions.
In conclusion, I would like to say that Estonia is
firmly committed to the international order based on
international law, including human rights law and the
rule of law. Estonia has become an international donor
and the rule of law enjoys a prominent place in our
development cooperation strategy. Estonia has created
a stable and fruitful basis for cooperation with many of
our partner counties by sharing our recent experience
of social, political and economical reforms. That is
why we support and highly value EU cooperation in
the field of rule of law with its eastern neighbours in
the framework of the Eastern Partnership. We are also
actively involved in several EU civilian crisismanagement operations with a focus on the rule of law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Finland.
Mr. Viinanen (Finland): I thank you, Sir, for
having organized this debate. I congratulate the
Secretary-General on the excellent report we have
before us today (S/2011/634*). We support the full
implementation of the recommendations contained
therein.
Finland aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union. In addition, I will make some
remarks on two interrelated issues: first, rule of law

12-21054

S/PV.6705 (Resumption 1)

and transitional justice in peace processes, mediation
and peace agreements; and secondly, access to justice
for women, children and vulnerable groups.

unfortunately still the weakest in peace negotiations
and post-conflict processes: women, children and
marginalized groups.

The rule of law in the context of peace and
security has been debated by the Council for almost a
decade, and a common understanding has emerged
about the centrality of justice and the rule of law to the
prevention of conflicts and the sustainability of peace
agreements. When bringing warring parties to a
negotiating table, a particular challenge is to address
the simultaneous requirements of stability and justice
in a balanced way.

The Secretary-General recommends a United
Nations policy to ensure the full inclusion of
marginalized populations. Good progress is being made
by United Nations actors in advancing women’s access
to justice in post-conflict situations. I would like to
commend the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict in
this regard.

In his report, the Secretary-General confirms that
the United Nations policy to reject any endorsement of
amnesty for genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity or gross violations of human rights is
increasingly reflected in peace agreements, ceasefires
and other arrangements. Blanket amnesties are
considerably less common today than they were
10 years ago. Despite this positive development, we
agree with the Secretary-General’s conclusion that a lot
remains to be done, as the incorporation of justice and
accountability measures into peace agreements remains
uneven. This is an area where we stand ready to work
together with the United Nations, the Council and all
Member States to further enhance the quality of
mediation, the resulting peace agreements and their
implementation.
Human rights violations and the need for justice
cannot be overlooked in the name of stability. Peace
can be sustainable only if it goes hand in hand with
justice and respect for human rights. There should be a
multifaceted and properly sequenced transitional
justice strategy to address the legacy of violations of
human rights and international law, including
prosecutions,
truth-seeking,
reparations
and
institutional reform. The World Bank’s World
Development Report 2011 demonstrates that providing
improved security, justice and jobs is a precondition
for a successful transition to stability. If one of these
elements is missing, transitions are less likely to
succeed.
It is important to ensure that the rule of law is
fully taken into account in all reform and
reconstruction efforts undertaken in conflict and postconflict situations. In so doing, priority should be
given to access to justice for those who often suffer
disproportionately in conflict and whose voices are

12-21054

Children need our attention. The SecretaryGeneral in his report recommends the development of
common minimum standards on children and
transitional justice. Finland fully supports that call.
Another area where Finland would like to see progress
made is reparations for victims of conflict and of
serious violations. We believe that innovative
measures, such as collective reparations or measures
that create economic and employment opportunities,
could greatly contribute not only to justice being done
but also to the broader goal of peacebuilding.
Although I have not mentioned many pertinent
issues — such as the role of the International Court of
Justice, the importance of the International Criminal
Court and support for the implementation of the
principle of complementarity to its fullest extent, or
due process considerations of sanctions regimes — our
support for all the essential building blocks of the rule
of law both at the international and national level is
unwavering. I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to
address the Council and stand ready to work with the
Council and the whole United Nations membership in
advancing the rule of law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank South Africa for having organized
this debate. I would also like to state that Switzerland
associates itself with the statement to be made by the
representative of Austria on behalf of the Human
Security Network. In our national capacity, however,
we would like to bring the following three points to the
attention of the Council.
There is a great deal to say on this issue, in
particular on the critical role of the International Court
of Justice in maintaining a world order based on law,

5

S/PV.6705 (Resumption 1)

but given the limited time available, we should like to
draw the Security Council’s attention to three points
that we believe to be of particular relevance.
First, we welcome the October 2011 report of the
Secretary-General on the rule of law and transitional
justice (S/2011/634*). The report rightly stresses the
need for a holistic approach to conflict and postconflict situations. The principles on combating
impunity that were formulated by the Sub-Commission
on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights
between 1994 and 2005 are the cornerstone of such an
approach. Those principles state that dealing with the
past in an effective and lasting way must include
processes of truth-telling, justice, reparations to
victims and institutional reforms, aimed at ensuring
that past abuses do not recur. More needs to be done so
that a coherent approach is pursued systematically
across United Nations activities and is felt in the field.
In that context, we believe that it is particularly
important to draw the attention of the Security Council
to the new mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the
promotion of truth, justice, reparations and guarantees
of non-recurrence, established by the Human Rights
Council by consensus in September 2011. That new
special procedure was put in place to contribute to the
fight against impunity, to enable States to better fulfil
their obligations and to give a voice to victims and
ensure that their rights are respected. We call on the
Security Council to actively consider the work of the
Special Rapporteur, and we hope that the Rapporteur
will receive the full support of the Council.
Secondly, we wish to draw the attention of the
Security Council to the conclusions of the World
Bank’s World Development Report 2011 on conflicts,
security and development. In our view, the report
highlights several crucial aspects that must be part of
discussions on justice and the rule of law. In particular,
it points to the links between conflict, impunity and the
weakening of Government structures, while also
emphasizing the clear links between the economy,
development and the rule of law.
The report also states that justice and the rule of
law are essential in the prevention of conflicts and the
consolidation of peace. An investment by the Security
Council in the rule of law is therefore not only a good
investment in the maintenance of peace, it is also a
good investment in development.

6

We recommend that the conclusions of the report
be carefully considered by the Council. Much remains
to be learned about exactly how the rule of law can and
must be strengthened in post-conflict situations. By
systematically including the strengthening of justice
and the rule of law in its mission objectives, the
Security Council could itself help to move this issue
forward by insisting on regular evaluations of the
progress achieved. I would cite the recent positive
example of resolution 2027 (2011), on Burundi, in
which this approach was highlighted.
Thirdly, the Secretary-General’s report calls on
the United Nations to make its measures more
predictable, effective and transparent. Recourse to
international legal mechanisms should not be exempted
from those requirements. That is why we believe that
the Security Council should develop a predictable and
coherent approach with regard to the situations that it
refers to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), while supporting past decisions.
The ICC is a court of law; as the Court is a
judicial body, the principles of equality and of
objectivity play an even more important role than
elsewhere. The implications for the action of the
Security Council are basically twofold. First, if the
Security Council refers a case to the Court in a given
situation, it must also do so when dealing with other
comparable cases. Secondly, once it has referred a
case, it must continue to give its full support, including
its financial support, to the work of the Court, while
respecting its independence and its decision-making
autonomy.
Mr. President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
would like to thank South Africa for convening this
open debate. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2011/634*) and for his
statement this morning. Of course, the Security
Council, as the body responsible for international
peace and security, plays an important role in
promoting human rights.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Austria on behalf of
the Human Security Network.
I would like to recall that heads of State and
Government met here in New York in 2005 and

12-21054

S/PV.6705 (Resumption 1)

adopted the World Summit Outcome (General
Assembly resolution 60/1), in which they expressed
their commitment to promote the protection and
promotion of human rights, the rule of law and
democracy. They also highlighted the close link
between those concepts and how they are mutually
reinforcing. the rule of law must operate both in
international relations and within States. Respect for it
at the international level is an essential element for the
peace and stability of nations and for democratic
governance and development.
As the Secretary-General expressed so well in his
report to the General Assembly, respect for the rule of
law at the international level is at the very foundation
of the Charter of the United Nations. In their mutual
relations, all States must respect legal norms that are
binding upon them, submit their disputes to agreed
methods for peaceful settlement and respect the
sovereign and legal equality of States. Those are what
is meant by the rule of law at the international level.
Chile accords the utmost importance to
promoting respect for the rule of law and believes it is
crucial to strengthen it. As a country that respects
international law, we recognize and support the
principles of the Charter as essential values for any
modern society. Of course, those and other elements,
such as respect for international treaties, contribute to
harmonious development and peaceful coexistence
between nations.
At the same time, the rule of law must be
respected within States. Respect for it is a necessary
precondition for domestic peace, which is linked to
international peace. The proper functioning of national
institutions and bodies allows for the normal
development of the rule of law. Unless there is respect
for those institutions and organizations, a State cannot
develop its activities properly. In legal terms, that
means full respect for human rights and the existence
of an independent legal system that acts in a legitimate
way. It also means that anybody who commits a crime
must answer for his conduct before legal bodies, no
matter what post he occupies, and the law must be
equally applied to all.
Clearly, the primary role in the observance and
respect for the rule of law belongs to States and their
institutions, which have the main responsibility of
ensuring that the rule of law is fully implemented.
Nevertheless, the international community, and especially

12-21054

the United Nations through its main organs — the
General Assembly, the Security Council and the
International Court of Justice — must also watch over
and encourage respect for the rule of law.
Respect for the rule of law allows us to prevent
the outbreak of internal conflicts. In that regard, the
international community, and the United Nations in
particular, must establish mechanisms that allow us to
avoid the outbreak of internal conflicts. In that
connection, there is a great window of opportunity for
preventive action, which can avoid many conflicts. In
cases where conflicts cannot be avoided, the postconflict period must be managed in a way to overcome
those obstacles to Governments implementing efforts
to attain national institutional reconstruction.
As crucial pillars of the rule of law, executive,
legislative and judicial bodies must quickly be rebuilt
in order to ensure the proper stability for the
reorganization of society. In such cases, there must be
close collaboration between Governments and the
international community, in particular the United
Nations, which must continue to work to achieve those
goals. Post-conflict peacebuilding must therefore take
into account issues related to the rule of law and to
human rights.
The role of truth commissions with regard to
respect for the rule of law should not be left outside
those peacebuilding processes. They have played a
very important role in various countries. While
respecting the particular character of each country, it is
important that truth commissions be considered as a
factor to favour peace and reconciliation.
In those processes, there must be compatibility
between justice and peace, without in any way
sacrificing any of those values. Internal peace cannot
be achieved without justice, and justice must be
exercised while taking into account that the goal is to
achieve peace. To that end, the aim should be a fully
legitimate justice system with the authority to impose
its decisions. Similarly, domestic justice system should
abide strictly by international laws and standards,
including respect for due process for all, especially the
most vulnerable sectors of society. In that connection,
peacekeeping operations must not fail to take into
account elements that promote appropriate justice.
The establishment of the International Criminal
Court represents an important element in terms of
enhancing the rule of law. The Court is called upon to

7

S/PV.6705 (Resumption 1)

act in cases where States in which crimes under its
jurisdiction have been committed are not in a position,
or are unwilling, to undertake legal proceedings.
International ad hoc criminal tribunals have fulfilled
the same function.
In conclusion, we would like to observe that,
while it is up to each State to implement the terms of
the Secretary-General’s report — in other words, to
build a just, safe and peaceful world governed by the
rule of law — it is also up to the international
community as a whole. We agree with the SecretaryGeneral on the need to reflect on ways in which the
international community can better carry out and
coordinate its initiatives to strengthen the rule of law.
For that reason we support the convening of the highlevel meeting that will be held on 24 September during
the next session of the General Assembly as an
example of a contribution on this theme.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr.
White
(Australia):
I
thank
you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate.
Australia also wishes to express its thanks to the
Secretary-General
for
his
thorough
report
(S/2011/634*) and presentation this morning. We also
look forward to participating actively in the high-level
meeting on the rule of law in September.
Australia supports the Council’s increased role in
promoting the rule of law, which is essential to
building confidence in institutions of governance and
to underpinning economic and social development.
Support to justice and security institutions and to
ending impunity is central to the peacebuilding task of
the United Nations and to reducing the risk of relapse
into conflict.
Over the lifetime of the United Nations, our
collective understanding of the rule of law, including
criminal accountability for serious crimes, has
deepened. We have come to understand the challenges
and risks that rule of law deficits pose to international
peace and security. We now know that complex
situations in which a rule of law deficit exists require
multidimensional, well-coordinated and specifically
tailored responses. Those responses take time. They
require long-term commitment to establish the
foundations for peace and for legitimate governance.

8

The majority of peacekeeping missions now have
rule of law mandates. That in itself makes clear the
Council’s acceptance of the importance of the rule of
law to the maintenance of peace and security. The
Council should continue to provide strategic direction
on the implementation of those mandates in order to
ensure that they are coordinated and properly
sequenced. Of course, issuing a mandate is not the end
of the story. Rule of law mandates must be maintained
and properly implemented to be effective.
As emphasized in the Secretary-General’s report,
the successful implementation of rule of law activities
requires a coherent approach, particularly through
increased
field
coordination,
stronger
policy
development and strengthened support from various
parts of the United Nations system. The importance of
planning is reflected in the latest strategy for
peacekeepers from the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support, which
seeks to provide guidance in relation to the
prioritization and sequencing of early peacebuilding
tasks, many of which are related to the establishment
of the rule of law.
The Council can make a vital contribution to the
strategic implementation of the rule of law on the
ground by ensuring that its mandates are adapted in
response to changing circumstances. Working closely
with other parts of the United Nations system,
including the Peacebuilding Commission, the Council
should ensure that rule of law mandates evolve over
time to reflect current and specific needs across the
justice sector, as well as to ensure that programmes
appropriately address the needs of societies as they try
to rebuild their institutions following conflict.
It is essential that the Council continue to play a
leadership role in encouraging a culture of
accountability. Accountability is a necessary guiding
principle for States trying to develop robust national
institutions that enjoy the confidence of the citizens
they are established to protect. Australia’s experience
is that accountability and justice need to be led by
national institutions. It is both the sovereign right and
the responsibility of individual Member States to
develop the administrative, judicial and security
institutions necessary to underpin sustainable peace. It
is the role of the international community to enhance
the capacity of those national institutions, which are
not only key to accountability but are also critical for

12-21054

S/PV.6705 (Resumption 1)

deterrence, and therefore to breaking cycles of violence
and instability.
In our own region, Australia has worked in
partnership with the Pacific Islands Forum to support
the Solomon Islands Government’s efforts to
strengthen its rule of law institutions. The focus of that
effort has been not only on the investigation and
prosecution of those responsible for crimes committed
during the 1998-2003 ethnic conflict, but on
strengthening the entire judicial system, including by
ensuring that accused persons have access to adequate
legal representation. The work of the United Nations in
supporting the investigation of serious crimes by the
Prosecutor General of Timor-Leste is another example
of a case where the international community enhanced
accountability at the national level through support for
national institutions. However, Australia also
recognizes that while the responsibility for promoting
accountability and the rule of law primarily lies with
national Governments, the Council should also
continue to encourage cooperation with established
international accountability mechanisms, such as the
International Criminal Court.
In conclusion, it is clear that weak justice and
security institutions place already vulnerable people in
post-conflict or fragile societies at greater risk. It is
necessary for all of us working within the United
Nations system to promote the development of robust
judicial and rule of law institutions that effectively
protect citizens in post-conflict societies. That
protection underpins the stability and security
necessary to allow societies to develop. It should
continue to be core work for the Council.

upholding the principle of accountability, providing
assistance to victims, strengthening the normative
framework of transitional justice and restoring citizens’
confidence in their justice and security institutions.
The Secretary-General’s October 2011 report
(S/2011/634*) on the rule of law and transitional
justice in conflict and post-conflict societies illustrates
the wide range of activities undertaken by the United
Nations and its Member States to promote the rule of
law at the global level. We encourage the SecretaryGeneral to continue his efforts to address rule of law
initiatives in a comprehensive and multidimensional
manner. In that regard, the high-level meeting of the
General Assembly on the rule of law at the national
and international levels, scheduled for 24 September,
will be an important milestone.
The Security Council is undeniably playing an
increasingly active role in promoting the rule of law.
Since 2004, it has referred to the rule of law and
transitional justice in more than 160 resolutions. More
important, it has included support for the rule of law in
the mandates of many special political and
peacekeeping missions. The increasingly frequent
participation of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights in the meetings and deliberations of the Council
serves as further testimony to this growing
commitment. We can only encourage the Council to
continue on this path and to take full advantage of the
available tools, including special procedures.

I fully associate myself with the statement made
on behalf of the European Union.

In order to maintain the legitimacy and
effectiveness of the Council’s action in this field, it is
all the more important for the Security Council itself to
adhere to the fundamental principles of the rule of law
in the conduct of its work. The expansion of the
mandate of the Ombudsman under the Al-Qaeda
sanctions regime pursuant to resolution 1989 (2011)
and the growing use of the International Court of
Justice to clarify the legal elements of international
disputes are examples of measures that strengthen the
legitimacy of actions undertaken by the Council. The
Court’s role in maintaining international peace and
security is further strengthened when Member States
recognize its compulsory jurisdiction, as Luxembourg
has done since the Court’s establishment.

The efforts of the United Nations in the service of
the rule of law are indispensable to international peace
and security. During and after conflicts, it is important
to assist countries to re-establish the rule of law by

Allow me also to highlight the importance that
we attach to combating impunity, as well as to the
International Criminal Court in that regard. The
International Criminal Court is a classic example of the

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by congratulating the South
African presidency of the Security Council for having
organized this open debate on the promotion and
strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

12-21054

9

S/PV.6705 (Resumption 1)

interaction between the national and international
levels with respect to the rule of law. The Court is
complementary to national jurisdictions, and its
permanent character allows it to help prevent the most
serious crimes and to fulfil a critical role in conflict
and post-conflict situations.
Luxembourg’s commitment to the rule of law
further manifests itself through our engagement with
the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
The experience of the PBC shows that lasting peace
cannot be achieved without the implementation of the
principles underlying the rule of law — universal
access to justice and equality before the law, the
maintenance and protection of the rights and freedoms
of each individual, the primacy of law and the fight
against corruption. It is therefore only right that the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law is a
priority for each of the six country-specific
configurations of the PBC.
Finally, I would like to highlight the support that
for a number of years Luxembourg has provided to the
activities of the International Center for Transitional
Justice and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations Office of Rule of Law and Security
Institutions, as well as our support for the proposed
United Nations rule of law indicators, implemented
jointly by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
It is by working together that we will succeed in
strengthening the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mauritius.
Mr. Meetarbhan (Mauritius): My delegation
wishes to focus exclusively on one aspect of this
debate, although we support the view that the many
issues raised by other speakers deserve attention and
consideration.
The rule of law, whether at the national or
international levels, requires enforcement and adequate
machinery for the settlement of disputes. Those are
essential components of the rule of law because a
normative framework, however well constructed, is not
sufficient. Unfortunately, that dimension of the rule of
law is often overlooked at the international level. The
rule of law at the international level can be really

10

meaningful only if there is adequate machinery for the
redress of grievances and the settlement of disputes.
Article 2 of the United Nations Charter provides
that all Members shall settle their disputes by peaceful
means. Article 33 spells out the means and ways of
doing so. In the same spirit, in its Chapter XIV, the
Charter provides for the establishment of the
International Court of Justice. However, recourse to
international adjudication for the settlement of disputes
between States has historically required the consent of
the States concerned. In recent times, a number of
bilateral or multilateral agreements have provided for
the prior commitment of States to submit to arbitration
or adjudication. Mauritius welcomes that development.
However, recourse to judicial or quasi-judicial
means or arbitration for determining disputes between
States still requires, as a general rule, the consent of
both parties. Giving consent is too often a matter of
bargaining power between the parties, and the stronger
party will often withhold consent because it can bear
the cost of denying the weaker party access to a
judicial determination of the law applying to the
contentious issue. Parties of similar size or economic
power therefore could be more likely to accept that a
dispute between them be referred to adjudication or
arbitration, but legal disputes between two parties of
unequal strength are likely to remain unresolved.
That is not consistent with the application of the
rule of law at the international level. Security requires
an appropriate legal framework for the redress of
grievances or the settlement of disputes so that some
States are not frustrated in their attempts to find a
peaceful settlement to their legal disputes. The
international community has yet to set up adequate
machinery for the settlement of legal disputes that is
available to all States.
Only about one third of the United Nations
membership has made declarations under Article 36 of
the Statute of the International Court of Justice to
accept the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court. Many
States that have made such declarations have also
stated reservations that limit the Court’s jurisdiction or,
in many cases, exclude it. Other States seek to vary or
revoke their declaration when a dispute is submitted or
is about to be submitted to the Court, to exclude the
competence of the Court over the dispute concerned.
Those examples illustrate the kind of difficulties a
State may have in settling a claim under international

12-21054

S/PV.6705 (Resumption 1)

law. One State involved in a dispute may refuse to
negotiate in good faith and seek to ensure that no
international tribunal can determine the law applicable
to the dispute.
Mauritius welcomes the decision of the President
of the General Assembly to adopt, as the theme for the
current session of the General Assembly, “The role of
mediation in the settlement of disputes by peaceful
means”. Mauritius also welcomes the decision to
convene a high-level meeting on the rule of law during
the sixty-seventh session. However, my delegation
wants to stress that the debate on the rule of law must
apply at both the national and international levels. We
therefore look forward to Member States discussing the
rule of law as it applies to inter-State relations as part
of the forthcoming debates.
My delegation is fully conscious of the fact that it
might not be realistic to expect that States are ready to
accept compulsory jurisdiction or that the international
legal order would contain provisions on justiciability
and judicial authority similar to what obtains in
domestic legal orders. However, the United Nations
has a duty, as part of the promotion and strengthening
of the rule of law in the maintenance of international
peace and security, to initiate a constructive dialogue
on the whole issue of the settlement of legal disputes.
Initially, that debate could focus on the adoption
of standards of conduct to which all States would
subscribe. The philosophy underlying such standards
could be that respect for the rule of law at the
international level entails a commitment to good-faith
negotiation, conciliation, mediation or other forms of
non-judicial or quasi-judicial settlement of legal
disputes. Alternatively, when a State does not accept
any of those, the standards of conduct could provide
that the State will submit to some form of international
adjudication. No subject of international law should be
left without any means or forum for the settlement of a
dispute or for determination of the law.
In his 20 August 2010 report on strengthening
and coordinating United Nations rule of law activities,
the Secretary-General stated:
“In 2008, I emphasized that in fulfilling its
responsibilities, the United Nations must work
towards the universal application at the
international level of the Organization’s
definition of the principle of the rule of law.”
(A/65/318, para. 9)

12-21054

In the same report he went on to say,
“The principle that all individuals and
entities, including States, are accountable to the
law lies at the heart of the rule of law.
Responsibility of all subjects of international law
for fulfilling their obligations is thus essential to
any concept of rule of law at the international
level.” (ibid., para. 24)
The credibility of the debate over the rule of law
will be challenged if it is essentially limited to the rule
of law within States and does not encompass the rule of
law among States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): The Security Council
has a particular role to play in promoting international
law, both by observing it — by adhering to it — and by
promoting it.
I would like to make a few brief points in this
timely debate. First, I want to underline the need to
fight impunity. Norway remains a strong supporter of
efforts to curb impunity for international crimes. Over
the past few decades, one of the most significant
developments in international law, and in international
relations in general, was the establishment of the
international criminal tribunals. Of course, the most
prominent of those is the International Criminal Court
(ICC).
We are encouraged to note that the number of
States parties to the Rome Statute continues to grow.
More and more States consider the Court to be an
important tool in maintaining international peace and
justice. However, we remain concerned over reports, as
well as judicial findings of the Court itself, that give
clear evidence of failures to deliver mandatory
cooperation with the ICC in the Darfur situation. We
therefore continue to encourage the Security Council to
assess and adopt measures that help to ensure
compliance with resolution 1593 (2005), which
referred the Darfur situation to the Court.
It goes without saying that international courts
can deal with only a tiny fraction of all cases of serious
crime. Efforts to fight impunity must therefore first and
foremost be rooted at the national level. In an
increasingly globalized world, the successful
prosecution of a criminal case frequently requires the
legal cooperation of several States. States should

11

S/PV.6705 (Resumption 1)

establish and exercise jurisdiction over transnational
criminal acts, so that those suspected of such crimes
cannot evade legal proceedings.
It is contrary to the rule of law and creates a
profound sense of injustice when a person suspected of a
serious crime is perceived as being granted impunity —
outside the reach of a competent criminal prosecution.
All States must abide by their obligation either to carry
out a prosecution themselves or extradite the accused
to another jurisdiction that is willing to do so. That
must apply irrespective of personal background, family
connections or wealth. There are still countries which
uphold the best criminal justice systems that money
can buy. They have a name, and they have shame.
Secondly, Norway welcomes the progress made
in enhancing the transparency and fairness of listing
and delisting procedures here in the Council. It is clear
from the number of delisting requests that the
Ombudsperson has received, and the number of
persons and entities removed from the list, that there is
a genuine need for the Ombudsperson’s mandate. In
our view, the procedures for listing and delisting
should be kept under constant review, and the Council
should
remain
open
to
further
procedural
improvements in the regime, such as the establishment
of an independent review panel.
Thirdly, with respect to the promotion of
women’s rights in conflict and post-conflict situations,
there can be no democracy without the participation of
all citizens, and there can be no rule of law unless the
law applies equally to all. The women involved in the
Arab Spring have impressed us. Across the region,
women have been present and vocal in the protest
movements. Yet they are now facing exclusion from
political processes and from constitution-building and
legal reform. That is, of course, unacceptable.
The United Nations must uphold universal values
and call for the inclusion of women in Government in
the process of transition and constitution-making.
Through the political mission in Libya, the United
Nations is well placed to be proactive in implementing
its responsibilities under the resolution 1325 (2000)
agenda. Modern constitutions that do not provide for
equal rights and opportunities for men and women are
not modern constitutions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.

12

Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): My delegation
welcomes the convening of this open debate at a time
when there is a growing realization of the challenges
and risks that rule-of-law deficits pose to international
peace and security. The United Nations has a
fundamental responsibility to maintain and strengthen
international peace and security in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law under the
Charter.
At a time when the world is facing everincreasing threats to international peace in the form of
transnational organized crime, terrorism, piracy and
climate degradation, it is fitting that the Council
highlight the centrality of the rule of law. The
strengthening of the rule of law is essential, not just to
maintain peace, but also to enable sustained economic
progress and the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals. Many organs and agencies of the
United Nations must therefore play a role in
contributing to the promotion and strengthening of the
rule of law at the international level.
In recent times, we have seen that it is ordinary
citizens’ demands for the rule of law, accountability
and transparency, when unmet, that have propelled
momentous changes in societies. The basic principles
of rule of law contribute to the strengthening and
protection of the individual. Governments that have
upheld justice and the rule of law as key components
of their governance structure are therefore stronger in
terms of stability and effectiveness.
The rule of law is not a modern, abstract concept;
it is ingrained in the history of all nations. All cultures
reflect it. The right to improve the rule of law should
not be the right of a handful, nor should it be
selectively implemented. Selective implementation
would cause doubts to arise as to credibility.
Internationally, there have been longstanding
efforts on the part of States to create an international
community based on law. The linkages between the
rule of law at the national and international levels are
multifaceted. A key aspect of the rule of law at the
international level is the codification of international
law. In that regard, the multilateral treaty framework,
developed mainly under the auspices of the United
Nations, has played a seminal role. Today there is
hardly an area of human activity that is not regulated
by treaty law. The judgments of the International Court

12-21054

S/PV.6705 (Resumption 1)

of Justice and its advisory opinions have also
contributed immensely.
Increasingly, regional approaches have also
played an important role in addressing the growing
problem of transnational organized crime and
terrorism, which threaten international peace and
security. That involves close cooperation and capacitybuilding at both the national and regional levels.
However, long-term solutions to, inter alia,
transnational organized crime, terrorism and piracy
will need to focus on the delivery of basic services by
justice and security institutions.
In addition, grievances based on violations of
economic and social rights have the capacity to spark
violent conflict that could spill over borders. The
United Nations has a vital role in the promotion of
dialogue on the realization of economic and social
rights for all peoples.
The principle of sovereign equality enshrined in
the United Nations Charter, which is intrinsic to the
international rule of law, must be maintained as
international rules are made and implemented. It is a
clear principle that Member States must respect; it
protects all States, especially the small and the weak.
Equally important is the maintenance of the principle
of non-interference in the internal affairs of Member
States, especially in situations that do not pose a threat
to international peace and security. Specific
circumstances may call for involvement, which should
be based on the agreement of all States. Unilateral and
selective applications of international law principles
must be avoided.

strengthen democratic institutions. There is therefore a
need to give countries such as these the much-needed
space to begin that restorative process so as to set
themselves on an even keel. In such contexts, the
United Nations must provide leadership in capacitybuilding efforts to address the gaps by also factoring in
local sensitivities.
Sri Lanka’s willingness to engage with the United
Nations to promote the rule of law based on
constructive, fair, non-selective and objective
assessments remains undiminished.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I thank South Africa
for guiding the work of the Security Council for the
month of January 2012 and for having scheduled this
open debate on the promotion and strengthening of the
rule of law in the maintenance of international peace
and security. I convey my sincere thanks to the
Secretary-General for his statement on this issue.
Allow me also to express my appreciation to the other
speakers who have taken the floor today.

Sri Lanka has always advocated the settlement of
internal and international disputes by peaceful means.
Negotiations and other such peaceful means must be
the first essential resort.

Since the Security Council held its last open
debate on the rule of law, in June 2010 (see
S/PV.6347), there have been some important
developments. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
latest report on the rule of law (S/2011/634*). A
notable development is the establishment of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. The forthcoming high-level event on the
rule of law, to be held during the sixty-seventh session,
in 2012, will be an opportunity for Member States to
renew their commitment to the universal adherence to
and implementation of the rule of law at both the
national and international levels and to take stock of
the progress made.

Mindful of the fact that conflict and post-conflict
settings are complex environments with many
competing priorities, we must recognize the tensions
and difficulties that emerge in the process of
endeavouring to balance national security interests and
the maintenance of civil rights under trying local
circumstances. Despite the onslaughts on the
democratic fabric, countries with strong legal
foundations have the resilience and the capacity to
restore democratic institutions. Such countries can also
create their own local mechanisms to consolidate
peace, encourage reconciliation and, most importantly,

Some challenges lie ahead in promoting and
strengthening the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security. One of them is to
address new threats to peace and security, for example
piracy, in the framework of the rule of law and justice.
Apart from that, another critical issue is the need to
support and strengthen the rule of law and transitional
justice at the national level as part of mandates. It is
also necessary that the global community increasingly
become more mindful of adhering to the principle of
not violating sovereign rights and to avoid selective
application of the rule of law. Last year, the United

12-21054

13

S/PV.6705 (Resumption 1)

Nations observed the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
right to development as a human right. We appeal the
global community to help nations to achieve that
objective.

In addition, Bangladesh is mindful of the importance of
developing accountable and coherent law-enforcement
institutions that operate within the framework of
international legal norms.

My delegation believes that, in order to ensure a
world order based on the rule of law, measures must be
taken to ensure better implementation of international
law, notably through technical assistance and national
capacity-building. The United Nations should increase
the efficiency of such assistance, expand it to broader
areas of international law and focus on the specific
needs of Member States. Measures should be taken to
support institutional development for the promotion of
the rule of law and encourage more States to become
parties to international instruments.

In conclusion, may I add that in the area of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding — the area of
engagement — we should further strengthen the rule of
law and system-wide coherence in all aspects.

The rule of law is a basic feature of the
Constitution of Bangladesh, article 27 of which
guarantees that all citizens are equal before the law and
are entitled to equal protection under the law. Article
31 guarantees that to enjoy the protection of the law,
and to be treated in accordance with the law, is the
inalienable right of every citizen, wherever he or she
may be, as well as of every other person for the time
being within Bangladesh. In particular, no action
detrimental to the life, liberty, body, reputation or
property of any person shall be taken except in
accordance with the law. All those provisions of the
Constitution are effective for ensuring the rule of law
in Bangladesh.
At the national level, Bangladesh is actively
promoting the rule of law and justice in all spheres of
life, in particular through administrative, judicial and
electoral reforms. The Government of Bangladesh
separated the judiciary from the executive branch of
Government and strengthened its anti-corruption
commission, which functions as an independent
watchdog.
In addition, the Government also established a
human rights commission, thereby ensuring that
international standards of human rights and personal
freedom are maintained in the country. Good news is
that last year it co-organized multiple workshops
throughout the country, with assistance from the United
Nations Development Programme, on issues such as
protecting people’s economic, social and cultural
rights, the rights of migrant workers, women’s rights,
violations against women et cetera. All of them were
successful in creating mass awareness of those issues.

14

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.
Mr. Acharya (Nepal): My delegation wishes to
express its sincere appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important open debate on the rule of
law in the maintenance of international peace and
security. This is an important step in reviewing the
progress we have made so far and to chart out our
shared road map for the future by upholding the hope
and aspirations of millions of people yearning for the
rule of law, justice, peace, security and development.
Over the years, the United Nations has made a
steady and significant effort in establishing the rule of
law in different parts of the world by ensuring
accountability and reinforcing norms, building justice
and security institutions and promoting gender
equality. The engagement of the Security Council has
also been important in the promotion and strengthening
of the rule of law, with a view to maintaining
international peace and security.
We firmly believe that ensuring the rule of law at
the international level is as important as it is at the
national level. The rule of law is an essential
component for the smooth transition of post-conflict
societies towards a just, peaceful and stable society. In
post-conflict situations, it is also understandable that a
transitional justice system plays an important role in
ensuring justice to the victims of conflicts. At the same
time, post-conflict societies may also require overall
reforms in the legal framework and institutional
structures of governance, including their functioning.
Adhering to the international principles is important
while making provisions for transitional justice and
consolidating the system of the rule of law. However, a
one-size-fits-all approach does not produce effective
results, since the political, social, historical, economic
and cultural contexts of different States have a great
deal of implications for their legal systems,
frameworks and institutions. In devising rule of law
programmes, special attention needs to be given to

12-21054

S/PV.6705 (Resumption 1)

address the specific needs of women, children,
minority and marginalized groups, refugees and
displaced persons.
No external support mechanism can replace
national ownership and national capacity in the nationbuilding process. In that context, all the efforts of the
international community to promote the rule of law,
including those of the United Nations system, should
be focused towards building national ownership and
national capacity in a sustained way. That will help
national stakeholders to take ownership for the
enactment and implementation of laws and for the
strengthening of institutions as a part of broader reform
efforts. We believe that this will alone ensure
sustainable peace and progress around the world.
The rule of law agenda in post-conflict societies
should be advanced in tandem with other issues. In
particular, the root causes of conflict, such as
exclusion, marginalization and deprivation in political,
economic and social spheres, as well as poverty, must
be dealt with in a comprehensive manner to make
societies more inclusive, just, equitable and
prosperous. The consolidation of security and the
revitalization of the economy will reinforce the rule of
law in the medium term by creating more stakes in the
overall transformation of post-conflict societies.
Nepal approaches the rule of law agenda with
determination as part of its historic transformation
process, with a view to moving forward in the
establishment of an inclusive, diverse yet unified, just
and peaceful society. Nepal has an independent
judiciary. It is also carrying out timely reform and
consolidation activities to deliver justice effectively
and efficiently. The use of a mobile court system has
brought judges and prosecutors closer to the people,
while the application of traditional mediation
mechanisms has helped communities to solve their
differences on their own.
As per a provision of the Comprehensive Peace
Accord, signed in 2006, the bill for the establishment
of a truth and reconciliation commission and a
commission on disappearances have been prepared
with wide consultations among various stakeholders,
including civil society and human rights organizations.
This matter is under discussion in our legislative
parliament. We believe that justice is part of the peace
process, and peace, justice and reconciliation have to
be seen in an integrated and holistic manner.

12-21054

The Secretary-General’s report contained in
document S/2011/634* reveals that the Security
Council has made references to the rule of law and
transitional justice in well over 160 resolutions since
2004. We need to remind ourselves that translating
those resolutions into action is a continuous challenge.
We call for an enhanced level of support from the
international community, in a coordinated and coherent
manner, so as to promote national ownership and
national capacity, including the appropriate provision
of an accountability framework in the field of the rule
of law. That would not only contribute to establishing a
just and stable society in countries receiving support,
but also help to maintain international peace and
security at large. In that regard, Nepal looks forward to
contributing to the high-level meeting on this issue to
be held in the General Assembly this year.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate on the promotion and strengthening of the
rule of law in the maintenance of international peace
and security. We are meeting at a time when significant
developments are unfolding in different parts of the
world, including the Middle East, and many issues
need to be addressed in a responsible manner within
the context of the rule of law.
The root causes behind many conflicts are
poverty, exclusion and marginalization, foreign
intervention and military excursion and occupation.
Unfortunately, in addressing the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
has in many instances failed to take into account those
causes. The sobering reality is that the influence
exercised by some members of the Council that have
made the decisions of the Council has, if not
exacerbated
conflicts,
contributed
to
their
prolongation, with severe impacts on peace and
stability. That has also hindered the way for the
promotion of sustainable development and economic
prosperity. Taking into account the time restraint, I
would like to bring to the attention of the Council just
one example to which the rule of law should have
caused it to react promptly.
The example relates to the sad series of terrorist
incidents targeting Iranian nuclear scientists, the most
recent of which happened last Wednesday in Tehran. In

15

S/PV.6705 (Resumption 1)

that incident, another prominent Iranian scientist,
Mostafa Ahmadi Roshan, Deputy Director of Iran’s
Natanz nuclear facility, fell victim to a blind terrorist
attack. Previously, assassination attempts had also
targeted the prominent physicists Majid Shahriari and
Fereydoun Abbasi Davani, who currently heads Iran’s
Atomic Energy Organization. Unfortunately, Majid
Shahriari was martyred in that attack. In the same
series of attacks, another prominent scientist, Professor
Massoud Ali Mohammadi, was martyred in front of his
house.
After such terrorist attacks, on behalf of my
Government, our mission immediately sent letters to
the Presidents of the Council and, through them, we
informed the members of the Security Council of those
attacks. The Secretariat distributed the letters as
documents of the Council (see S/2010/634 and
S/2012/27). Through those letters, we brought to the
attention of the Council the fact that, on the basis of
some evidence, those operations were masterminded by
some foreign intelligence services, which we have
already explained in those letters.
Officials and politicians of the Israeli regime do
not deny the fact that such terrorist attacks have been
carried out as part of efforts to disrupt Iran’s peaceful
nuclear programme. Those circles have spared no effort
in depriving the Islamic Republic of Iran of its
inalienable right to peaceful nuclear energy. They
called for covert operations, ranging from assassinating
Iranian nuclear scientists to launching a military strike
on Iran, as well as sabotaging Iran’s nuclear
programme, to be conducted.
Here, I want to refer to Israeli officials, who have
recently stepped up their war rhetoric against Iran.
Rhetoric along the same lines is used by some
politicians in the United States. They should also note
the fact that United Nations bodies, including the
Council, suffer from several deficiencies, such as the
failure to keep the inspection of nuclear facilities
secret, which is required by established laws,
regulations and practices.
In this case, however, there is high suspicion that
those terrorist circles used intelligence obtained from
United Nations bodies, including the sanctions list of
the Security Council and interviews carried out with
our nuclear scientists by the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), to identify and carry out their
malicious acts. The late Ahmadi Roshan had recently

16

met with IAEA inspectors — a fact that indicates that
that United Nations Agency may have played a role in
leaking information on Iran’s nuclear facilities and
scientists.
While the Council promptly reacts to terrorist
incidents that happen around the world, it is odd to
note that the Council kept silent about the terrorist
attacks targeting Iranian scientists. Is that the way to
advance the rule of law at the international level?
Now, the question remains whether resorting to
all unlawful and coercive measures, even terrorist acts,
to prevent developing nations from exercising their
right to development, including the peaceful use of
nuclear energy, is permissible within the internationally
recognized rule of law. It goes without saying that the
imposition of unilateral economic sanctions and
organizing terrorist attacks against scientists and
experts, particularly in the field of peaceful nuclear
technologies, pose a serious threat to peace and
security, as well as to sustainable development in
developing countries. The least expectation of this
body is that it should denounce such actions and take
the necessary steps to prevent their recurrence.
We hope that the international community will
take all measures necessary to uphold the rule of law,
fairness and justice on the basis of respect for the lives
of innocent scientists. Justice demands that the
perpetrators of those crimes be prosecuted and brought
to justice. That is extremely important for the credibility
of the Security Council. If we want our debate on the rule
of law to be meaningful and effective, we should have a
fair, balanced, non-selective and comprehensive
approach based on full respect for international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Solomon Islands.
Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate on
the issue of the promotion and strengthening of the rule
of law. By all accounts, this is the fifth time that the
Council has conducted an open debate on the item —
and rightly so as the primary role of the United Nations
is to maintain international peace and security and to
promote economic development and freedom to live in
dignity. The occasion gives us the opportunity to take
stock of how far we have come and what needs to be
done in closing any gaps.

12-21054

S/PV.6705 (Resumption 1)

We have a come a long way. Notably, the Council
has adopted various resolutions on establishing
criminal tribunals, referring situations in certain
countries to the International Criminal Court, sanctions
regimes and resolutions managing the sanctions. In a
couple of months’ time, the Secretary-General will
present his follow-up report on the rule of law to feed
into the September high-level meeting. We look
forward to that.
This debate is timely, as we are witnessing
unilateral actions slowly creeping into the international
environment,
eroding
and
undermining
our
international multilateral system. The use of force is
slowly replacing the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Operating in a globalized and rules-based world, the
threats that we face are interconnected. We must
uphold the Charter and international and humanitarian
law. Rules must not be used to pursue narrow political
and economic interests.
In looking at today’s new and evolving threats,
we need to respond to them with a sense of urgency.
On climate change, which is a threat multiplier for
least developed countries (LDCs) and small island
developing States, a lack of multilateral action until
2020 will see more conflicts emerge over land, water
and food in the coming years.
We must now prepare for the consequences of our
inaction and the costs that come with it. It is even more
disappointing and of concern when Member States
withdraw from their multilateral obligations at a time
when collective security is most needed. Mу delegation
hopes that the Secretary-General will address that in
his forthcoming report.
As a post-conflict country, Solomon Islands is
assisted regionally by its Pacific neighbours. That
assistance is led by Australia, supported by New
Zealand and all our small island developing Pacific
neighbours, deploying police, legal, military and
civilian support. The assistance over a period of years
has allowed the economy of my country to grow and
enabled Solomon Islands to invest in peacebuilding
and nation-building initiatives. The Regional
Assistance Mission is currently undergoing a
transitional phase. Against that background, I would
like to make the following brief points.
First, just to reiterate what other speakers have
more or less alluded to in their respective statements,
the primary actor of the international system is the

12-21054

State, of which the authority and legitimacy should be
respected.
The second issue is support for LDCs
implementing their national obligations under
international conventions and treaties. When we speak
of the rule of law domestically, we also refer to the
integration of international law within the country.
Thirdly, strengthening the justice system and
security institutions is critical only to a point if it is not
accompanied with economic development, without
which sustainability for peace becomes fragile.
Resources must be committed in a multi-year format,
thereby making support predictable and available.
Fourthly, there should be special support within
the wider United Nations system for countries that are
dealing with the underlying causes of conflict, as they
move from reconciliation to State-building.
Fifthly, transitional justice in post-conflict
countries should be managed in a flexible manner, so
that it can adapt to the changing situations in countries.
Finally, the United Nations should have a
stronger presence in the LDCs.
Let me conclude by stating that we must look for
new ways to assist countries on the periphery of the
international system and to integrate them more
meaningfully into the global economy. That would
ensure that there are no weak links in our collective
effort to create a safer world for all our peoples.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate. My country attaches the
utmost importance to strengthening the rule of law as
an essential requirement for the achievement of peace
and security at both the national and international
levels, the latter of which occurs with the framework of
the Security Council.
With regard to conflict and post-conflict
situations, my country is of the view that, when
establishing mandates, the Security Council must give
due priority to the need to ensure the application of the
rule of law in conflict and post-conflict societies, in
particular by strengthening internal judicial machinery
and police systems, which also contribute to the
prevention of situations of that kind in the future. That

17

S/PV.6705 (Resumption 1)

objective is directly linked to the role of the Security
Council and has been increasingly expressed in the
mandates approved by this organ.
With respect to situations of armed conflict, full
respect for international humanitarian law is essential
to ensuring the protection of civilians by parties to a
conflict and by United Nations forces. Parties to an
armed conflict are subject to the basic rule that
civilians must be protected against the effects of armed
conflict. With respect to peacekeeping operations, my
country is convinced that the inclusion of activities for
the protection of civilians in the mandates of United
Nations missions is important in order to ensure in
practice the effective provision of humanitarian
assistance. It is also essential to hold those responsible
for serious violations of human rights criminally
accountable.
Fortunately, the international community has
overcome the justice versus peace paradigm in postconflict and conflict situations, in which political
agreements put justice aside through de jure or de facto
amnesties. The present paradigm is one in which peace
and justice are not only compatible, but also
complementary, objectives.
Combating impunity must be a commitment of all
States Members of the United Nations. The
international community is witnessing a notable
evolution of international criminal justice. Such a
process progressed with the establishment by the
Council of the ad hoc Tribunals for Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia, and showed a clear recognition by
the Security Council of the close relationship between
peace and justice. The International Criminal Court
(ICC) is one of the most important institutions of the
multilateral system. In 1998, it was not expected that
the Rome Statute would enter into force in such a short
period, and much less that, in just under 10 years since
its adoption, the Court would be playing such a central
role in the fight against impunity.
Through resolution 1970 (2011), the Security
Council referred a new situation to the Prosecutor of
the Court. Argentina supports referrals by the Security
Council, which involves a power recognized by the
Rome Statute. However, there are two aspects
regarding which I would like to express the serious
concern of my country.
Paragraph 6 of resolution 1970 (2011) follows the
questionable precedent set by the referral of the

18

situation in Darfur to the ICC when it formulates an
exception to the jurisdiction of the Court that is not
provided for in the Rome Statute. That has an impact
on the integrity of the criminal justice system of the
Court. In addition, the resolution provides, in its
paragraph 8, that
“none of the expenses incurred in connection
with the referral … shall be borne by the United
Nations [but] by the parties to the Rome Statute”.
Such a provision is inconsistent with Article 115 of the
Rome Statute and with Article 13 of the Relationship
Agreement between the United Nations and the Court.
Argentina would also like to urge Member States
to fulfil their obligations to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court and to encourage
continued cooperation of the Security Council with the
Court, with the aim of putting an end to impunity.
Similarly, my country calls on States that have not yet
ratified the Rome Statute to ratify it as soon as
possible.
The
report
of
the
Secretary-General
(S/2011/634*) highlights the strengthening of the
normative framework for the right to justice, truth and
guarantees of non-recurrence. My country also stresses
that evolution, as they deal with the pillars for
combating impunity.
In that regard, it should be highlighted that,
during the most recent session of the Human Rights
Council, it was decided, at the insistence of my
country, among others, to establish a Special
Rapporteur of the United Nations for the promotion of
truth, justice, reparation and the guarantee of nonrecurrence in cases of serious violations of human
rights and of serious violations of international
humanitarian law. The establishment of that new
special procedure constitutes an important contribution
to the fight against impunity within the framework of
the United Nations.
A debate within the United Nations on the rule of
law cannot be conducted without a reference to the
importance of the peaceful settlement of international
disputes. The peaceful settlement of disputes is one of
the pillars of the international community, and clearly
the International Court of Justice plays a principal role
in that regard. But the peaceful settlement of disputes
also contemplates other methods, which are described
in Article 36 of the Charter. In that respect, my country

12-21054

S/PV.6705 (Resumption 1)

underscores the need for the parties to a controversy to
comply in good faith with the calls that the organs of
the United Nations, including the General Assembly,
make or have made with the aim of seeking a solution
to the dispute.
Among the means available to the Organization,
we would like to highlight the role played by the good
offices that the organs of the United Nations may
request the Secretary-General to undertake. For the
successful fulfilment of a mission of good offices of
the Secretary-General — and therefore for solving the
given dispute — the goodwill and good faith of the
parties to the dispute are also required.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that
international peace and security are of key importance
to the international community. That is a global interest
that we must defend, and the Security Council is the
international body with the primary responsibility for
doing so. Legitimacy, democracy and justice are values
to guide the action by the Security Council in conflict
and post-conflict situations, in order to build and
consolidate peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Mr. Staur (Denmark): Let me start by expressing
Denmark’s appreciation to South Africa for organizing
today’s important debate in the Security Council. We
also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
commitment to strengthening United Nations support
for the rule of law. Denmark agrees that we now have
before us historic opportunities for enhancing justice
and the rule of law.
Denmark aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union.
We welcome the convening of a high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on the topic of the
rule of law at the national and international levels
during the high-level segment of its sixty-seventh
session. As a staunch supporter of an international
system based on international law, Denmark remains
committed to actively participating in sustaining and
further coordinating efforts aimed at promoting the rule
of law.
The promotion of the rule of law and universal
human rights constitute fundamental prerequisites for
achieving sustainable peace. We are therefore pleased
that in recent years the Security Council has been

12-21054

playing an increasingly important role in the promotion
of justice and the rule of law.
In recent years, the international community has
been confronted with an increasing number of
intra-State conflicts that have consequences not only
for national, but also for regional and international
peace and security. This development is of great
concern and should be addressed by focusing even
more on the important linkages between peace and
security, development and justice at the international as
well as at the national and regional levels.
As the Secretary-General said, there is a need for
enhanced political will and stronger efforts to build
national ownership when it comes to the rule of law
and transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies. This also requires increased support for
multilateral efforts to promote the rule of law, as well
as enhanced donor coordination.
The promotion of the rule of law, human rights,
access to justice and security are key strategic
objectives of Danish development cooperation,
including with States in fragile situations and in
transition. Genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes often take place in chaotic situations in fragile
and conflict-affected countries with weak institutions.
Denmark is a strong supporter of transitional justice
programmes that can help heal the wounds, initiate
truth-seeking processes, and establish judicial
accountability
mechanisms
and
reparations
programmes for the victims. Rebuilding trust in the
justice systems is crucial to breaking cycles of violence
and paving the way for stability and development.
Repression and large-scale human rights
violations pose a threat to international peace and
security and concern us all. Human rights violations
are the root cause of many conflicts — not least
intra-State conflicts — and must therefore be at the
core of the Council’s deliberations and its responses.
To Denmark, it is clear that in order to achieve lasting
peace agreements respect for and protection of human
rights need to be addressed. Ensuring respect for and
protection of international human rights norms and
standards should be a central element of all support to
justice systems. The international community must
work towards strengthening national ownership as well
as the capacities of Governments, which bear the
responsibility to protect their populations and ensure
respect for their human rights.

19

S/PV.6705 (Resumption 1)

Denmark is an unwavering supporter of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), and we are pleased
to see the Court increasingly fulfilling its important
role in fighting impunity for the crimes of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes in conflict and
post-conflict situations. We take this opportunity to
encourage all States not yet parties to the Rome Statute
to ratify or accede to it, and further call on all States
parties to adhere to their obligations to fully cooperate
with the Court.
However, not all instances of the most serious
crimes should be dealt with at the international level. A
fundamental principle of the Rome statute is that of
complementarity.
It
underscores
the
primary
responsibility of national judicial systems to prosecute
perpetrators of atrocity crimes. To the extent that States
themselves are willing and able genuinely to prosecute
the most serious international crimes, we view that as
the better option.
National prosecutions serve to enhance local
ownership and understanding of the proceedings —
elements that are crucial if such processes are to lead
to true reconciliation and justice. Within the Assembly
of States Parties to the ICC, Denmark, together with
South Africa, has helped facilitate the complementarity
agenda. The aim is to fight impunity more effectively
by having international justice and rule of law actors
joining efforts to support strengthening judicial,
prosecutorial and investigative capacities in domestic
jurisdictions.
Justice sector capacity-building related to crimes
within the ICC’s jurisdiction is a win-win situation.
States improve their ability to process the most serious
crimes, while at the same time they increase the
general capacity of their justice sector institutions.
To conclude, Denmark trusts and expects the
Council to do its part in strengthening justice and the
rule of law, and we will continue to give full support to
the work of the Council in this respect.
The President: I give
representative of Armenia.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I join previous
speakers in thanking you, Sir, for having convened this
debate, which serves as an engine for generating
complex and open dialogue to analyse and examine the
conceptual issue of the rule of law. We would also like
to join previous speakers in thanking Secretary-

20

General Ban Ki-moon for his active involvement in
addressing this important subject and for his follow-up
report (S/2011/634*).
In recent years, the international community has
stepped up its efforts to address the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict situations. Following the
commitment to the rule of law made in the Outcome
Document of the 2005 World Summit (General
Assembly resolution 60/1), the rule of law was placed
high on the United Nations and other international
agendas. A consensus emerged that the rule of law
should be promoted at both the national and the
international levels and based on the United Nations
Charter, the norms of international law and the
principles of good governance.
In its presidential statement of June 2010, the
Council recognized that
“respect for international humanitarian law is an
essential component of the rule of law in conflict
situations and reaffirm[ed] its conviction that the
protection of the civilian population in armed
conflict should be an important aspect of any
comprehensive strategy to resolve conflict”
(S/PRST/2010/11).
We share the views expressed by Council members and
other speakers who have called for a more systematic
approach to protection.
We also trust that increased efforts to fight
impunity at the national and international levels are
essential. It is commendable that the Council continues
to focus on the responsibility of States to end impunity
and to thoroughly investigate and prosecute persons
responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity or
other grave violations of international humanitarian
law in order to avoid their recurrence and to seek
justice and peace.
Armenia attaches the utmost importance to the
promotion of justice and the rule of law, as these
values are indispensable to the maintenance of
international and regional security and the protection
of human rights. Moreover, systematic breaches of the
rule of law contribute to violations of basic human
rights and fundamental freedoms, including peoples’
right to self-determination, which are among the major
and most immediate causes of regional conflicts.
The notion of the rule of law represents a concept
that is diametrically opposed to rule by force or the use

12-21054

S/PV.6705 (Resumption 1)

of force. This principle stipulates a framework for
peaceful
conflict
resolution
and
democratic
governance. Strengthening the rule of law based on
justice and security therefore requires a deeper
commitment and a broader vision of the future.
Adherence to the principles of the non-use or threat of
use of force, clearly and unequivocally declared by the
parties concerned in conflict and post-conflict settings,
is another crucial factor for creating an environment
conducive to building mutual trust and achieving
peace, justice and security.
The rule of law is a concept at the very heart of
the stated mission of the United Nations and other
international organizations. It is a well-known fact that,
in an increasing number of operations on the ground,
the United Nations is calling on the services of relevant
regional and subregional organizations, since in certain
areas and in some cases these international actors are
able to provide expertise and a better understanding of
local particularities to complement that of the United
Nations.
While the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of peace, relevant
international organizations, including the Bretton
Woods institutions, other multilateral actors and civil
society, can play a significant role and contribute in a
coordinated manner to the development and
strengthening of the rule of law and the maintenance of
international peace and security.

The United Nations Charter clearly indicates that
any acts occurring in the world that might lead to a
breach of the peace should be settled by peaceful
means and in conformity with the principles of justice
and international law. In that regard, the role of the
International Court of Justice as the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations is significant. The Court
should be one of the key mechanisms for the peaceful
settlement of international disputes. We therefore
commend the Court for its contribution to that end, as
well as its valuable contribution to the evolution of
international law.
Kyrgyzstan recognizes the importance of the
United Nations Programme of Assistance in the
Teaching,
Study,
Dissemination
and
Wider
Appreciation of International Law and fully supports
the activities of the Rule of Law Coordination and
Resource Group, which is responsible for the overall
coordination and coherence of the rule of law within
the United Nations. We also support the important
work done by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, particularly in
capacity-building activities to strengthen national rule
of law systems and respect for human rights around the
world. As a member and as the Vice-Chair of the
Human Rights Council, my country actively stands for
the necessity to respect human rights in all situations,
including conflict and post-conflict situations.

Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): Let me at the outset
sincerely thank you, Sir, for convening this very
important open debate on a topic that reflects the
Security
Council’s
special
responsibility
for
maintaining international peace and security in
conformity with the principles of United Nations
Charter. I would also like to extend my gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive statement.

I would like to stress the importance that
Kyrgyzstan attaches to justice and the rule of law in
rebuilding post-conflict societies as part of a
comprehensive approach to peacebuilding strategies
aimed at achieving reconciliation, stability and lasting
peace. As members are well aware, in 2010,
Kyrgyzstan overcame conflict and is now at the stage
of post-conflict reconstruction and peacebuilding. We
strongly believe that transitional justice and restoring
the capacities and the legitimacy of national
institutions should continue to be at the very heart of
United Nations rule of law efforts.

Kyrgyzstan welcomes the recent report of the
Secretary-General on the subject of the rule of law and
transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies (S/2011/634*). Kyrgyzstan fully supports the
Secretary-General’s commitment to continuing to
promote initiatives aimed at strengthening the rule of
law, increasing the capacity-building of justice and
security institutions around the world, and ensuring the
prompt and holistic response of the United Nations to
national requests to assist with legislative reform
processes.

Since 2010, Kyrgyzstan has made significant
progress. Despite all the difficulties, my country has
adopted a new Constitution, held two successful
presidential and parliamentary elections and carried out
reforms aimed at the improvement of the judicial
system, at increasing the capacity of law enforcement
agencies, and at empowering women and youth, as well
as ensuring their active involvement in the decisionmaking process. Today, Kyrgyzstan is deeply
committed to enduring legal principles such as due
process, equal protection under the law, judicial

The President: I give
representative of Kyrgyzstan.

12-21054

the

floor

to

the

21

S/PV.6705 (Resumption 1)

independence and justice for all. Lasting peace and the
reconciliation of society in post-conflict areas is the
top priority on the agenda of the Government of
Kyrgyzstan. For that reason, the special concept of
ethnic development in the consolidation of society was
adopted by the Assembly of the Peoples of Kyrgyzstan
in 2011, and is now being successfully implemented
throughout the country.
In conclusion, it is incumbent upon the Security
Council to pay due regard to the value of the rule of
law as an end as well as a means. Our quest for justice
and the rule of law should not be limited to the
domestic sphere. The same standards should apply at
the international level as well. It is our collective
responsibility to manifest a just international order, and
thus to empower all peoples on our planet to live in
peace and harmony. At the same time, however, there is
a fragile balance between the need to respect human
rights and the rule of law in States, and interference in
the internal affairs of States, which must be considered
and taken into account.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We are very pleased that
this important topic — the promotion and
strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security — is being discussed
by the Council during the South African presidency. I
would therefore like to express our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for having taken this initiative. We are
also appreciative of the efforts by the SecretaryGeneral to promote justice and the rule of law.
Few regions of the world have been so deeply
affected and, without too much hyperbole, so
devastated by the adverse consequences of a lack of
compliance with the rule of law as the Horn of Africa.
It is therefore axiomatic for us that strengthening the
rule of law would have a hugely transformative impact
on the state of peace and security in our region. There
is little doubt that an improvement of the security
situation and the prevalence of peace would be a great
boon to the aspirations of the region’s peoples for
economic revival, creating hope in a region where hope
has been a distant dream for too long. For many, that
might also mean achieving the Millennium
Development Goals.
But the task of ensuring the supremacy of the rule
of law, both in the domestic sphere and in relations
among States, has not been easy for our region. It is
also self-evident, whatever might be its theoretical
validity, from the experience of the Horn of Africa, that
the lack of compliance with the rule of law in the

22

domestic domain is invariably associated with flagrant
disregard for, and lack of compliance with, rules of
international law governing inter-state relations.
Strengthening and promoting the rule of law
provides a firm foundation for ensuring justice, and
thus for maintaining domestic peace and stability in
nations. A host of issues arise in that regard, with
respect to capacity-building and the lack of robust
institutions for the administration of justice when one
focuses on the issue of the lack of compliance with the
rule of law. Respect for the rule of law and the capacity
to make rules that are complied with are particularly
vital in order to ensure that societies in transition from
war to peace succeed in that exercise.
However, it appears obvious to us that, when this
topic is discussed by the Security Council, it is
absolutely critical to pay sufficient attention to the
matter of the lack of compliance with the rule of law
that manifests itself in flagrant violations of the
principles of international law that governing interState relations. A quick glance at the recent history of
the Horn of Africa makes that abundantly clear, as does
what is taking place there as we speak.
Beyond a doubt, if there were to be some
progress in our region in that respect — for which the
Security Council is in a position to make a great
difference — the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development region would make a huge leap forward
in ensuring peace and security in the region. The
positive implications of that for international peace and
security are unquestionable.
Mr. Sorreta (Philippines): The Philippines wishes
to express its appreciation and full support for your
efforts, Mr. President, in bringing attention and muchneeded focus to an issue of vital importance to us all.
The rule of law at the national and international
levels is the bedrock upon which nations build stable
and flourishing societies and foster strong relations.
The rule of law emphasizes the protection of rights and
underscores compliance with obligations. Those are
crucial in order to exact responsible behaviour both
from individuals and from States. Those are vital in
order for justice to be served at the national and
international levels.
The rule of law is essential as an instrument and
object of policy as we seek to rebuild and strengthen
societies in, or emerging from, conflict. The rule of law
and justice are cornerstones in President Benigno
Aquino’s programme of good governance. The

12-21054

S/PV.6705 (Resumption 1)

Philippines development plan for the period 2011 to 2016
highlights that, stating that justice is no less important a
public good and that the framework of the rule of law is
the foundation of our democratic society. The strict
implementation of the rule of law indicates our
Government’s seriousness in carrying out its
responsibilities and obligations in a democratic
environment.
Beyond its borders, the Philippines continues to
do its part in further strengthening the rule of law and
the institutions and processes needed to uphold it in
post-conflict and conflict-affected areas around the
world. The Philippines actively participates in the
efforts of the United Nations to bring about peace and
security to countries torn by conflict and instability.
Close to 1,000 Filipinos — men and women alike —
serve as peacekeepers on the ground in eight United
Nations missions. Additional training and capacitybuilding — based on solid rule of law principles and
delivery of justice — will further enable peacekeepers
and allow peacekeeping operations to accomplish much
more. For our part, we hosted the train-the-trainer
course in the United Nations police standardized
training curriculum on preventing and investigating
sexual and gender-based crimes, which was held in
Manila in June last year. This was the first such
training to be conducted in the Asian region.
There is a need for greater international cooperation
in delivering predictable, accountable and effective rule
of law assistance where it is most needed. The continued
support of donor countries remains crucial, particularly
for rule of law programming and for follow-through
efforts in implementing reforms in conflict and postconflict societies.
The conclusions and recommendations contained
in the report entitled “New voices: national
perspectives on rule of law assistance”, issued by the
Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group, are
worthy of our interest. We draw particular attention to
the need to draw on and empower national stakeholders
and the need for greater coordination and coherence in
rule of law assistance in the rational implementation of
reform measures. It is vital that we engage each other
within the United Nations on rule of law issues. The
high-level meeting on rule of law at the national and
international levels, to be held during the high-level
segment of the sixty-seventh session of the General
Assembly, will be a very valuable venue to enrich our
discussions on rule of law at both levels.

12-21054

Conscious of its obligations and responsibilities
as a democracy — and keeping in mind the valuable
lessons we learned in fighting colonial rule and an
oppressive dictatorship — last year the Philippines
ratified the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court (ICC). The election of Ms. Miriam Defensor
Santiago to the International Criminal Court
demonstrates the international community’s confidence
in our commitment and ability to contribute to our
collective efforts against impunity.
The ICC and other international judicial bodies
play a vital role in preventing conflicts and abuses and,
just as importantly, in helping to resolve disputes. We
must make full use of our resources and institutions to
ensure that justice and the rule of law prevail. Time
and again, conflicts — ideological, political, military
and territorial — have arisen when the rule of law is
weak. We need to continue to work together to rebuild
societies ravaged by conflicts and to ensure that
democratic institutions and processes are established or
strengthened. But we also need to continue to work as
one to prevent the escalation of conflicts by respecting
the rule of law. On that point, I would like to join
others who have emphasized that the rule of law has a
central role to play in the settlement of disputes, be it
in the method of the settlement or in the very substance
of the reasons behind the dispute.
Thirty years ago, on 15 November, 1982, we all
reiterated our high regard for law and justice when
faced with potential or actual disputes when the
General Assembly adopted the Manila Declaration on
the Peaceful Settlement of International Disputes
(resolution 37/10). The Manila Declaration reinforces
the norm that international disputes shall be settled in
conformity with the principles of justice and
international law. This year, we will mark the thirtieth
anniversary of the Manila Declaration, and the
Philippines will be commemorating this landmark
throughout 2012.
Justice and the rule of law are both objectives and
instruments that we rightly must harness to achieve our
shared goals of a world of greater peace, progress and
prosperity.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

23
