United Nations

A/RES/59/55

General Assembly

Distr.: General
8 February 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 12

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 2 December 2004
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/59/L.27/Rev.1 and Add.1)]

59/55. Public administration and development
The General Assembly,
Recalling all pertinent resolutions, in particular its resolution 58/231 of
23 December 2003 on public administration and development,
Recalling also the historic resumed fiftieth session of the General Assembly,
devoted to the subject of the strengthening of public administration and
development,
Stressing the need for capacity-building and e-Government initiatives as tools
to promote development,
Recognizing that efficient, accountable, effective and transparent public
administration at both the national and the international levels constitutes a key
factor in development,
Recognizing also the importance of strengthening public administration
institutions, improving public sector human resources capacity and fostering
knowledge creation and innovation and the utilization of information technology for
development in public administration and in the implementation of internationally
agreed development goals, including those contained in the United Nations
Millennium Declaration, 1
Welcoming
Corruption, 2
1.

the

adoption of the United Nations Convention against

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 3

2.
Stresses the importance of United Nations Public Service Day and the
United Nations Public Service Awards in the process of revitalizing public
administration by building a culture of innovation, partnership and responsiveness;
Also stresses the valuable contribution that the Global Forum on
3.
Reinventing Government has made to the exchange of lessons learned in public
_______________
1

See resolution 55/2.
Resolution 58/4, annex.
3
A/59/346.
2

04-47956

A/RES/59/55

administration reform, and reiterates its appreciation to the Government of the
Republic of Korea for hosting the Sixth Global Forum on Reinventing Government
in 2005;
Encourages the Secretary-General to make arrangements for the
4.
implementation of the proposals made for the commemoration of the tenth
anniversary of the resumed fiftieth session of the General Assembly, on public
administration and development;
Takes note of the important analytical and operational contribution that
5.
the World Public Sector Report provides to policymakers responsible for public
administration in Member States;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to facilitate, through the
United Nations Online Network in Public Administration and Finance, the
dissemination of valuable practices in public administration;
Also requests the Secretary-General to focus the work on public
7.
administration along the lines of Economic and Social Council decision 2004/302 of
23 July 2004 and General Assembly resolution 58/231;
Further requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
8.
Assembly at its sixtieth session on progress made in Member States by revitalizing
public administration during the last ten years, since the resumed fiftieth session of
the Assembly, on public administration and development, and to ensure that the
findings are brought to the attention of Member States on the occasion of the special
event in 2005.
65th plenary meeting
2 December 2004

2
