I

UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

CONTENTS
PN,LpJ

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2399)

.,. ., .,.. .. , .... ..,... ,.....,. .. .,.. .

I

Expression of welcome to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Panama . . , , . . .

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . , , , . . , , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . , . , . . . . . . .

1

The situation between Iran and Iraq:
Letter dated 1 October 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Iraq
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security CouncilW15443) .,....,,...,.,.,.....,,......,.,............~.........

1

S/PV.2399 and Corr. 1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Sekurity Council (symbol SI. . .I are normally published in
quarterly Srrpplements of the Qfficial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of fhc> Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2399th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 4 October 1982, at 4 p.m.
Pwsidmr:

Mr. Hazem NUSEIBEH

(Jordan).

the representatives of Iraq and Morocco in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

PIWJ~Z~: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2399)

1.

Adoption of the agenda

2.

The situation between Iran and Iraq:
Letter dated 1 October 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Iraq to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/ 15443)

4. The PRESIDENT:
The Council is meeting today
in response to the letter dated 1 October 1982 from
the representative of Iraq addressed to the President
of the Council [S//.544.?].
5. Members of the Council have before them document S/ 15293, which contains the report of the Secretary-General submitted in pursuance of paragraph 3
of Security Council resolution 513 (1982).

Expression of welcome to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Panama
I. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to acknowledge
the presence at the Council table of the Minister fol
Foreign Affairs of Panama, Mr. Juan JosC Amado,
to whom, on behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome,
Expression

6. The first speaker is the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq, Mr. Saadoon Hammadi.
I welcome
him and invite him to make his statement.
7. Mr. HAMMAiD
(Iraq): Mr. President, I should
like to extend to you and to the members of the Council my profound gratitude for having acted promptly
on Jraq’s request to convene this urgent meeting of
the Council. The swift manner with which the Council
acceded to our request is a positive indication of its
high sense of responsibility
and dedication to its
important tasks.

of thanks to the retiring President

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to pay a tribute,
on behalf of the Council, to Mr. Masahiro Nisibori,
representative of Japan, President of the Council for
the month of September, for the great diplomatic skill
with which he guided the Council’s work last month
-and, I would add, for his superb patience. I am sure
I speak for all of us in expressing to him deep appreciation.
Adoption

8. Today more than ever, peace and security in OUI
sensitive region are in grave danger. The Iranian
aggression against my country has been going on for
a little over two years. But we are not the only target:
the whole Arabian peninsula is, and particularly
the
Arab Gulf region. Should the Council fail to deal with
the situation swiftly and effectively, the consequences
for international
peace and security would be far
reaching.

of the agenda

The situation between Iran and Iraq:
Letter dated 1 October 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Iraq to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council

9. When the Council took up this question in the
autumn of 1980, I exposed in detail 12250th mcctingl
the facts of the Iranian aggression launched against
Iraq on 4 September of that year. At that time,
I emphasized at.the outset that the problem was neither
new nor simple and that it was necessary for us to take

(S/15443)
3. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received letters from
I

a hard look at the problem in its proper perspective
if a viable solution were to be found. I pointed out
that, on the basis of our experience throughout a
considerable period of history, we have become convinced that the successive regimes in Iran, regardless
of their form or colour, have considered Iraq and the
Arab Gulf region as their sphere of influence and domination. Expansionism was a central objective, for the
achievement
of which policies
were conceived,
depending on the circumstances. A detailed historical
account is not called for. It is sufficient to say that
the Iranian vision of power and domination
has not
changed. During the regime of the Shah, their banner
“the policeman
of the region”.
Now, under
WLlS
Khomeini, it is “the export of the revolution”.

Sl/5/Y6,
N~HL’.Y]. It will also be recalled that
I expressed before the Council the sincere hope that
the Iranians would soon respond favourably to the
call of reason and put an end to their policy of prolonging the war. I also pledged our full co-operation
with the Council in order to achieve a just and honourable settlement. Despite all this, the attitude of the
Iranian Government was negative,
13. We learn from the report of the SecretaryGeneral [S//52%?] that resolution 514 (1982) was
transmitted to the Iranian Government immediately
after its adoption. From that report and the reply of
the Iranian Government
[S//5292, Anne-r], we find
that Iran took no wiser course than to insult the Council, telling it what its responsibilities were and dissociating itself from any action taken by the Council.
This was done under the pretext that the Council has
so far given its disguised support to the country that
Iran alleges is the aggressor. Thus the Iranian Government stands on an equal footing with the Zionist
entity in rejecting co-operation with the Council and
refusing to abide by its resolutions. The Iranian
Government should be made aware that misquoting
the Charter of the United Nations, as it did in connection with Article 24, offers it no refuge when it violates
the Charter. In that article, Member States conferred
on the Council primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security and agreed
that in carrying out its duties the Council acts on their
behalf. In the discharge of these duties the Council
shall act in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations, through the specific
powers granted to it in the manner laid down in Chapters VI, VII, VIII and XII of the Charter. Resolutions 479 (1980) and 514 (1982) fall squarely within
this framework, and the Iranian rejection of their terms
is a grave violation of the Charter. Moreover, the
Iranian Government should also be reminded of the
explicit agreement of Member States in Article 25
‘*to accept and carry out” the decisions of the Council
in accordance with the Charter. Its rejection of the
Council’s resolutions, therefore, is another grave
violation of the Charter for which it is accountable.

IO. Be that as it may, we in Iraq, especially since
our independence, have always striven to coexist with
Iran, regardless of the tremendous injuries inflicted
upon us. We are neighbours and we have shared
cultural. religious and humanitarian
ties with the
Iranian peoples. This goes as well for the present
regime-which
we welcomed. despite its allegations
to the contrary.
I I. Our persistent efforts to establish normal and
co-operative relations with it were unfortunately
met
with a negative response. A few months after he had
assumed power in Iran. Khomeini started the export
of his so-called Islamic revolution to Iraq and the Arab
Gulf region. Acts of Iranian hostility ranged from
fanatic and sectarian propaganda to fomenting civilian
strife through subversion.
sabotage and terrorism.
from violations of international
obligations
binding
upon Iran in almost all spheres of bilaternl relations
to the use of armed force across frontier lines. which
culminated in the imposition of total war. The factual
details of all these acts have already, as I have said.
been placed on the records of the Council and, I should
add, those of numerous other forums. It is highly
significant to recall now. however, the fact that Iraq
has never ceased to pursue peace in the form of a just
and honourable settlement.
When I last spoke in the Council on 12 July 1982
~~~~~~d,,l~lll,i,ryl. after the unanimous adoption of resolution 514 (1982). I explained to the Council in detail
our initiatives for peace from 28 September
1980
[.YOOS/14H.?l to 30 June 1982, on which date we completed the withdrawal of our forces from Iranian territories to the international
frontiers.’
Our position,
which is to seek a peaceful. just and honourable settlement of the conflict with Iran, has not changed. The
members of the Council are aware of the fact that we
have accepted the Council’s resolutions 479 (1980) and
514 (1982) and that we are ready to cease firing and
immediately
end all military
operntions.
We have
withdrawn our forces from Iran. We have agreed to
negotiate with Iran directly on all the issues pertaining
to the conflict. We have also accepted arbitration by
the Council, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries
or the Organization
of the Islamic Conference lscc

14. I should like also to refer to another significant
fact regarding the position of the Iranian Government. That Government announced, as soon as Iraq
commenced the withdrawal of its forces from Iranian
territories, that our undertaking was a lie and part of
an imperialist plot.
IS. It is well known to the Council that on the day
following the adoption of resolution 514 (1982), the
Iranian forces launched a large-scale armed attack
against Iraqi territory in the area east of Basra. Between that date and 29 July. four similar attacks were
carried out in the same area and with the same intensity. The details relating to these armed attacks have
already been reported to the Council [S/1.53871. The
armed attack which took place early last Friday came
in the Sumar sector near the Iraqi town of Mendeli.
2

It was followed by three more. All those armed attacks
were mounted in a desperate attempt to cross the
international frontier, invade Iraq and set up a new
regime in the country. All those attempts failed
miserably, and the same fate awaits all those that may
follow, for our people will continue to defend every
inch of their homeland.

temporal being such as the people. The rule of the
Jurist is divine, and the role of the clergy under him
is to run the administration
of affairs of society in
accordance with his instructions.
21, That is the ideological
background
against
which Khomeini set up his Islamic Republic when he
gained power in Iran IO years later. The Constitution
of the Islamic Republic of Iran states in article 5 that
the authority and the leadership of the nation shall be
vested in a jurist. As to who this person is, article 107
of the Constitution states that when all the conditions
laid down in article 5 which are known and accepted
by the majority of the people are fulfilled, as they now
are in the person of the Great Ayatollah Imam Khomeini, the source of tradition and the leader of the
revolution,
authority and all responsibilities
shall
be vested in this leader.

16. It is important to remember in this connection
that the Iranian Government continues to allege that
our forces still occupy parts of Iran’s territory. In so
doing, it attempts to put forward a pretext for continuing the fighting.
17. I should like to reaffirm strongly before the
Council that our forces have withdrawn completely
to the international
frontiers. Iraq is so sure of the
legality of its position that, as I have indicated, it is
ready to accept the arbitration of the Council. Would
the Iranian regime accept the same?

22. The Islamic Republic of Iran is considered by
Khomeini
as the’ point of departure for the achievement of Islamic unity and, accordingly, it is in divine
duty bound to expand its authority over other Islamic
nations in order to constitute the Islamic State. The
Islamic Republic is conceived as the founding base
of the Islamic revolution and so occupies the position
of leadership.
What emanates from it should be
obeyed by all other Islamic States. Now, what is left
of the principles of sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and non-interference in internal affairs
in that framework of thought? Khomeini’s
ideology
obviously seeks to nullify all those basic principles of
the Charter and of international law and behaviour.

18. It is not difficult to comprehend the internal
reasons which prompt the Iranian regime to continue
the war against my country. The crux of the matter
is Khomeini’s schemes to export his so-called Islamic
revolution, for as far back as 21 March 1980 he declared, in a statement delivered by his son on his behalf:
“We must do our utmost to export our revolution to the other parts of the world and renounce
the concept of keeping the revolution within our
boundaries,”
19. But what is the Islamic revolution? In answering
this question I do not mean to interfere in Iranian
internal affairs. What the Iranians set up in their own
country is their own affair, But when they seek to
impose the same on us we are undoubtedly entitled to
express our opinion.

23. Furthermore,
according to Mr. Bani Sadr, who
until last year was the President of Iran and its chief
negotiator in the peace talks then undertaken,
the
coljp that deposed him was a manoeuvre by the mullahs
to prevent peace at,a time when Iraq was prepared to
withdraw its troops. He said that the prospect of a
well-organized Iranian military force returningfrom
the
borders to the cities was too threatening for the regime,
and he claimed that Ayatollah Khomeini had launched
his attacks against Iraq last July to, among other things,
“finish off the army”. Mr. Bani Sadr made those
comments in an interview published in the lnnto~crtioncrl Hrwld
Trikune of 4 August 1982.

20. To comprehend
the meaning of this so-called
Islamic revolution, the best source to go to is Khomeini
himself. In his book Wilcry~~rr-ul-Fcrqih, which contains a set of lectures he delivered to students of religion at Al-Najaf,
in Iraq, in 1969-1970, Khomeini
argues for the need for Islamic unity, a concept which
he relates to the very nature which the political organization of the Islamic State should take. According
to Khomeini’s
conception, colonialism is responsible
for the division of the Islamic world into countries,
into nations, hence nationalism
is a by-product of
colonialism.
All the Islamic States are perceived as
lacking in independence, since the very phenomenon
of multistatehood
in Islam in colonial. As for the
Governments,
they are agents of colonialism,
since
they incarnate the notion of division, and, accordingly, all Islamic Governments should be brought down
in order to achieve the formation of one Islamic State
governed by the Islamic Government. The Islamic
Government
works under the authority of the fk/ih
or Jurist. All owe to the Jurist the duty of obedience,
for he receives his authority from God, not from a

24. The so-called Iranian Islamic
revolution
has
created its own vocabulary of violence. It has popularized terms designed to make murder a religious
duty and consequently opened the door for official
terrorism internally as well as abroad. Prejudice and
se.ctarianism have been fanned with great zeal, and as
a result, ethnic and religious minorities have suffered
their share of violence and discrimination.
The bloodletting has known no limits as to sex or age. All this
is being perpetrated in the name of Islam. There is
no greater sacrilege against our compassionate
and
merciful religion.
2.5.

tinuing
3

It is quite clear that the Iranian regime is conthe war against Iraq without any justification.

Iran stands alone in this policy, drawing sympathy
and pleasure from none except Israel, for reasons that
are well known. It is evident that there is an international consensus to end this war, whether in the
United Nations. amongst the non-aligned countries 01
in the Organization
of the Islamic Conference. Iraq
is part of that consensus. Deep alarm and concern
are felt by the overwhelming majority of the members
of the international
community.
In the Arab world,
deep pain is felt at the continuation
of the war. The
Iranian r@gime should fully understand the implications
of confronting the Arab countries with its policies of
aggression and territorial expansion, now more than
ever before. During the Twelfth Arab Summit Conference, held at Fez, Morocco, from 6 to 9 September
I98 I. the Arab countries affirmed their desire to live
in peace and good-neighbourliness
with their neighbours. But. at the same time, they declared theil
obligation to defend all the Arab territories, considering any aggression on any Arab country as aggression against the Arab countries as a whole [SFP S/1.55/0,
(/17/7C.\’1,

tance both to our countries and to the entire international community,
since it jeopardizes international
peace and security.
3 I. It would be remiss of me to neglect this opportunity to welcome you personally, Sir, to the presidency of the Council at a time when it is considering
so important a matter. because it is for us at once a
source of satisfaction and a guarantee of success that
our discussions will be directed by a person of YOUI
adroitness, diplomatic experience and authority, who
at the same time comes from a brother country with
which we have extremely close and healthy relations.
32. In the two years that this serious conflict between Iraq and Iran has lasted, the international
community in general and the Arab and Moslem countries, those in the region in particular, have been
following its development
with deep sorrow and
justified concern.
33. Indeed, the lethal skirmishes and destructive
confrontations have continued to alarm us, particularly since we fail to see either the need for them 01
that they are inevitable in the settlement of the dispute
between those two neighbouring Moslem countries.
for in our opinion the dispute is wholly within the
purview of classic diplomacy if both countries show
equal good-will and a sincere desire for peace and
pursue it with the same diligence.

26. This is the fourth time that I have spoken
before the Council on the armed conflict bctwcen
Iran and my country. A senseless and tragic war was
forced upon us. We had no choice but to respond
by defending our legitimate rights, without neglecting
the pursuit of peace.
27. On this occasion, 1 should like to close on a note
of thanks to the Council for the understanding
it has
shown regarding our grievances in this case. Similarly, we appreciate and are grateful for the mannel
with which the Secretary-General
has performed his
tasks in the interests of peace. To everyone here,
WC‘rcitcrate our pledge of co-operation to achieve a just
and honourable settlement.

34. Yet what do we find today’? Bitter battles, eve1
larger numbers of victims, ever greater destruction,
despite the fact that the Council, which has been seized
of this crisis several times, had clearly realized both
the futility and the potential danger the prolongation
of such confrontations bears for the entire region and
had reminded both parties of the need to respect the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations in such
circumstances, while advocating an appropriate process for the immediate and peaceful settlement of
the dispute underlying the conflict.

28. Wr fully understand the adverse implications
for international
peace and security which would
result from the continuation
of this conflict. The
problem the Council has to face does not lie with us.
In order to prevent further deterioration
of peace and
security in our sensitive region. we feel that it will be
imperative for the Council to take effective measures
a@nst the party that re.jects peace. We pray that this
will not be necessary.

35. Thus. on 28 September
1980. the Council
unanimously
adopted resolution
479 (1980). the
purpose of which was precisely to prevent the conflict
from spreading and worsening, which unfortunately it
did do as the months passed.

29. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
Minister of State in charge of Foreign Affairs of
Morocco. Mr. Mohamed Boucetta. I welcome him
and invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

36. During the month of July 1982, at a time when
conditions seemed to augur well for a swift settlement
of the conflict on the basis of the principles of the
United Nations, the Council held a very serious
meeting [238.?1~/ /nccfinLq] which fully reflected the
concern of all States Members of the Organization,
and adopted resolution 514 (1982), in which the Council calls upon both parties, in pressing terms, to observe
an immediate cease-fire: to withdraw all forces to
internationally
recognized boundaries, and to COoperate within the framework of the intensive measures
being undertaken through the Secretary-General.

30. Mr. BOUCETTA
(Morocco)
(irrt~~,~prc~ttitit,,r
.fi.onl Fr~~c,lr): First, Mr, President. I should like to
convey to you and the other members of the Council
my gratitude for the opportunity to speak here today.
both on behalf of my country, the Kingdom of Morocco, and on behalf of my brothers the heads of Arab
delegations. on a matter which is of particular impor4

37. That
resolution,
which
was unanimously
adopted, was welcomed by Iraq, which thus gave
‘laudable evidence of good-will. As the SecretaryGeneral stated in his report to the Council dated
15 July [S//52!??], the Foreign Minister of Iraq had
informed him that the Government of Iraq was prepared to co-operate with him in the implementation
of
resolution 5 I4 (1982).
38, Unfortunately,
in that same report the Secretary-General was unable to mention any such encouraging attitude on the part of the other party to the
conflict, to our earnest and sincere regret,
39. In this connection, I should like to pay a tribute
to the other very praiseworthy attempts at mediation
that have been made-those
of the Secretary-General
through his representative, Mr. Palme. those of the
Non-Aligned
Movement,
and, in particular.
those
undertaken by the Peace Committee of the Islamic
Conference, This last, which was a very high-level
body presided over by a respected African Head of
State. President Ahmed Sekou Toure, paid visits to the
leaders of the two countries to urge the need for an
immediate
peaceful settlement based on both the
decisions of the Islamic Conference. founded on the
principles and precepts of peace and brotherhood
inherent in the Islamic faith that closely unites the
two peoples. and the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. which we all loyally
support.
40. After having paid a further tribute to the members of the Islamic Peace Committee for their devotion to the cause of peace, I should like to reaffirm
the urgent desire of our community to see both parties
respond equally and with the same peaceful determination and the same good faith to the generous offers
of peace and reconciliation
that have been extended
to them by various international bodies and. in particular. by the Council.
41. In this context, the unilateral Iraqi cease-fire
declaration [SW S//5/%5, ~I?IZC.V]is a responsible act of
courage and an invaluable contribution
to the international efforts to foster peace,
42. During the Twelfth Arab Summit
Meeting,
held recently at Fez. the Arab heads of State expressed
their appreciation of the unilateral Iraqi declaration
of the withdrawal of its forces to the internationally
recognized boundaries. They also cmphasized the
need for both parties to abide by Security Council
resolutions 479 (1980) and 514 (1982) and to co-operate
in their implementation
in a coordinated
fashion
[SW S//55/0. ~1n~.~l. This is what I have come here
today to confirm and to emphasizc.
43. In once again welcoming with great satisfaction
the laudable readiness that Iraq has continued to
evince, both unilaterally
and in co-operation
with
international
mediation missions. to initiate a peace

process based on the.Charter and the resolutions of the
Council. we must say that we believe that the Council
should clearly remind the other party. Iran. of all the
obligations incumbent upon it because of its membership in the Organization-namely,
its duty to respect
our common law, the Charter, and to co-operate
loyally and closely with the Council in restoring R just
and lasting peace to the region, in accordance with
international law as it relates to good-neighbourliness.
44. The decisions of the international
cannot remain a dead letter indefinitely,
be ignored and flouted.

community
nor can they

45. I should like to express once again to the Council my country’s great appreciation, as well as that of
the Arab countries which have instructed me to speak
on their behalf, of the Council’s continuing efforts in
favour of peace. I should also like to welcome all the
positive actions that have been or may be undertaken
by either of the antagonist countries to expedite a
peaceful solution to a dispute the prolongation
of
peace
which, apart from endangering international
and security throughout the Middle East region, is
unjustly and pointlessly hindering the development
efforts of two peoples to which we are linked by agcold bonds of brotherhood.
46. In conclusion, I should like to assure the members of the Council and the Secretary-General
of our
complete availability,
both as Member States and as
Arab. Islamic or non-aligned organizations.
to continue the efforts [or- peace which we have already
undertaken, to co-ordinate our action with yours and
to give you the necessary support in any action you
decide to take in order to promote peace and concord
in the region. in accordance with the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and the commitments
which we have undertaken pursuant to it.
47. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them document S/15446. which contains the
text of a draft resolution prepared in the course of the
Council’s consultations. It is my understanding that
the Councit is ready to proceed to the vote on that
draft resolution.
48. If I hear no ob.jection. I shall put the draft rcsolution to the vote now.

Secretary-General
PRESIDENT:
The
The
wishes to make a statement. and 1 now call on him.

49.

SO, The SECRETARY-GENER.4L:
I hnvc taken
note of the resolution just adopted. With rcfc‘rc‘ncc
to its paragraph 4. I shoutd like to \tatc for the information of the Council that the effcctivc dzploymcnt

touch with the parties concerned
Council currently informed.

of United Nations observers is naturally contingent
on the concurrence and co-operation
of the parties
concerned and on the existence of a cease-fire.

53. It goes without saying that I shall continue to
make every effort to find a peaceful solution to this
conflict.

51. The dispatch
of unarmed
United
Nations
observers without the above-mentioned
prerequisites
being met would not be consistent with normal and
well-tried United Nations peace-keeping practices.
52. Should both parties convey to me their concurrence and co-operation,
arrangements
could of
course be made for United Nations observers to be
in the area in some 48 hours. I shall, naturally, be in

HOW TO OBTAIN
United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

NOTE

( See

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United Nations.
Sales Section,
New

SE PROCURER LES PUBLlCATlONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
sent en vente
du monde entier.
Informez-vous
aupris
de votre
Section
des ventes.
New York ou Genkve.

kf3~1atW1

OpraHHlauWi

M3~AHMR

Litho

in United

Nations.

New

York

DES NATIONS UNlES

dans les librairies
et les agences depositaires
libraire
ou adressez-vous
B : Nations
Unies.

OG-bEs’JMHEHHbIX

HALIMA

HausA

KynHTb
B KHWxwbIX
06 tunawwx
FJ BaueM

Mara3WHaX
KHHRCHOM

HasonuTe
OpraHw3auwn

MOW0

cnpaeKK
04benaHeHHblx

HarMi,

CexuwR

no

meweea.

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicsciones
de las Naciones
todas panes del mundo.
Cons&e
Nucva
J’ork
o Ginebra.

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

OPI-AHM3AUMM

G6LeaHHeHHhiX

II areHTcTaax
80 acex pai\oHax
tillpa.
Mara3HHe
HJI~ nr!tultTe
rtc anpecy:
nponame
~3naw!tR,
HblO-MopK
wnw

COMO CONSECUIR

A/37/323.

UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS

publications
your bookstore

KAK IlOJlYYMTb

and shall keep the

DE LAS KACIONES UNIDAS

Unidas
estzin en venta en librerias
v casas distribuidoras
en
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Uiidas.
Secci6n
de Ventas.

00300

RX-60989-October

l989-?.0~0
