United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9042nd meeting

Wednesday, 25 May 2022, 2.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. DeLaurentis/Mr. Mills/Mr. Hunter. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Silveira Braoios
Mr. He Siyang
Ms. Lebatteux
Mr. Nanga
Ms. Tenkorang
Mrs. Maitra
Mr. Lennon
Mr. Olanda
Mrs. Jiménez Alegría
Mr. Andersen
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Alolama
Ms. Mudrick

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2022/381)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-36117 (E)
*2236117*

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The meeting resumed at 2.20 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to limit
their statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Flashing lights on the collars of the microphones will
prompt speakers to bring their remarks to a close after
four minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Luxembourg.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg is grateful to the United States for having
organized this open debate on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. I thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2022/381) and the recommendations
contained therein.
Luxembourg fully supports the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union and
the statements on behalf of the Groups of Friends on
the protection of civilians and the responsibility to
protect. Please allow me to add some remarks in my
national capacity.
We are deeply shocked by the devastating impact of
Russia’s unprovoked and unjustified aggression against
Ukraine. A growing number of testimonies and reports
describe unbearably brutal attacks by Russian armed
forces against civilians and civilian infrastructure,
including schools and hospitals, cities under siege
in Ukraine, human trafficking, rape and other forms
of sexual violence targeting women and children
in particular.
The information gathered and verified by the
United Nations and its partners is essential to counter
any manipulation of information. For example, between
24 February and 17 May, the World Health Organization
(WHO) verified 226 attacks against health-care
facilities in Ukraine. That figure represents two thirds
of the attacks against such civilian infrastructure that
have been verified by WHO throughout the world
since the beginning of the year. Let us be very clear:
those acts may constitute war crimes and crimes
against humanity.
Luxembourg would like to stress the need to
implement Security Council resolutions on the protection
of civilian infrastructure, in particular resolution 2601
(2021), which calls for measures to protect schools
from attack. We remain strongly committed to the Safe
2/46

25/05/2022

Schools Declaration and encourage all States that have
not yet done so to sign it.
The protection of persons displaced by armed
conflict, in particular women and children, must
be guaranteed. We condemn attacks on displaced
persons, which make it extremely difficult to provide
humanitarian assistance, which is so crucial. Full
and unhindered humanitarian access is a necessary
precondition for effective humanitarian action,
particularly in times of armed conflict.
In that context, we welcome the tireless efforts
of our humanitarian partners to protect civilians
in increasingly complex situations. I would like to
highlight in particular the crucial mandate of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
its fundamental role in protecting people affected by
conflict and other situations of violence. Luxembourg
is proud of the strategic partnership it has built with the
ICRC, which can count on our continued support.
International humanitarian law is one of the more
powerful tools we have to ensure the protection and
dignity of every person and to address the devastating
effects of conflicts on civilians. The international
community must redouble its efforts to ensure
compliance with international humanitarian law and
lay a foundation for just and lasting peace, not only in
Ukraine but also in Afghanistan, Mali, Syria, Yemen
and all conflict situations.
Impunity must end. We must do everything to
ensure that the perpetrators of violations of international
humanitarian law be held accountable for their actions
and that justice be done for the victims, who must be at
the centre of our efforts. In that regard, Luxembourg
underscores the important role of the International
Criminal Court.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): We wish to thank the
United States presidency for this open debate and the
briefers for their valuable contributions earlier today.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement to be made
by the observer of the European Union and wishes to
make some additional remarks in its national capacity.
We are deeply concerned about the reported
numbers of civilian deaths, the immense suffering and
the continued violations of international law in too
22-36117

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

many armed conflicts throughout the world in 2021. We
condemn in the strongest terms the blatant disregard for
international law and civilian lives and dignity, and we
call for the perpetrators of those international crimes to
be held accountable.
As we continue to witness further civilian deaths,
suffering and massive displacement, we condemn in
the strongest terms the unprovoked Russian military
aggression against Ukraine.
As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/381) yet
again points out, we need to do more, and we need to
do better, to protect civilians and those most affected in
armed conflict.
Water infrastructure, housing, schools, hospitals
and other crucial infrastructure are vulnerable to
indiscriminate attacks, particularly in densely populated
areas. We are concerned about the long-term impacts of
environmental degradation and destruction, as well as
the impacts of the contamination of soil and land, on
the civilian population. Slovenia supports initiatives
to enhance the protection of water infrastructure and
installations, such as the Geneva List of Principles on the
Protection of Water Infrastructure, formulated by the
Geneva Water Hub, which provides recommendations
on how to better protect water infrastructure.
We are particularly alarmed by reports of the rising
number of attacks against schools, which constitute
grave violations affecting children. Strengthening the
protection of education facilities from attacks and
restricting their use for military purposes must be a
number one priority in armed conflicts. Schools must
remain safe havens and enabling environments for
children. We call on those who have not yet done so
to endorse the Safe School Declaration and promote
its implementation.
One of Slovenia’s national priorities is to support
activities to strengthen human security and enable
the recovery and development of conflict-affected
countries. Projects and programmes focus on clearing
landmines and other explosive remnants of war and
provide assistance to landmine victims through care,
rehabilitation and reintegration. Psychological and
physical assistance and the rehabilitation of children
affected by armed conflicts, social rehabilitation
training for counsellors and mine-risk education are
just some examples of our activities and actions carried
out through the Slovenian humanitarian organization
ITF Enhancing Human Security.

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Preventive action should be our key investment.
Respect for, and compliance with, international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
are essential. All those responsible for crimes against
civilians must be prosecuted and punished. Ensuring
accountability and fighting impunity for the most
serious crimes, such as genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes, is an essential component
of preventing armed conflicts, protecting civilians and
building sustainable peace. International mechanisms
such as the International Criminal Court play a key role
in those efforts.
Effective and comprehensive peacebuilding and
peacekeeping, with robust mandates that are flexible
enough to provide protection and assistance to the
civilian population, are critical.
In conclusion, the strong and continuous
engagement of the Security Council in protecting
civilians on the ground is of the utmost importance for
protecting people’s lives and dignity and alleviating
their suffering. We cannot ignore our responsibility to
ensure that people’s lives and dignity are protected in
every setting.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malta.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): May I start by expressing our
condolences for the loss of lives in the mass shooting
in Texas.
Malta thanks the United States for convening this
important debate. I also express our gratitude to all the
briefers for their valuable briefings and participation in
today’s meeting.
Malta aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of the European Union and would
like to add a few remarks in its national capacity.
The Secretary-General’s annual report (S/2022/381)
makes for sobering reading. It demonstrates how
violations of international humanitarian law continue to
have a negative — and in some cases deadly — impact
on people’s lives. Our starting point must be enhancing
respect for international humanitarian law.
Malta believes that the Security Council must
systematically demand that all parties to armed
conflict respect and implement their obligations under
international humanitarian law in all circumstances.
That body of law places an obligation on parties to

22-361173/46

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

armed conflict to allow and facilitate safe, rapid and
unimpeded access for humanitarian personnel to
civilians in need. The safety of such humanitarian
personnel must be guaranteed.
Restrictions on humanitarian access are still too
frequent, and the impact is most often felt by women,
children, elderly persons, people with disabilities and
other vulnerable groups. Whether due to bureaucratic
reasons, obstacles in engaging with non-State armed
groups or attacks suffered by humanitarian personnel,
we see humanitarian access being restricted in places
such as Ukraine, Syria, Yemen, Afghanistan and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Humanitarian access and assistance must never be
politicized. In that vein, we look forward to working
with the incoming special adviser on the preservation
of humanitarian space and access.
We commend the role of humanitarian workers
for their work in protecting civilians in the most
challenging circumstances. We also highlight the
crucial role of principled humanitarian organizations in
engaging with non-State armed groups. Furthermore,
we are extremely concerned by the disinformation
aimed at eroding trust in humanitarians and casting an
unjustifiable shadow of doubt over their activities.
It is regrettable that the international community
has been too silent when violations of that body of law
are perpetrated. Ensuring accountability for violations
is of paramount importance. We underline the
complementarity, and sometimes necessarily role, of
international judicial bodies, such as the International
Criminal Court.
The Security Council has developed a strong
protection-of-civilians framework. It is time to fully
implement the relevant resolutions, namely, resolution
2175 (2014), on the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel, resolution 2286 (2016), on the protection
of health-care workers, resolution 2573 (2021), on the
protection of civilian infrastructure, and resolution
2601 (2021), on the protection of education in conflict.

25/05/2022

norms, but the inability to enforce existing laws and
norms. Should Malta be entrusted to serve as an elected
member of the Security Council from 2023 to 2024, we
will ensure that the protection of civilians continues to
underpin our work at the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Espinosa Cañizares (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the United States presidency for
again providing us a valuable opportunity to deepen last
week’s discussion in the Security Council on conflictinduced hunger and other forms of civilian impact (see
S/PV.9036).
According to the Secretary-General’s report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2022/381),
more than 140 million people were suffering from crisis
or heightened levels of food insecurity in 24 States in
December 2021, up from 99 million in 2020.
The events in Ukraine have exacerbated that
situation, which already extends beyond areas of
conflict. Of course, that is not the only impact that
concerns Ecuador. The 10 May report mentions the
unbearable pain and anguish that has reverberated far
beyond Ukraine.
In March alone, my country had to evacuate
more than 700 Ecuadorians from Ukraine on several
humanitarian flights. We urge the implementation of
resolution ES-11/2, by which the General Assembly, in
the absence of a Council decision, resolved to demand
that all parties protect civilians, including foreign
nationals, in particular students, without discrimination,
to allow safe, voluntary and unimpeded passage.

Synergies with other instruments, such as the call
for humanitarian action, the Safe Schools Declaration
and the Irish-led initiative that seeks to adopt a political
declaration on the use of explosive weapons in urban
areas, should also be pursued.

We support the efforts of the Secretary-General
focusing on the pursuit of peace and the protection of
civilians. We also appreciate presidential statement
S/PRST/2022/3, of 6 May, by which the Council
finally showed unity, and we call for expedited
efforts to achieve a lasting ceasefire on that basis.
Ecuador is concerned about the overall state of the
protection of civilians. In the January open debate on
war in cities, I recalled that this year was also central
to efforts to advance the implementation of the New
Urban Agenda, adopted in Quito, which recognizes
the humanitarian impact of war on urban areas
(see S/PV.8953).

Today’s challenges, illustrated so vividly in the
annual report, are not due to an absence of laws and

We are concerned about the military use of schools,
and we therefore call for the implementation of the

4/46

22-36117

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Safe Schools Declaration. The Council must further
deepen its efforts against the use of explosives in
populated areas.
We also condemn the threats and attacks against
health-care providers, six years after the adoption of
resolution 2286 (2016). We condemn any attack that
deprives civilian populations of goods essential for
their survival, which is why last year we co-sponsored
resolution 2573 (2021).
We reiterate our commitment to continuing
to support the efforts of the United Nations, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and civil
society to promote the effective implementation of
international humanitarian law and to alleviate the
impact and suffering caused by conflict.
I would like to conclude my statement by expressing
Ecuador’s deep concern about the alarming numbers of
journalists killed in conflict zones in 2021. Recently,
the Committee on Information, which I chaired,
observed a moment of silence in honour of them and
of the Palestinian-American journalist Shireen Abu
Akleh, whose murder shocked the Organization. But
the best way to pay tribute to their lives and service is
by strengthening the work of the Security Council and
the United Nations system in protecting journalists and,
even more so, by redoubling efforts for the peaceful
and urgent resolution of all conflicts as a core priority
of humankind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Skoog: I thank the United States for putting
this very important issue on the agenda. I also thank our
briefers this morning. I express special admiration and
appreciation for the remarkable work that humanitarian
organizations are doing to protect civilians every day.

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

suffering to millions of civilians. The latest example is
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine.
The EU is also deeply concerned by the impact
of the widespread and indiscriminate use of explosive
weapons in populated areas against civilians and
civilian infrastructure. In that regard, we support the
ongoing process to develop a political declaration on
explosive weapons in populated areas.
The EU will use all the tools at its disposal to
strengthen international humanitarian law and promote
accountability for violations. Since the beginning of
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, the EU
has been very active in supporting initiatives aimed
at ensuring that perpetrators of serious human rights
violations and violations of international humanitarian
law be held accountable, including the investigations
started by the International Criminal Court, the Human
Rights Council’s commission of inquiry, national
investigations by the Ukrainian authorities and
investigations by EU member States.
The EU notes with deep concern that the number
of attacks against health facilities and medical
personnel continues to increase. The EU is committed
to supporting the collection and analysis of data on
attacks against medical personnel and implementing
concrete measures to ensure the safety and security of
humanitarian workers.
Mental health and psychosocial support is an
integral part of the EU humanitarian response to crises,
especially for civilians affected by the devastating
consequences of conflict. To step up our efforts in that
domain, the EU is supporting a pilot programme to
provide related services, entitled the Mental Health and
Psychosocial Support Minimum Services Package.

I am speaking on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its member States. North Macedonia, Montenegro
and Albania; Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Georgia, Monaco
and San Marino, align themselves with this statement.

The EU and its member States note with concern
the figures on conflict-driven hunger, as presented in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/381). When
the impact of the Russian war of aggression against
Ukraine on global food security is accounted for, the
picture will likely be even more dire. The EU supports
the Secretary-General’s initiative to create a global
crisis response group. We call for a strong coordination
of the international efforts to address this crisis, such as
the Global Alliance for Food Security and the Food and
Agriculture Resilience Mission.

The EU is deeply concerned by the pervasiveness of
armed conflicts across the globe, which cause immense

However, those efforts are still insufficient to
cover the needs. We call for increased contributions

Given the time constraints, I will deliver a muchabbreviated version of my statement now and will
distribute the full statement through other means.

22-361175/46

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

from international partners. More efforts are needed
to alleviate hunger in armed conflict, in line with
resolution 2417 (2018). We condemn the destruction
of the environment as a means of warfare, especially
where the civilian population is directly dependent on
its natural resources for water, food and livelihoods.
We will continue to advocate for the protection of the
natural environment in armed conflict.
The EU and its member States are very concerned
about the ever-increasing number of forcibly displaced
people in the world. We share the Secretary-General’s
concern about the dramatic increase in the number of
internally displaced persons and the severe challenges
they face. The EU reiterates its support for the
Secretary-General’s efforts to develop a draft action
agenda on internal displacement.
Children remain disproportionally affected by
armed conflict, including through an increasing rate
of attacks on education facilities and a high level of
sexual violence. The EU strongly supports the children
and armed conflict mandate and the Monitoring
and Reporting Mechanism. We also support the
implementation of resolution 2601 (2021) in order to
protect schools from attack and mitigate and avoid the
military use of schools, and we welcome the efforts of
United Nations States Members that have endorsed the
Safe Schools Declaration.
The EU remains committed to the protection of
women and girls and to supporting the prevention
of sexual and gender-based violence, as well as to
addressing its impact on sexual and reproductive health.
Persons with disabilities face additional risks and
vulnerabilities in situations of armed conflict. Their
needs should be duly taken into account, and barriers
to access, information evacuation and emergency
assistance should be lifted.
Finally, the EU concurs with the report of the
Secretary-General that securing rapid, safe and
unhindered humanitarian access is of the utmost
importance. We are committed to avoiding any potential
negative impact of sanctions and counter-terrorism
measures on principled humanitarian action. People
impacted by armed conflict deserve our concrete
actions to protect their lives and dignity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
6/46

25/05/2022

Mr. Rae (Canada): First of all, on behalf of my
Government and the people of Canada, I would like to
express our deep sorrow over the events that took place
yesterday in Texas. The United States, its delegation
and you, Mr. President, are very much in our thoughts
and prayers.
(spoke in French)
I thank the United States for hosting today’s open
debate, and the presenters for sharing their views
with us.
The Secretary-General’s report on the protection
of civilians (S/2022/381) presents some very disturbing
trends. There are more conflicts today than since the
end of the Second World War. Forced displacement,
world hunger and humanitarian needs are at their
highest levels in many years. And violence against
civilians and civilian infrastructure is increasing — and
becoming more deadly.
(spoke in English)
Tragically, we are witnessing this daily in Ukraine,
where there is still no end in sight to the horrors of
what has been dubbed the Russian war machine or
the “atrocity factory”, as one scholar has called it.
The Russian Federation’s unprovoked and illegal
invasion of Ukraine has cast a glaring spotlight on
two problems undermining the protection of civilians
in armed conflict — first, the abuse of the veto power
and, secondly, the glaring lack of accountability for
violations of international law.
We all know the first line of the Charter of the
United Nations. But today, despite that promise to
“save succeeding generations”, this generation is
suffering from the scourge of war. And it is the civilian
population — children, women and men — who bear
the brunt of armed conflict. That is why we have to
look at the peace and security architecture of the United
Nations, including the Security Council veto.
The recent resolution adopted by the General
Assembly opens the door for greater — and
needed — scrutiny of every veto and will give all Member
States the opportunity to consider recommendations
for collective measures, instead of a blocked
Security Council.
When armed conflict does arise, the laws of war
are uncontroversial — they protect those who are not
or are no longer taking part in hostilities. And they
22-36117

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

prohibit means and methods of warfare that cause
unnecessary suffering. Were parties to armed conflict
to scrupulously follow the law, we would not be
discussing humanitarian access and, most important,
the vast majority of harm to civilians and civilian
objects would be avoided.
Yet we continue to witness these violations — in
Ukraine, Syria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Ethiopia, Myanmar and in many other places. Deliberate
attacks on hospitals, schools, homes and essential
infrastructure have become all too familiar, carrying
with them devastating effects, particularly for
women, children and the disabled — those least able
to take care of themselves. Non-compliance and a
lack of accountability mean there is less space for
humanitarian actors.
Sometimes our instinct in response to these horrors
is to do something — adopt a resolution, create new
laws. But I wonder if that is really the right approach.
First, we must examine ourselves. What are we
doing to make sure that international humanitarian
law — the protocols and conventions that we
adopted — are actually now built into our domestic
laws, what we do nationally and what are practices
really are?
Secondly, we have to make sure that there is
scrupulous adherence to international humanitarian
law by our State and non-State partners.
Thirdly, when parties to armed conflict
commit serious violation, we must hold them to
account — diplomatically, through collective sanctions;
militarily, by supporting Governments, like Ukraine,
that are defending themselves under Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations; and legally, through
prosecution at the International Criminal Court, the
International Court of Justice and other bodies.
(spoke in French)
Our solidarity is our strength. We must collectively
build a stronger incentive structure for compliance with
international law and strengthen the Council’s twodecade-old architecture for the protection of civilians.
In Ukraine, our solidarity has translated into
unprecedented sanctions against the Government of the
Russian Federation and a willingness to hold its forces
accountable for clear violations of international law.

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

There should be no place in the world where the
most serious violations of international law can be
committed with impunity.
(spoke in English)
Russia’s unprovoked and illegal actions in Ukraine
shock the conscience of humankind. But its horrific
conduct has reinforced our collective will to defend
the very international order that it is attempting to
undermine. And we must use the same collective
will to protect those who are suffering in conflicts
around the world at the hands of too many, whose
actions — in flagrant violations of the rules of war and
humanity — continue with little accountability.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Ms. Baptista Grade Zacarias (Portugal): Portugal
aligns itself with the statements delivered by the
representatives of the European Union (EU), on behalf
of the EU and its member States; Switzerland, on behalf
of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians in
Armed Conflict; and Croatia, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.
We thank the United States for organizing this
debate and would like to add three points in our
national capacity.
First, this discussion is essential, given the number
of conflicts causing unspeakable suffering to civilians
across the globe. Deliberate attacks against civilians
constitute war crimes and, in some cases, crimes against
humanity. They cannot go unpunished and demand
accountability following investigations initiated by
national or international institutions.
In that context, I would like to reaffirm Portugal’s
support for the International Criminal Court and
for the call for the universal ratification of the Rome
Statute. I also wish to reiterate our full support for the
international human rights protection system, while
underlining its critical role in ensuring accountability
for human rights violations and abuses, as well as
stressing the importance of early-warning mechanisms.
The prevention of human rights violations should
be everyone’s priority. We therefore welcome the
prevention focus of the New Agenda for Peace set out
in Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) and look forward to
the next steps in that regard.

22-361177/46

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Secondly, like others, we remain concerned
about the disproportionate use of explosive weapons
in populated areas and their impact on civilians and
civilian infrastructure. We support the ongoing process
developing a political declaration on the subject. We
think of Syria and Ukraine. We think of Afghanistan,
where last year more than 900 schools were destroyed,
damaged or closed, with their rehabilitation hampered
by the presence of explosive hazards. That figure is
staggering and puts the future of entire generations at
risk while disproportionately affecting girls. It reminds
us of the need to implement resolution 2601 (2021),
on safeguarding the right to education, and resolution
2573 (2021), on critical civilian infrastructure, among
other resolutions.
Thirdly, we note with concern the numbers on
conflict-driven hunger. Russia’s war of aggression in
Ukraine, a global breadbasket, is further disrupting
commodity supply chains, contributing to a rise in food
market prices and, by the same token, food insecurity
across the world. That aggravates the humanitarian
situation in the most vulnerable regions, such as the
Sahel and the Horn of Africa, which already have to
deal with conflict, the pandemic and climate change,
in addition to poverty and inequality. Such global,
interconnected challenges demand a strong multilateral
response. The recently created Global Crisis Response
Group on Food, Energy and Finance has a key role to
play. We support it and look forward to its continued
work. We have the instruments. We must use them,
including in the Security Council. Full compliance
with international humanitarian law, from all parties
to conflicts, including non-State armed groups, must
remain our guiding star across the board.

25/05/2022

devastating humanitarian effects, with 1.4 million
people without access to running water and an
alarming increase in food insecurity not only felt by
the people of Ukraine — one of the world’s largest
grain producers — but by many around the globe. We
condemn the Russian forces’ attacks on civilians and
civilian objects, such as hospitals, schools, apartment
buildings and shelters. International humanitarian law
makes it extremely clear that such attacks on civilian
infrastructure, whether carried out kinetically or with
cyber weapons, are illegal. They are war crimes and
must be investigated and prosecuted as such, including
by the International Criminal Court when national
judiciaries are unwilling or unable to do so themselves.
Liechtenstein also supports Council action to address
the growing impact of conflict on infrastructure,
building on resolution 2573 (2021).
We are heartbroken and outraged that atrocities
continue to be committed in conflicts around the world,
but we must not be discouraged. This tragic state of
affairs requires our collective persistence in ensuring
accountability through international, regional, national
and hybrid regimes in order to bring justice to the
victims of these crimes and deter their commission in
future. In that regard, Liechtenstein will continue to
advocate consistently for a comprehensive, impartial
and sustainably funded system of international justice
for the most serious international crimes.

Ms. Oehri (Liechtenstein): I thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this year’s open debate
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
in circumstances that unfortunately could not be
more apposite.

Conflict also has a lasting effect on mental health.
According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/381), more than one in five people living in
conflict-affected areas were estimated to be suffering
from depression, anxiety and post-traumatic stress
disorder. Trauma is particularly associated with
sexual and gender-based violence, which continues
to blight many conflicts. While women and girls are
disproportionately affected, the pathbreaking research
by the All Survivors Project highlights the devastating
impact of sexual and gender-based violence on men
and boys — an often-overlooked issue — as well as the
need to provide relevant assistance and support to all
victims and survivors.

Conflict
continues
to
destroy
essential
infrastructure and other civilian objects and cause
extreme civilian harm. After more than a decade of
war in Syria, widespread damage to water systems has
left civilians with 40 per cent less drinking water than
10 years ago, and more than half of the population is
suffering from hunger. The war in Ukraine has had

Climate change is costing lives, exacerbating
vulnerabilities and inequalities, and is a driver of
conflict as well as a matter of human security itself. It
is therefore vital to ensure that humanitarian action is
environmentally sustainable, limiting potential damage
to the planet. As an expression of our appreciation of the
work of the International Committee of the Red Cross

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.

8/46

22-36117

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

(ICRC) in that regard, Liechtenstein has supported
the ICRC Climate and Environment Transition Fund,
which will enable it to transition towards sustainable
and climate-smart humanitarian action in conflict. We
are hopeful that other relevant actors on the ground will
follow suit.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Ms. Schwalger (New Zealand): I would like to
thank our briefers from the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the International Committee
of the Red Cross and the International Rescue
Committee, as well as Ms. Boketa, of Women for
Women International.
This annual debate on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict is one of the most important topics
on the Council’s thematic agenda. Unfortunately,
we live in a world where conflicts continue to take a
devastating toll on civilians. Our daily news feeds
have stories of civilians targeted in conflict zones
from Afghanistan to Ethiopia, Ukraine to Syria.
Civilian deaths, psychological trauma, sexual violence
and family separations are only some of the wounds
that will take generations to heal. Today’s debate
takes place against a backdrop of Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine. That unprovoked and unjustified aggression
has caused unbearable heartache and forced 12 million
Ukrainians to flee their homes. It has threatened the
unthinkable — nuclear conflict.
In conflict, civilians pay the highest price. As the
Secretary-General (S/2022/381) notes in his report, in
2021 the United Nations reported more than 11,000
civilian deaths across 12 armed conflicts. Health-care
personnel, medical facilities and civilian infrastructure
were directly targeted, in flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law. As our briefers have
noted, we continue to see attacks on health-care workers,
with 219 deaths in 2021 alone. We also continue to see a
lack of respect for international humanitarian law. That
is unacceptable. Even war has rules. Listening to our
briefers, we took away three key areas where we should
redouble our efforts to reverse those terrible trends.
First, we need greater determination from the
Council in discharging its responsibility to maintain
international peace and security. Russia’s abuse of its
veto has led to the Council’s inaction in the face of an act
of aggression. It must avail itself of every possible tool

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

to prevent conflict, defend fundamental international
norms and seek negotiated political solutions.
Secondly, we need all Member States to demand
universal compliance with international law from
both State and non-State actors. We should support all
efforts to reinforce that compliance, including the draft
political declaration strengthening the protection of
civilians from the humanitarian consequences arising
from the use of explosive weapons in populated areas,
which New Zealand encourages all States to support.
We must also ensure that those who are responsible
for violations of international law and international
humanitarian law face justice, by deploying the
accountability mechanisms we have at our disposal.
The erosion of international rules must not be allowed
to become our new normal. Council resolutions that
were agreed on in order to protect civilians must not
become rhetorical commitments.
Thirdly, the Security Council should prioritize
the protection of civilians in United Nations
peacekeeping operation mandates. Member States
should provide trained personnel and resources to
support those mandates. Early warning of threats to
civilians and mechanisms that provide for timely and
effective responses must be a baseline requirement for
peacekeeping missions. Improved integration with the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture would better
protect civilians at all stages of conflict.
During New Zealand’s most recent term on the
Security Council, we worked with four elected members
to secure the unanimous adoption of resolution 2286
(2016), in response to the horrific escalation in attacks
against medical facilities and personnel in Syria,
Yemen, Afghanistan and beyond. It was an important
reaffirmation of our collective commitment to uphold
international law in the face of such atrocities. It was
also a demonstration of the important role elected
members of the Council play in advancing the protection
of civilians in the work of the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Ms. Lõuk (Estonia): We thank the United States
for hosting today’s debate, and the briefers for
their presentations.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union.

22-361179/46

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The protection of civilians is an essential part of
the Security Council’s agenda. With an overwhelming
majority of harm caused by conflicts borne by civilians,
we cannot address the maintenance of international
peace and security without a strong focus on their
protection in every conflict.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/381)
yet again reflects an enormous gap between the parties’
obligations under international law and the reality
in situations of conflict around the world. Estonia
reiterates its call for compliance with international
law, including international human rights law and
international humanitarian law. We underline that
existing international law also applies in cyberspace.
With tens of thousands of civilians in need of
assistance, we find the persistent and increasing attacks
against those who strive to help them — humanitarian
and health-care workers — abhorrent. Hundreds of
health-care workers were killed and facilities were
damaged in 2021 — a number that will increase
exponentially this year due to the attacks conducted
systematically and ruthlessly by Russia in Ukraine.
Scores of humanitarian workers have been killed,
wounded or kidnapped, 95 per cent of them national
staff — most notably in Ethiopia, Afghanistan and
Syria. The civilian toll continues to include dozens of
killed and injured journalists, whose work adds to the
information and awareness of the impact of conflict.
We welcome the focus of today’s debate on ways
to ensure better humanitarian access. We note with
concern the various emerging challenges outlined by
the Secretary-General, including restrictions of the
activities of female humanitarian personnel, who are
essential in reaching those must vulnerable, as well as the
fragmentation of armed groups and the difficulties for
humanitarian engagement resulting from the growing
number of private military and security contractors,
in particular in the Central African Republic. We also
note the increasing risk borne by local humanitarian
workers due to the increased risks associated with
humanitarian operations.
The denial of humanitarian access is a violation
of international law. Increased and consistent Council
scrutiny, enhanced data collection, monitoring and
reporting and ensuring accountability for violations are
key tools for countering the obstacles to humanitarian
access. Estonia underlines the importance of, and
continues to focus on, the contribution of digital
10/46

25/05/2022

technologies to the identification and assessment of
humanitarian needs. However, we take note of the
Secretary-General’s emphasis on the need to adopt
strategies to address their malicious use in undermining
humanitarian action.
The Russian aggression against Ukraine has been
carried out with cynical indifference towards the
protection of civilians. It has been characterized by
violations of international law amounting to war crimes
and crimes against humanity; targeted systematic
violence against the most vulnerable, including women
and children; and extensive shelling and sieges of cities.
It has led to millions being displaced and thousands
being deported, disappeared, tortured or subjected to
sexual violence.
It has also been characterized by massive
disinformation, including here at the Council, about
the Russian actions towards the civilians in Ukraine
and their inhuman intent, as well as cynical and surreal
attempts by Russia to claim that its actions comply with
international law.
Estonia has continued to emphasize the importance
of accountability for all violations of international law
through national, regional, international and hybrid
mechanisms. That includes the investigation of, and
full accountability for, the Russian crimes in Ukraine.
We commend the tireless efforts of humanitarian
organizations, in particular local organizations, as well
as the United Nations and the International Committee
of the Red Cross, in working to ensure humanitarian
access and deliver assistance to those people in dire
need. We underline the need for safe and unhindered
humanitarian access throughout Ukraine.
The Security Council needs to step up its action
to protect civilians everywhere, including by showing
political will and providing adequate protection
capacity for its peacekeeping and political missions.
Otherwise, it will continue to fall short of the aims set
for its role in the Charter of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Marschik (Austria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this meeting as an open debate and for
allowing us to participate. I also thank the briefers for
their stirring presentations, and the Secretary-General
for his latest report (S/2022/381) on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
22-36117

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Austria aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union and the statement
made by representative of Switzerland on behalf of the
Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians.
We say it over and over again: civilians must not
be targets in armed conflicts. And yet we see it over
and over again: civilians are targeted. Women, men,
children and civilian infrastructure are targeted. That
is done not just through negligence; all too often, that
targeting is fully deliberate and intentional.
A case in point is Russia’s illegal war in Ukraine,
where shelling of civilians and civilian infrastructure
occurs daily, in clear violation of international
humanitarian law but also in violation of Security
Council resolutions on the protection of civilians. We
join those who say that needs to stop, in Ukraine and in
all other parts of the world.
One of the biggest causes of civilian harm is the
use of explosive weapons in populated areas. In such
cases, civilian casualties amount to almost 90 per cent
of casualties, with long-term effects on mental health,
infrastructure and supply chains. We say it again and
again: full compliance with international humanitarian
law is essential. To underline that, Austria has been a
staunch supporter of the process to elaborate a strong
political declaration on the use of explosive weapons in
populated areas. It is high time we adopt it.

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

range of issues in the context of protecting civilians,
focusing on persons with disabilities, the protection of
medical personnel, missing persons or the protection
of indispensable civilian infrastructure. Fully
implementing those resolutions, including by ensuring
swift, safe and unimpeded access for humanitarian
workers to areas of concern, would go a long way to
improving the fate of civilians in conflicts around
the world.
As the Secretary-General mentioned in his report,
the cycle between armed conflict and hunger persists.
Food must never become a weapon of war, because
it always targets civilians. The deliberate creation of
food insecurity, just like deliberate climate insecurity,
aggravates an armed conflict, turning it into a
global threat.
Finally, we must also think about public perception.
In matters of peace and security around the world,
the public expects the United Nations to act. When
civilians are harmed in large numbers, wherever that
may be, the Security Council cannot remain silent. The
Council must speak up, stop the activities causing harm
and help bring the perpetrators to justice. The Council
owes that to the thousands of civilian casualties whom
we witness every year.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.

Secondly, if those resolutions or key norms
of international relations, such as international
humanitarian law, are violated, we need decisive and
swift responses by the Council to immediately counter
such violations.

Mr. Chatrnúch (Slovakia): We greatly appreciate
the holding of this open debate on the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, which
continues to be very worrying. The Secretary-General
underlined in his report (S/2022/381) that armed
conflicts continue to be characterized by high levels of
civilian death, injury and psychological trauma, sexual
violence, torture and forced disappearances, as well as
damaged and destroyed homes, schools, hospitals and
essential civilian infrastructure. Moreover, an already
unfavourable general situation has been exacerbated
by the coronavirus disease pandemic, which is
totally unacceptable.

Thirdly, we must ensure accountability for such
violations. In that respect, Austria reiterates the
importance of effective and context-specific training in
international humanitarian law, as well as appropriate
guidance at all levels of military operations — strategic,
operational and tactical — in order to ensure compliance
with international humanitarian law. Security Council
resolutions in previous years have covered a wide

Slovakia would like to take this opportunity
to express its strong commitment to international
humanitarian law and the principles it is founded
on. Respect for international humanitarian law is
an irreplaceable tool for the effective protection of
civilians in armed conflicts. We must ramp up our
efforts to prevent, minimize and mitigate the adverse
impact of military operations on civilian populations in

In the concept note for today’s debate, you asked
us, Sir, what actions could be undertaken to strengthen
the protection of civilians in a comprehensive manner.
In our eyes, the answer is not too complicated.
First, we must all ensure and enable the full,
continuous and effective implementation of Security
Council resolutions by all Member States.

22-3611711/46

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

order to protect them from violence. That approach must
be based on the fundamental understanding that the
protection of civilians is an obligation of all the parties
to a conflict. They must distinguish between civilians
and combatants and civilian and military objects and
ensure that attacks are proportionate and necessary.
Slovakia, together with 113 other States, has
endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration. Access to a safe
and quality education is a fundamental right of every
person, and the right to education is crucial to personal
development and prosperity. It responds to multiple
needs and offers protection and hope for a better future.
We are appalled that attacks on education continued to
rise in 2021 and strongly condemn attacks on students,
teachers, schools and universities. We likewise call
on all Member States to endorse and implement
the Declaration.
Last but not least, I want to once again condemn
the Russian Federation’s unjustified and unprovoked
military aggression against Ukraine, in blatant
violation of international law. Its impact is being felt by
undernourished victims across Africa and the Middle
East, and the ripple effect will only widen until Russia
stops this senseless war. Low supplies and skyrocketing
prices are directly affecting dozens of countries,
many of which were already food-insecure before the
war started. And, as we know, hunger is not only the
consequence of conflict — it is often its cause. We are
already seeing increased social tensions in middle- and
low-income countries, where civilians pay the highest
prices for food and energy shortages. The aggressor to
blame for this situation is clear. Slovakia recently joined
Canada, 39 other Member States and the European
Union in calling on Russia to respect and comply
with the order of the International Court of Justice of
16 March on preliminary measures and to immediately
suspend its military operations in Ukraine. We reiterate
our firm call on it to do so without further delay.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Ms. Bassols Delgado (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today’s meeting.
Spain aligns itself with the statement made earlier
on behalf of the European Union.
Last year, 11,075 civilians died in 12 conflicts
around the world. That figure represents an increase of
12/46

25/05/2022

17 per cent from 2020, although the unverified figures
are much higher. We are witnessing a proliferation of
conflicts, of violence against civilians as well as other
forms of violence, and that has resulted in escalating
levels of vulnerability for millions of people in Nigeria,
Ethiopia, Cameroon, the Central African Republic,
Mali, Burkina Faso, Afghanistan, Yemen, Syria and
Myanmar, and now Ukraine. In accordance with the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the United
Nations and the Security Council must implement the
triple nexus in the initiatives they adopt to prevent cycles
of violence, reduce their impact and scale, and limit the
time frame in which they are developed, in addition to
protecting civilians, especially women and girls, young
children, the elderly and people with disabilities.
The illegal and unjustified aggression of the
Russian Federation against Ukraine, which Spain firmly
condemns, has once again demonstrated the enormous
vulnerability of the civilian population. It has also made
clear that disinformation and misinformation violate
the rights of a civilian population that is also dealing
with a denial of those same violations. It is therefore
essential to demand respect for human rights, the
rights of refugees and international humanitarian law.
When those are seriously violated, we must strengthen
investigation and accountability mechanisms. Spain
is a staunch supporter of the fight against impunity.
There can be no sustainable peace over time without
justice and without respect for human rights and the
international obligations of international law, including
international humanitarian law. Spain has supported
the request for an investigation by the Office of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court and the
establishment of a Human Rights Council commission
of inquiry into violations committed during Russia’s
military aggression against Ukraine.
I would like to briefly mention four of Spain’s
priorities for the protection of civilians agenda. First
is the protection of health in armed conflict. Just
yesterday we attended the presentation of the report
entitled Unrelenting Violence: Violence Against Health
Care in Conflict 2021, which offered devastating data
on attacks and destruction of health systems around the
world. Three quarters of Tigray’s health facilities have
been destroyed. The public health system in Myanmar
collapsed in the first quarter of 2021. Since February,
Russia has been attacking hospitals, ambulances and
clinics. The World Health Organization has confirmed
200 Russian attacks. All of that took place in a year
22-36117

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

when health was compromised by the coronavirus
disease pandemic. Spain therefore urges all parties to
conflicts to comply with resolution 2286 (2016).
Secondly, turning to the protection of education, we
must work together to prevent attacks on educational
facilities and their use for military purposes. Such
attacks increased by 20 per cent in 2021. The Safe
Schools Declaration and its guidelines, together
with Security Council resolution 2601 (2021), are
essential to protecting a specific sector of the civilian
population — boys and girls. Attacks on schools and
universities have also had a significant gender impact.
Girls and teachers continue to be at increased risk of
having their rights violated.
Thirdly, turning to the protection of the rights of
women and girls, in particular the fight against sexual
and gender-based violence, Spain has allocated a very
high percentage of its humanitarian budget for Ukraine
to gender programmes, in collaboration with UNICEF,
the United Nations Population Fund, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and UN-Women.
Unfortunately, sexual violence as a tactic of war and a
form of torture and repression is still used today. There
are no verifiable statistics on such violations due to the
stigma related to that act of aggression itself. A shift
in focus is therefore necessary, because sexual assaults
exist even where there are no complaints. We must be
proactive in protecting women and girls.
Fourthly and lastly, turning to humanitarian access
and the protection of humanitarian workers, Spain
supports principled humanitarian action. We urge all
parties to armed conflicts to respect rapid, safe and
unhindered humanitarian access. Health-care workers
should not be exposed to risk when protecting and
assisting vulnerable populations. I wish to take this
opportunity to thank humanitarian workers for their
tireless efforts to bring humanity into devastated areas.
We have a mature legal framework for the protection
of rights, as well as a shared protection agenda. The
real challenge is in the implementation. National
and international courts must be a real instrument of
implementation, providing effective prevention against
and condemnation of attacks on the civilian population.
Spain encourages the Security Council to use the
instruments at its disposal, including the referral of
reports of war crimes and crimes against humanity to
the International Criminal Court for investigation and
eventual judgment.

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): Australia welcomes this
year’s annual debate on the protection of civilians. We
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2022/381).
It is clear that, despite the existing legal framework
supporting the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
respect for international law continues to be flouted.
Every day we are confronted with fresh examples of
egregious violations of the international legal rules
protecting civilian populations. As we have seen with
Russia’s illegal and unprovoked invasion of Ukraine
and its wanton disregard for the protection of Ukrainian
civilians, conflict is ruinous to societies and generates
irrevocable trauma.
Civilians are adversely impacted by conflict on
a daily basis in many parts of the world: Ukraine,
Syria, Ethiopia, Yemen, South Sudan and many more
places. And beyond the terrible harm inflicted upon
civilians caught up in conflict, those situations also
grievously undermine fundamental human rights.
We unequivocally support measures to promote full
compliance with international humanitarian law,
especially in relation to the protection of civilians. We
must hold to account those responsible for violations of
international humanitarian law and war crimes in order
to ensure justice and deter future perpetrators.
National prosecutions and those by the International
Criminal Court, which are complementary to national
jurisdictions, play a critical role. Today’s report
highlights the disturbing trend in obstructing the free
passage and timely delivery of humanitarian assistance
to persons in need, as well as deliberate attacks against
humanitarian workers. In northern Ethiopia, delays
in delivering humanitarian assistance and attacks on
humanitarian workers have contributed to a growing
humanitarian crisis, with 9.4 million people now in
need of assistance. That number should not just roll off
the tongue.
Similarly, in South Sudan, attacks on humanitarian
workers have prevented life-saving assistance from
reaching people in need. Women and girls are
disproportionately affected by conflict and violence.
Protecting the human rights of women and girls
in humanitarian crises is essential. That includes
accountability for perpetrators of any form of violence,
the appointment of gender advisers, the appointment of
women protection advisers and women’s participation

22-3611713/46

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and leadership at all stages and levels of conflict
resolution and peace processes.
Another serious element of the challenges we face is
to better understand how misinformation, disinformation
and hate speech are used to inflame conflict and how
they heighten the risk of violence towards civilians and
humanitarian staff. Australia welcomes constructive
thinking. It welcomes constructive ideas on how the
multilateral system can better intercept and counter
those insidious and destructive tools of conflict.
Peace operations play an important role in
protecting civilians by creating more stable conditions
for physical protection, intercommunal dialogue and the
protection of human rights, as well as by contributing
to processes of accountability within judicial systems.
The credibility and legitimacy of United Nations
peace operations largely depend on the willingness
and capability of peacekeepers to act when civilians
are under threat. Peacekeepers must be empowered
and supported by both the United Nations and troopcontributing countries to protect civilians. That
includes being equipped to understand and identify the
early-warning signs of heightened risks to civilians of
the commission of mass atrocity crimes.
Ultimately, we as a global community must work
to ensure that human rights violations and abuses
and violations of international humanitarian law are
enforced and that accountability measures ensure
justice and deter future perpetrators.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): At the outset, we wish to
express our heartfelt condolences to the Government
and the people of the United States and the families
of the victims for the tragic event that occurred in
Texas yesterday.
We thank the United States for convening this
open debate. Today’s meeting, although an annual
one, takes on new urgency when global efforts for
the protection of civilians are facing unprecedented
challenges. Conflicts and security threats are raging
at a broader scale, from Europe to Africa. Civilians,
including women and children, continue to account
for the majority of casualties in armed conflicts. The
coronavirus disease pandemic is still raging across
countries in conflict situations in which health-care
services are minimal.
14/46

25/05/2022

On top of the perennial hardship in terms of
humanitarian needs, the daily lives of, and assistance
to, tens of millions of people are threatened with serious
food insecurity and disruptions in supply chains, as
the Security Council discussed in detail last week (see
S/PV.9036). That in turn compounds the fragilities
of economic recovery for many. Urgent crises now
have to compete for the already scarce resources for
humanitarian assistance.
In the face of such unprecedented difficulties,
important principles must be ensured. Stronger
emphasis must be put on compliance by all parties with
the Charter of the United Nations, international law and
international humanitarian law. It is crucial to uphold
the principles of humanitarian assistance and support
the sovereignty and primary responsibility of States in
protecting their civilians.
All parties to armed conflicts must fully
refrain from attacking civilians and critical civilian
infrastructure. In times of scarcity and major hardship,
it is also critical to galvanize integrated support and
synergy from various actors, ranging from regional and
non-governmental organizations to the private sector.
The international community must take immediate
measures in the short run. Both the parties to conflicts
and international partners should prioritize the
protection of civilians.
Now is the time for sustained political will in
that regard, as well as to scale up the provision of
humanitarian aid to various conflict zones in order to
meet the increasing needs. If we are to alleviate the
serious situation detailed in the Secretary-General’s
latest report (S/2022/381), access to assistance must be
maintained and should not be politicized. However, none
of the measures that I have mentioned can replace the
longer-term imperative to resolve disputes peacefully
and avoid conflict so as to prevent innocent casualties
entirely. It is equally important to support conflictaffected communities, not just in responding to their
short-term needs but also in building their resilience
and ability to adapt to emerging challenges, including
climate-related risks.
In the light of such a challenging undertaking, it
is encouraging that the Security Council, as one of
the primary organs of the United Nations, continues
to engage regularly on the issue of the protection of
civilians and has made it a key element of its thematic
and country-specific discussions. The Council should
22-36117

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

fully discharge its functions as the primary body for
maintaining international peace and security in order
to better respond to the growing challenges, and it
should actively promote efforts to resolve and prevent
conflicts. Another way to better protect civilians is to
expand discussions and adopt measures on specific
and important aspects related to their protection, such
as critical infrastructure, mine action and food and
water security, as well as on facilitating the life-saving
activities of humanitarian agencies and protecting
humanitarian workers. Messages of unity from the
Council are equally important.
My country understands the consequences of war
first-hand and fully empathizes with the plight of
the civilians who are suffering as a result of armed
conflicts around the world. We ourselves have placed
a high priority on post-conflict reconstruction and
tackling the consequences of war in order to promote
socioeconomic development for our people and protect
them from risks such as explosive remnants of war.
Viet Nam was pleased to facilitate the adoption last
year of resolution 2573 (2021), pursuant to which the
Secretary-General’s latest report discusses issues
related to the protection of civilian infrastructure. We
remain committed to joining future efforts to ensure
the protection of civilians.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We would
like to thank the United States for convening this
open debate, and the speakers from the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Women for Women
International, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the International Rescue
Committee for their valuable briefings.
As we meet today, many existing conflicts persist
while new ones are emerging, with grave consequences
for civilians, as indicated in the Secretary-General’s
report to the Council (S/2022/381). The effects of
conflict are not limited to the regions where the
violence occurs. Beyond threatening the lives and
safety of civilians, conflicts can also have other
negative repercussions. They can cause displacement,
refugee crises and negative economic effects, as
well as worsening threats to food security, which is
already at risk thanks to the effects of climate change
and the supply-chain disruptions resulting from the
global pandemic.

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

The most effective way to spare civilians from
the scourge of violence and suffering, including the
resulting humanitarian needs, is by preventing conflicts
from occurring in the first place and resolving them
through peaceful and diplomatic means. In the absence
of such solutions, it is essential that all parties to conflict
abide by the principles and provisions of international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law and refrain from targeting civilians and civilian
facilities and infrastructure. We also stress the need
to make every possible effort to ensure the freedom
of civilians and guarantee them rapid and unimpeded
access to the humanitarian and emergency aid they
need. That requires facilitating the work of medical
and humanitarian workers and providing them with
security and protection. Unfortunately, hundreds of
those workers continue to suffer unjustifiable violence.
There are other categories of civilians targeted
by violence in conflict situations who must also be
protected. According to UNESCO, 20 journalists
were killed in conflict-affected countries in 2021. The
State of Qatar condemns in the strongest terms the
assassination by the Israeli occupation forces of the
Al Jazeera correspondent Shireen Abu Akleh, as well
as the wounding of a producer, Ali Samoudi. They
were working, wearing gear clearly marked “press”,
when they were attacked. That is a heinous crime, a
flagrant violation of international humanitarian law
and a blatant infringement of freedom of the press,
freedom of expression and of all people’s right to
obtain information. We reiterate the Security Council
members’ call for an immediate, thorough, transparent,
fair and impartial investigation and for accountability
for the perpetrators.
The right to education, which continues to suffer
from unacceptable violations in conflict situations,
including when educational institutions are the target
of attacks, must be ensured. In that regard, we recall
the importance of implementing General Assembly
resolution 74/275, submitted by the State of Qatar,
which urges the parties to armed conflict to protect
civilians, including students and education workers,
and to protect educational institutions.
The State of Qatar is anxious to alleviate the
impact of humanitarian crises on civilians affected
by armed conflict, and we therefore continue to play
a leading role in providing development and relief
assistance and supporting the efforts of the United
Nations in that regard. The State of Qatar is among the

22-3611715/46

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

top 10 contributors to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs. We have provided support
for humanitarian efforts in many Arab countries
and contributed more than $18 million to the Central
Emergency Response Fund. We also continue to provide
humanitarian and development support to our brother
Palestinian people, especially in order to alleviate
the difficult conditions and support reconstruction
efforts in the Gaza Strip, in addition to our continued
contributions to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. We
are also providing urgent humanitarian assistance to
Afghanistan, including via an air bridge from Doha to
Kabul, as well as working to rehabilitate Kabul airport
in order to facilitate the delivery of basic food supplies.
In conclusion, Qatar reiterates its commitment
to humanitarian work based on the principles of
cooperation, partnership, integrity and impartiality.
We will continue to coordinate with our international
partners to assess humanitarian situations and provide
assistance wherever necessary for the benefit of
civilians affected by armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to sincerely thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate to address the
urgent need to protect civilians in conflict situations.
It is the responsibility of the international
community and the Security Council to take effective
measures to protect civilians in cities and displacement
camps from acts such as the terrorist attacks being
committed by the Iran-backed Houthi militias against
civilians and civilian objects in Yemen, Saudi Arabia
and the United Arab Emirates, which constitute a
flagrant violation of international law and international
humanitarian law. They also represent a real threat
to vital civilian infrastructure, energy supplies and
global economic stability and undermine regional and
international peace and security.
Despite the continuing United Nations truce
in Yemen, which is mainly aimed at alleviating the
human suffering of Yemenis, the Houthi militias have
repeatedly violated the truce in the city of Ma’rib,
with a population of 4 million people, more than
2 million of whom are displaced. They have also
committed violations in the Al-Hudaydah, Dhale and
Hajjah governorates, among others. Those are some
16/46

25/05/2022

of the most prominent examples of how the lives and
safety of civilians are being endangered in a situation
of conflict. The Houthi militias continue to target
civilians and civilian objects with ballistic missiles,
drones and other heavy weapons, leaving dozens
dead and hundreds injured, most of them women and
children, and destroying schools, hospitals and places
of worship. In addition, they are recruiting children
at so-called summer camps, brainwashing them with
ideas of hatred and extremism and throwing them into
battle. All of that is in flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law and all international norms. The
Houthi crimes against civilians have extended to taking
the population as hostages in entire cities and villages,
using them as human shields, using schools as weapon
stores and systematically sniping at civilians.
Those militias also continue to besiege cities,
denying the population freedom of movement or access
to water and food and using starvation as a method of
warfare. Protecting civilians in Taiz from bombardment
and the continued seven-year Houthi siege is a
humanitarian priority. The Yemeni Government
has worked to implement its obligations under the
Stockholm Agreement, which included provisions for
starting consultations to lift the siege; however, the
Houthi militias have continued their fierce campaign
against the city’s residents.
Today, nearly two months after the start of the truce
sponsored by the United Nations, which again included
engaging in consultations to lift the siege of the city,
those militias continue to disavow their commitments
and use human suffering as a means of political gain.
We reiterate the need for the international
community and the Security Council to find a way
to lift the siege of Taiz; open the crossings; end the
restrictions imposed on the freedom of movement of
individuals and goods urgently and unconditionally;
ensure humanitarian access to those in need; and stop
the obstruction perpetrated by Houthi militias, their
interference in the work of international organizations
and their diversion of the flow of aid away from those
who deserve it. We also reiterate the importance of
transparently reporting on those violations.
Mines represent one of the most serious dangers
facing civilians in conflict areas in Yemen, which
signed the Ottawa Mine Ban Treaty in 1997 and
destroyed its stocks of that terrible weapon. The Houthi
militias have manufactured nearly 2 million mines and
22-36117

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

explosive devices and deployed them in more than one
of the areas of Yemen that they control, leading to the
subsequent deaths and injury of thousands of civilian
victims, especially among women and children.
While civilians have attempted to benefit from the
window of hope offered by the truce, their movement
on mine-infested roads between towns and villages has
led to a high number of civilian casualties. That weapon
paralyses the movement of Yemenis and threatens the
lives of millions of civilians and displaced people, who
are trapped between the Houthi bombardment to which
they are exposed in cities and camps and the mines laid
in their homes, streets, cities, farms and grazing areas,
which represent the livelihoods of millions.
Despite the extraordinary efforts of the national
army and the Masam project to clear mines, the
randomly laid mines and the lack of maps pose a great
challenge to those efforts and will remain a threat to the
lives of future generations for decades. We call on the
Council to take measures to pressure the Houthis and
ensure that they hand over all mine maps without delay.
The Iranian regime’s supply of weapons,
including ballistic missiles, to the Houthis is a clear
violation of relevant Security Council resolutions,
especially resolutions 2216 (2015) and 2231 (2015),
and also demonstrates a disregard for the efforts of
the international community to maintain regional and
international peace and security.
Therefore, the efforts of the Council to end the
conflict and protect civilians must be translated into the
implementation of its resolutions and the adoption of a
decisive approach to deterring and holding accountable
the violators of those resolutions and preventing the
smuggling of weapons, which are used to prolong the
war and exacerbate the humanitarian crisis in Yemen.
Those weapons impede any progress in the peace
process led by the United Nations to end the Yemeni
crisis and achieve a just and sustainable peace based on
the agreed parameters of the political solution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Dvali (Georgia): I would like to express
our appreciation to the United States presidency for
organizing this important open debate. I would also
like to thank the briefers for their comprehensive and
informative briefings.

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
wishes to add the following points in its national capacity.
We are deeply alarmed by the finding in the
Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2022/381) that
the civilian population accounts for the vast majority
of casualties in armed conflict. Such unlawful
attacks against civilians constitute a clear violation
of international humanitarian law and the rules-based
international order. Georgia actively supports and
stresses the importance of the various international
initiatives aimed at protecting civilians in armed
conflict, including the political declaration on the
protection of humanitarian and medical personnel in
armed conflict and the Safe Schools Declaration.
As a result of Russia’s full-scale military aggression
against my country in August 2008, more than 400
civilians and military personnel were killed and more
than 1,700 were wounded. Thousands more civilians
joined the 500,000 internally displaced persons and
refugees who had been expelled from the two integral
regions of Georgia during the previous waves of ethnic
cleansing. A total of 53 Georgian villages in and around
the Tskhinvali region were fully cleansed and destroyed,
and 35,000 houses belonging to ethnic Georgians were
deliberately burned and ruined.
The security and humanitarian situation in the
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali Russian-occupied regions of
Georgia has been deteriorating on a daily basis since
2008, and the list of human rights violations has grown
worse. Ethnic discrimination, violations of the right
to life, torture and ill-treatment, arbitrary detentions,
kidnappings, restriction of the freedom of movement
and infringement of the right to property — those
are just part of an incomplete list of violations that
people have to endure daily on the other side of the
occupation line.
Russia’s aggression and its occupation policy, as
well as its hybrid methods of warfare, which were welltested on my country, have unfortunately been applied
against Ukraine on a larger scale. Thousands of civilians
have been killed or injured. More than 500 schools and
52 hospitals have been shelled and entire cities have
been razed to the ground. Haunting images of massacres
with large numbers of civilian deaths and casualties, as
well as the destruction of civilian infrastructure, show
the true face of that brutal aggression.

22-3611717/46

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

25/05/2022

We call on Russia to comply with the provisional
measures of the International Court of Justice of
16 March, which bind Russia to immediately suspend the
military operations that it commenced on 24 February
2022 in the territory of Ukraine and withdraw all of its
forces and armaments entirely.

personnel — continue to be the victims of direct,
deliberate, systematic and violent targeted attacks
by armed forces. Similarly, access to humanitarian
assistance has been compromised by the continued
destruction of hospitals and attacks on medical
transport and essential services.

We call for ensuring the safe, rapid and unhindered
access to populations in need of assistance for
medical and humanitarian personnel, as well as the
protection of all medical and humanitarian personnel
exclusively engaged in their duties. In that regard, we
reiterate Georgia’s unwavering support for Ukraine’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
within its internationally recognized borders, including
Crimea and Donbas, as well as Ukraine’s navigational
rights in its territorial waters.

We continue to urge for ensuring that objects that
are indispensable to civilian populations are protected
at all costs, and for the stringent implementation
of resolution 2573 (2021), pertaining to attacks on
civilian infrastructure, in order to uphold international
humanitarian
law.
Non-combatants,
including
journalists, must be protected in keeping with the
principle of distinction and other protective measures
of the Geneva Conventions.

It is vital to safeguard civilians everywhere and
ensure that the perpetrators of violations of international
law and international humanitarian law are held to
account. We stand in solidarity with all those affected
by violence and remain committed to contributing to the
collective endeavour of ensuring that justice is served.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): We would like to
thank the United States for convening this open debate.
South Africa welcomes the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2022/381), which informs our discussions
today. Furthermore, we wish to thank all the briefers
for their presentations.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
continues to have impacts on new, ongoing and
protracted conflicts, exacerbating existing inequalities
and vulnerabilities and drawing further attention to
protection concerns. We have witnessed escalating
humanitarian needs in conjunction with the
displacement of persons, disruptions to global supply
chains, food insecurity and famine. Vaccines have
enabled many parts of the world to bring the pandemic
under control, but their distribution remains unequal.
It is therefore crucial that urgent measures be taken to
ensure that COVID-19 vaccines are also made available
to those in conflict situations.
Despite being protected under international
humanitarian law, civilians, including the most
vulnerable — children, women, refugees, displaced
and disabled persons, and humanitarian and medical
18/46

We remain concerned about the continued
politicization of humanitarian corridors, with
detrimental effects on the civilians most in need of
assistance. Yet despite those challenges, humanitarian
personnel continue to do their work bravely and provide
assistance to the most vulnerable communities. We
would like to highlight several areas where the Security
Council could assist in strengthening the protection
of civilians.
First, where possible, the Security Council and
Member States should continue to support non-violent
and community-based protection mechanisms such
as political mediation, early-warning activities and
unarmed civilian protection. The effective protection
of civilians begins with safe and inclusive dialogue
with conflict-affected communities, States and other
stakeholders at all levels. Additionally, grass-roots
peacemaking efforts should be promoted, along
with the roles that women and young people play in
those initiatives.
Secondly, the Council and Member States must
fulfil their commitment to the full protection of
civilians, including by promoting and implementing the
relevant and applicable legal and policy frameworks. It
is important to make efforts to ensure accountability
for violations, including by condemning those who
violate international humanitarian law. We believe
that accountability mechanisms at the domestic level
are essential, while broader regional and international
mechanisms should continue to support them based on
the principles of complementarity and subsidiarity.
Finally, we commend the United Nations
peacekeeping operations’ continued efforts, where
22-36117

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

mandated, to protect civilians and promote and
protect human rights in situations of armed conflict,
in collaboration with host States. Peacekeeping and
humanitarian organizations should undertake activities
that complement the protection cluster’s response.
Interaction and dialogue between those various actors
are therefore essential to improving and strengthening
their respective protection mechanisms.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): I would like to express
my appreciation to the delegation of the United States
for convening this Security Council open debate on the
subject of the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
I thank today’s briefers for outlining the pressing
humanitarian challenges and vulnerabilities that persist
in various parts of the world.

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

as reported and documented by various human rights
institutions. In April we circulated the interim report of
the Human Rights Ombudsman of Nagorno Karabakh
as a document of the Security Council and under the
General Assembly agenda items on the prevention
of armed conflict; the elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance; the
right of peoples to self-determination; the responsibility
to protect and the prevention of genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. The
interim report provides evidence of targeted attacks on
the civilian population and the various manifestations
of Azerbaijan’s violations of the rights of the people
of Artsakh.

Given the fact that our human experiences of crises
and calamities have enabled us to evolve throughout
history, the topic of today’s debate is essential to
addressing the many challenges and disturbing realities
we continue to face. International humanitarian
law and international human rights law represent
a crucial framework for the effective protection of
civilian populations and infrastructure, and in that
context we want to emphasize the vital importance
of the full and unconditional implementation of the
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols.
We condemn violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law, including attacks on
humanitarian and medical personnel and schools and
educational institutions, as well as violence, threats
and intimidation against journalists and media workers
operating in conflict settings. Armenia remains
committed to protecting education from attack, in line
with the Safe Schools Declaration and the provisions
outlined in the Paris Principles and the Vancouver
Principles, which our country has endorsed.

In a report published last week, Amnesty
International revealed the magnitude of the attack’s
disproportionate impact on the older ethnic Armenian
population, who were specifically targeted by the
Azerbaijani military forces in their commission of war
crimes, including extrajudicial killings and torture of
detainees. The systematic violent acts and provocations
aimed at disrupting normal life in the border
areas include deliberately setting fire to pastures,
indiscriminate shootings, cattle-raiding, disruptions of
gas supplies and other forms of hostile conduct intended
to intimidate civilians and deprive them of their basic
human rights. It has been equally disturbing to see the
attempts to instrumentalize the issue of prisoners of war
and civilian captives, whose return Azerbaijan continues
to deny, in violation of the Geneva Conventions and
in defiance of the provisional measures issued by the
International Court of Justice as a matter of urgency on
7 December 2021. These persistent aggressive actions,
accompanied by violent rhetoric using open military
threats, distorted interpretations of history, incessant
territorial claims and manipulative reversals of agreed
commitments, should be a matter of concern for the
international community.

In our part of the world, we continue to face the
humanitarian consequences of the premeditated
military attack that Azerbaijan openly admitted to
initiating in the autumn of 2020, amid the emergence
of an unprecedented global health-care crisis that has
resulted in thousands of casualties and displacements
and the destruction of livelihoods and critical civilian
infrastructure. The military aggression against
Nagorno Karabakh included extensive, highly
disturbing instances of violations of humanitarian law,

The obstruction of safe and unhindered humanitarian
access for United Nations agencies to the Nagorno
Karabakh conflict zone continues to undermine
efforts to conduct a comprehensive assessment of the
needs of the civilian population and create a long-term
humanitarian response to them. In delivering relief and
assistance in situations where the right to life and human
dignity are under imminent threat, it remains a critical
priority for the United Nations system to adequately
address in a timely manner the issue of humanitarian

22-3611719/46

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

access to people on the ground, without discrimination
and by ensuring that no one is left behind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank the United States
for convening this important meeting. I would also like
to thank the briefers and pay tribute to the continuing
efforts to protect civilians under the leadership of the
United Nations and the International Committee of the
Red Cross.
The global trend on the protection of civilians is
disturbing. Conflict continues to cause civilian deaths
and injuries, sexual violence, family separations
and disappearances. The safety of medical and
humanitarian personnel and their facilities remains at
high risk. The Security Council must use the full extent
of its influence to facilitate the implementation of the
relevant resolutions and ensure that the key provisions
of international humanitarian law are respected. While
there may be some room to improve the monitoring and
reporting of humanitarian access, there are no easy
practical solutions or mechanisms that can effectively
counter the systematic denial of such access by parties
to ongoing conflicts, who rarely agree to or respect
unimpeded access.
Achieving a ceasefire in Ukraine is of the utmost
importance. In view of the intolerable civilian
suffering in Ukraine, Russia must immediately cease
its hostilities and fully implement General Assembly
resolution ES-11/2, adopted on 24 March, and the
relevant Human Right Council resolutions. Since the
invasion, Japan’s emergency humanitarian assistance
to Ukraine and neighbouring countries amounts to
$200 million in total. Japan will continue to stand by
the people of Ukraine.
Countering the obstruction of humanitarian access
is crucial, but it is not enough. The international
community should act in a timely manner to allow
humanitarian access to surge once the obstacles to that
access have been cleared.
Following the agreement of the first nationwide
truce in six years in Yemen, on 10 May Japan decided to
provide $10 million through the World Food Programme
in response to the food crisis in the country. That
assistance is expected to make a big difference against
the backdrop of rising food prices.
20/46

25/05/2022

In support of the internally displaced persons
affected by conflict in northern Ethiopia, Japan provided
$12.4 million in December 2021, as soon as the access
to humanitarian assistance had been improved.
Japan is determined to continue making every
effort for the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We will work closely with other Member States, the
United Nations system, international humanitarian
organizations and civil society organizations to
contribute to that endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Let me
begin by thanking the United States Security Council
presidency for convening this open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I also thank
the briefers for their interventions.
Today’s meeting is very timely, as it comes in the
context of a highly turbulent international situation
of concern to us all, which requires all stakeholders
to promote and ensure full respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Since its adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), which
brought the protection of civilians onto its agenda, the
Council’s actions have undoubtedly strengthened the
protection of civilians in armed conflict framework and
saved many lives. However, a review of the situation
regarding the protection of civilians shows that they
continue to account for the great majority of casualties
in armed conflict.
In addition to the devastating repercussions of
the pandemic, the international community faces
political, economic, security, environmental, health,
humanitarian and other crises. Unfortunately, in the
context of ongoing armed conflicts, almost all of those
crises are coming to a head at the same time.
Another obstacle to the protection of civilians is the
spread of armed conflict, the parties to which are often
violent extremist groups or non-State armed groups
that carry out brutal attacks on civilians and critical
infrastructure. As a result, today’s modern conflicts
are complex, ever-changing and fragmented. Allow me
now to highlight the following relevant points.
First, we reiterate that the protection of civilians is
the primary responsibility of States. Nevertheless, it is
clear that periods of conflict can render some States’
22-36117

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

capabilities insufficient or even non-existent. In such
cases, it is imperative for the United Nations system
to play an important role in supporting Member States
within the framework of its mandate and ongoing
peacekeeping operations. Similarly, the mandates for
such operations should include an adequate protection
system and tools for ensuring that civilians are not
targeted by armed groups.
Secondly, when it comes to the protection of
civilians, there must be a clear separation between
humanitarian actions and political objectives and
civilians must be protected from being instrumentalized
by any party to the conflict.
Thirdly, protecting humanitarian personnel and
ensuring the effective delivery of humanitarian aid to
the populations most in need is essential.
Fourthly, Morocco firmly condemns the targeting
of civilian populations and infrastructure, including
schools and medical facilities, and stresses the need
for the full and effective implementation of relevant
Council resolutions in that regard.
Fifthly, all parties must respect international
humanitarian law, fulfil their obligations to protect
civilians and guarantee access to and delivery of
humanitarian assistance to those in need. There is a
vital need to prevent and address the devastating effects
of conflict on civilians, particularly in vulnerable
segments of society, while generally speaking there is
a need for all parties to conflict, including non-State
actors, to comply fully with the norms of international
humanitarian law.
Sixthly, accountability for any violations of
humanitarian law must continue to be a fundamental
part of all strategies for ensuring the protection
of civilians.
Finally, integrating the protection of civilians
as part of a long-term approach that extends beyond
emergency measures would be beneficial. To that end,
it remains essential to adopt a preventive approach that
intersects systematically with civilian development
efforts, in synergy with the phases of post-conflict
reconstruction and peacebuilding.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco commends
all those responsible for protecting populations in
conflict areas for their exemplary work and takes this
opportunity to accord them special recognition.

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
The protection of civilians in armed conflicts is a
fundamental principle of international humanitarian
law. However, the international community is
bearing witness to non-compliance with international
humanitarian law and a lack of accountability for grave
violations thereof.
According to the Secretary-General’s recent
report (S/2022/381), armed conflicts continue to be
characterized by high numbers of deaths, injuries
and displacements of civilians, as well as significant
damage to and deterioration of critical infrastructure
for water, sanitation, electricity and health services.
Deprivation and hunger also run rampant.
Moreover, medical and humanitarian workers
continue to be targeted in different parts of the world.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has also
exacerbated human suffering and placed additional
strains on already overburdened health-care systems.
According to the report, vaccines have helped many
parts of the world control the pandemic; however, their
distribution remains deeply unequal. Nearly 3 billion
people are still waiting for their first shot, many of whom
live in conflict areas with weakened health systems.
Climate change has exacerbated conflict-related
vulnerabilities, such as food insecurity.
In addition, sanctions on humanitarian activities,
including the obstruction of humanitarian access, bring
about negative consequences for civilians in need.
Conflicts have had devastating effects on our
volatile region of the Middle East, where international
humanitarian law is being flagrantly violated. According
to the Secretary-General’s report, attacks against
schools, hospitals, telecommunications infrastructure,
roads, factories, houses and other civilian objects in
Yemen have resulted in acute food insecurity, which
has worsened, with an 8 per cent increase in the number
of people in need compared to early 2021.
Similarly, the humanitarian situation in Palestine
has deteriorated as a result of the Israeli regime’s
decades of occupation and apartheid policies. The
systematic mass killing of civilians, including women
and children, continues, with the occupied Palestinian
territory having the highest number of injured health-

22-3611721/46

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

care workers in the world. In Gaza, infrastructure has
been damaged, and Palestinians have been deprived of
basic services due to the illegal blockade.
In Syria, continuing occupation, terrorism and
unilateral sanctions have displaced millions of people,
damaged infrastructure, limited access to vital
resources and disrupted the trade and supply of food
and agricultural products. Against that backdrop, I
would like to emphasize the following points.
First, humanitarian assistance
politicized under any circumstances.

must

not

be

Secondly, it is crucial to provide protection during
armed conflicts, particularly for those who are most
vulnerable, such as women and children. In that regard,
unilateral sanctions, which hamper humanitarian aid
delivery in various ways, must be lifted immediately.
Thirdly, all medical and humanitarian personnel
must be protected.
Fourthly, it is necessary to ensure that international
humanitarian law is respected, particularly the 1949
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols,
which serve as the cornerstone of the legal framework
for the protection of civilians.
Fifthly, in order to protect civilians, military
intervention, including blockade and foreign occupation,
must come to an end. Furthermore, the achievement of
a long-term political solution is the only way to keep
civilians safe from harm and suffering. In this regard,
States must fulfil their obligations under international
law to prevent and resolve conflicts peacefully.
Sixthly, it is of paramount importance that the
United Nations, in particular the Security Council,
demands that the conflicting parties honour their
obligations and respect international humanitarian law,
in order to spare civilians from further hardships.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Ms. Skoczek (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
the delegation of the United States for organizing
today’s important debate and by expressing my
appreciation to all the briefers for their interesting and
thought-provoking contributions.
Poland aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representative of the European Union, in its
capacity as observer, and by the representative of
22/46

25/05/2022

Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends of the
Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict.
A very disturbing picture emerges from the report
of the Secretary-General on the state of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict in 2021 (S/2022/381).
Thousands of civilian deaths and injuries, destroyed
homes, attacks on basic civilian infrastructure, refugee
crises — these are the horrific consequences of armed
conflicts around the world. Poland remains concerned
about the harm inflicted on civilians during active
hostilities in populated urban areas. Effective protection
demands more focus on vulnerable groups, including
women, children, youth, persons with disabilities and
internally displaced persons, as they suffer most the
devastating and disproportionate consequences of
armed conflicts.
The Russian war against Ukraine has reminded us
that children are always particularly affected during
conflicts. In addition to the direct threat to their
lives and health and the massive displacement across
Ukraine, hundreds of schools have been destroyed or
severely damaged by Russian shelling and air strikes.
Landmines and explosive remnants of war left behind
by Russian troops pose a deadly threat to civilians,
including children.
Unfortunately, persons with disabilities caught up in
conflict also face multiple obstacles, including limited
access to humanitarian assistance, health-care services,
education and psychological support. We should use
the upcoming third anniversary of resolution 2475
(2019), initiated by Poland and the United Kingdom, to
reiterate our commitment to alleviating the suffering
of persons with disabilities and to doing better to make
sure that they are not discriminated against in any way
and that their specific needs are adequately addressed
in humanitarian responses.
According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, more than 100 million
people globally have been forced to flee war, violence,
persecution and discrimination. It is the highest figure
on record. Among them are 14 million people in
Ukraine who were forced to flee their homes as a result
of the Russian aggression. Within just three months,
8 million persons have been internally displaced, and
another 6 million have left Ukraine to seek refuge in
neighbouring countries, including Poland, where the
number of persons who crossed the Ukrainian-Polish
border since 24 February has exceeded 3.4 million.
22-36117

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We support the appeal of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, who stated that the number
of people displaced globally should serve as a wake-up
call for more action to promote peace and address all
causes of forced displacement.
We must underline that, under Common Article
1 of the four Geneva Conventions, States parties are
obliged to respect and ensure respect for international
humanitarian law in all circumstances. Fighting
impunity for the violations of international humanitarian
law is indispensable to delivering justice to victims.
Despite this clear and unconditional international
obligation, during the last three months Russia has,
by committing war crimes in Ukraine, deliberately
created a humanitarian catastrophe in Ukraine and
blatantly disregarded the principles of international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
As the international community, we must ensure that
those responsible for these crimes are held accountable.
For its part, Poland is cooperating closely with the Office
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court in
the investigation into the situation in Ukraine and is
simultaneously carrying out a domestic investigation
into Russia’s crime of war of aggression against the
country, which is subject to penalty under Polish law.
In addition, together with Ukraine and Lithuania, we
have established a joint investigation team that operates
within the framework of the European Union Agency
for Criminal Justice Cooperation, in order to collect
and preserve evidence of crimes committed in Ukraine.
We call on Russia to abide by the legally binding
decision of the International Court of Justice, issued
on 16 March, on provisional measures in the case
Ukraine v. Russia. We welcome the establishment of an
independent commission of inquiry on Ukraine by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Our discussion coincides with the sixth anniversary
of the Security Council’s unanimous adoption of
resolution 2286 (2016) on the protection of health
care in conflict. During yesterday’s side event on
practical actions for implementing that resolution,
co-organized by Poland, the still existing — and even
expanding — gap between the principles and reality
was pointed out. We therefore need to enhance our
support and advocacy towards full compliance with
obligations under international humanitarian law.
In closing, let me emphasize that international
humanitarian law is one of the greatest achievements

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

of the international community in its efforts to reduce
the suffering of civilians during armed conflict. But
it can only remain to be our common achievement if
all of us are respecting its principles, fully complying
with its provisions and ensuring accountability for its
violations. Poland remains committed to doing its part
and to contributing to initiatives and activities aimed at
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): Today’s open debate comes
at a critical point for the protection of civilians. The
unjustified and unprovoked aggression by the Russian
Federation against Ukraine has been added to several
other ongoing conflicts around the world.
Italy aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representative of the European Union, in its
capacity as observer, and by the Group of Friends of
the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict. We also
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his annual
report on the protection of civilians (S/2022/381).
As stated in resolution 2573 (2021), approved only
a year ago and co-sponsored by Italy, all parties to
armed conflicts should distinguish between civilian
populations and objectives, on the one hand, and
combatants and military objectives, on the other.
Nonetheless, just a few weeks ago, 60 people died in
the Luhansk region when a school was bombarded by
the Russian army. This is only the most recent example
of how cities have sadly become the battlefields of our
time and of how civilians and civilian infrastructures
are frequently targeted.
We are particularly concerned about the use of
explosive weapons in densely populated areas. We
therefore support the ongoing negotiations in Geneva
aimed at introducing a political declaration to ban
their use.
It is crucial to find ways to guarantee the full
respect of international humanitarian law and ensure
safe, rapid and unhindered humanitarian access to
populations in need. Too many times have we agreed
on universal principles to protect civilians and save
lives; we cannot now allow important resolutions to
remain empty words. We need to discuss and find
practical solutions.
Let me raise three points as food for thought for
further reflection. First, if and when the Security

22-3611723/46

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Council is not able to agree on a ceasefire, the United
Nations should be able to quickly step in, at least
to allow humanitarian corridors and humanitarian
access, fully abiding by the humanitarian principles of
neutrality, impartiality, independence and humanity.
In this regard, the evacuation mechanism established
in Mariupol, thanks to the coordination efforts of the
United Nations and the International Committee of
the Red Cross, is a clear example of how international
humanitarian law cannot be left to the mere spontaneous
initiative of armed and non-armed groups. Italy
supports a more proactive role for the United Nations
in fostering international humanitarian obligations and
in monitoring their implementation. The addition of a
new ad hoc protocol to the 1949 Geneva Conventions
might provide a specific normative framework for a
United Nations coordination mechanism focused on
humanitarian corridors and humanitarian access. It
would also bolster international commitment to the
protection of civilians.
Secondly, from a national perspective, it is of
paramount importance that the protection of civilians be
prioritized in the planning and execution of all military
operations and be enshrined in all national military
guidelines. Providing combatants with targeted training
on humanitarian access and humanitarian corridors
can indeed have a positive effect on international
humanitarian law compliance.
Thirdly, Italy strongly believes that the presence of
female personnel in the military can have a significantly
positive impact on the protection of civilians. Women
have proved to be successful in fostering trust, which is
at the core of agreed humanitarian access and corridors.
Let me conclude by emphasizing a final cornerstone
of the protection of civilians: accountability. In that
connection, Italy calls on the international community
to guarantee accountability for the perpetrators of
severe breaches of international humanitarian law. We
reaffirm our full support for the work of independent,
international and domestic investigative institutions to
ensure that there is no impunity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.
Mr. Rai (Nepal): I begin by thanking the United
States presidency for convening today’s open debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I thank
the briefers for their comprehensive and insightful
briefings this morning.
24/46

25/05/2022

The protection of civilians is at the core of the
work and purposes of the United Nations. However, the
challenges of protecting civilians will persist as long
as protracted conflicts continue, and new conflicts
emerge. In past years and recent times, we see a record
level of civilian casualties, forced displacement, human
rights violations and deprivation.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/381)
presented a gloomy picture of conflicts in the recent
period, which resulted, inter alia, in 11,075 deaths,
84 million people forcibly displaced, 9,797 civilian
casualties of explosives alone and 140 million with
acute food insecurity.
We must ensure compliance with applicable
international law and relevant Security Council
resolutions in the conduct of armed conflict, including
unhindered access to humanitarian assistance and
the protection of forcibly displaced persons, women
and children. Well-resourced United Nations peace
operations could implement those mandates on
the ground.
Devastating distress inflicted upon innocent
civilians is deplorable. We strongly condemn
indiscriminate attacks against civilians and civilian
infrastructure by all parties to conflicts. We must end
the deliberate targeting of civilians in situations of
armed conflict.
The State has the primary responsibility to protect
its civilians and prevent violence against them. We
must strengthen the capacity of national Governments
to implement of international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law if States are to assume that
responsibility. We must ensure the primacy of politics
and promote preventive diplomacy in order to address
the root causes of conflicts.
With its own experience of a nationally led peace
process, Nepal underscores the significance of promoting
political dialogue, social harmony and understanding
for the protection of civilians during conflict and
post-conflict reconstruction. The involvement of local
community leaders and organizations in peacebuilding
is necessary. Investments in education, awarenessraising programmes and employment-generation are
critical. Similarly, inclusive and representative State
structures help build social justice and enduring peace.
Nepal has always supported the United Nations
normative framework aimed at safeguarding and
22-36117

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

protecting civilians in armed conflict. Currently, Nepal
is the second-largest troop- and police-contributing
country in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We provide high-quality predeployment and in-theatre
training to our peacekeepers on applicable international
humanitarian and human rights law to protect civilians
on the ground.
To deliver the best on the ground, the protection-ofcivilians mandate should be treated as a whole-ofmission approach and supported by adequate financial
and human resources. We emphasize national ownership
and political solutions in order to prevent countries
from relapsing to conflict during mission transition
and withdrawal.
In conclusion, the protection of civilians during
armed conflict is a challenging task for the United
Nations. Oftentimes, the success of the United Nations
is judged on its ability to protect civilians on the ground.
We must ensure that the United Nations succeeds in
that responsibility. Nepal is committed to taking up its
role as one of the largest troop- and police-contributing
countries to do its best to carry out the Council’s
mandate to protect civilians in conflict areas.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Dvornyk (Ukraine): I recognize the
representative of Putin’s regime in the permanent seat
of the Soviet Union.
Ukraine aligns itself with the statements made by
the representative of the European Union and by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict.
I would like to thank the United States for
organizing this important debate, as well as all briefers
for their presentations.
I would also like to express to our friends, the
Government and the people of the United States, our
sincere condolences over the terrible tragedy in Texas.
Civilians and their rights are among the first to be
hit by any war. Now in Ukraine, millions of civilians,
Ukrainians and foreigners are struggling — not just for
their rights, but also for their lives.
Russian troops continue their indiscriminate
attacks on Ukrainian cities, with missile strikes and
heavy artillery, including last night’s attacks. Tens of
thousands of civilians have lost their lives, and many

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

more are wounded. Nearly 220,000 people have lost
their homes. Millions of Ukrainian citizens were forced
to flee occupied or war-affected areas. Eight million
have become internally displaced, and 6.5 million have
left Ukraine as refugees.
This is the worst refugee crisis in Europe since the
end of the Second World War. And we have no doubt
that in Russian war strategies this refugee crisis — and
food crisis — was envisaged as one of the welcome
outcomes. What Russia underestimated was the
hospitality, commitment and readiness to help of our
neighbours and friends. We reiterate our gratitude to
all of them. We also appreciate the good offices of the
Secretary-General on humanitarian assistance and the
evacuation of civilians from the war-affected areas.
The civilian population of Ukraine in the occupied,
and war-affected areas remains extremely vulnerable to
the war crimes and crimes against humanity committed
by Russian troops on a regular basis — killings, torture
and illegal detention, forcible deportation, deprivation
of property rights, alarming human rights violations
in the occupied territories, attacks against civilian
infrastructure throughout Ukraine and expropriation of
grain from local farmers. That is not even a complete
list of Russian crimes committed against civilians in
Ukraine. The abduction of at least 230,000 Ukrainian
children, among the 1.4 million Ukrainian citizens
forcibly deported to Russia, is a crime aimed at
destroying the Ukrainian nation by depriving it of its
youth, which is a modern manifestation of colonialism.
Russia attacks Ukrainian civilians deliberately as
a part of its Nazi-style war strategy. At the same time,
the atrocities are committed by individuals, and every
one of them has a name. The day before yesterday a
Ukrainian court sentenced Russian serviceman, Vadim
Shishimarin, to life imprisonment for the killing of an
unarmed civilian in the Sumy region. Yesterday the
Prosecutor General’s Office of Ukraine announced
that five Russian servicemen and three members of
the paramilitary Wagner Group had been identified
as suspects of the abduction, torture and killing of the
head of the village of Motyzhyn, Kyiv region — Olga
Sukhenko, her husband and her son.
We reiterate that those who ordered, committed and
whitewashed crimes against civilians will not escape
justice. We call on all Member States to engage actively
in the process of ensuring justice for all civilians
suffering Russia’s atrocities.

22-3611725/46

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, allow me
to congratulate the United States on its presidency
of the Security Council and for convening this open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Allow me also to convey our condolences to you,
Mr. President, for the tragic loss of lives in Texas. Also,
allow me to thank the Secretary-General for both his
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2022/381) and his 2018 report on the protection of the
Palestinian civilian population (A/ES-10/794), which
remains of acute relevance. I would also like to thank
the representative of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for his briefing.
The entire international humanitarian law edifice
was built with the primary objective of protecting those
who do not take part, or have stopped taking part, in
hostilities, and yet in Palestine, those are the primary
victims of the Israeli occupation — our civilians, our
prisoners, our wounded and our sick.
In the words of the former United Nations Resident
Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator for
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, the situation in
Palestine is the “most long-standing protection crisis in
the United Nations history” — and one might add, with
no end in sight.
Every day is a stark reminder that our people
are left defenceless in the face of repeated attacks by
Israeli occupation forces and settlers. Nowhere are our
people safe — not in their homes, not in their schools,
not in the streets, not in United Nations buildings and
not in hospitals. No one is safe — not a child, not a
woman, not a man, not a humanitarian worker, not a
farmer and, certainly, as recent events demonstrated,
not a journalist.
Shireen dedicated her life to giving a voice to
victims until she became one herself. She dedicated her
life to telling the stories of Palestinians, and her killing
is unfortunately an integral part of the Palestinian story,
one of being under threat at any and every point of one’s
life and of not finding peace, even in one’s death, as
even her funeral was attacked. But it is also a story of
the resilience of an entire nation that will not surrender
to captivity — the nation that mourned and honoured
Shireen in Jerusalem and everywhere.
26/46

25/05/2022

That insecurity, endured by an entire nation in its
flesh, is a direct result of full-scale Israeli impunity.
Accountability remains the best form of protection and
the most effective deterrent against the targeting of our
civilians and the recurrence of crimes.
Israeli leaders, soldiers and settlers know that they
enjoy blanket immunity when it comes to their crimes
against the Palestinian people. They commit them in
broad daylight, shamelessly and repeatedly.
Almost 30 years ago, the Security Council called
for the confiscation of the arms of Israeli settlers, with
the aim of preventing illegal acts of violence by them, as
well as for measures to be taken to guarantee the safety
and protection of Palestinian civilians throughout the
occupied territory, including, inter alia, a temporary
international or foreign presence. I am referring to
resolution 904 (1994).
That resolution, like many others, was never
implemented, and even the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron/Al-Khalil was expelled by Israel.
That is part of the ongoing Israeli war against any
witness of its crimes and any effort to bring them to an
end. Israel has denied visas to the international staff of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. It has attacked and killed journalists.
It has assaulted and killed members of the international
solidarity movement. It has arrested and killed human
rights defenders and has designated Palestinian
non-governmental organizations, including those
defending human rights and pursuing accountability,
as terrorist organizations.
In 2021, echoing resolution 904 (1994), the General
Assembly called for measures to be taken to guarantee
the safety and protection of Palestinian civilians in
the occupied territory, and recalled in that regard the
report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
the Palestinian civilian population, welcoming his
observations, including with respect to the expansion
of existing protection mechanisms to prevent and deter
violations.
We call on the Secretary-General to implement his
proposals without delay, notably by ensuring a more
visible and effective international presence on the
ground to ensure the protection of the Palestinian people.
While we call for immediate action to avail the
Palestinian people the protection to which they are
entitled, we stress that the Palestinian people will
22-36117

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

be truly safe only once they fulfil their right to selfdetermination and Israel’s illegal occupation is brought
to an end.
The calls to uphold international law and the
Charter of the United Nations cannot coexist with
refusing to hold accountable an Israeli occupation
that systematically rewards and shields the killers
and accuses and punishes their victims — enough
with denied justice, enough with selective justice and
enough with delayed justice.
Why would the pursuit of justice be compatible
with, and even indispensable to, the pursuit of peace
everywhere except in Palestine? Experience has
confirmed, including in Palestine, that without justice
there can be no peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Ms. Fatima (Bangladesh): I thank the United
States presidency for convening today’s debate on
this important issue. I also thank the briefers for their
insightful presentations.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of the
Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians.
The protection of civilians lies at the heart of the
work of the United Nations. Yet civilians globally
continue to face increased risk due to ongoing
conflicts, humanitarian crises and forced displacement,
which reached more than 100 million people last week.
While responding to such needs, humanitarian workers
and peacekeepers face multiple challenges, including
attacks against them.
As noted in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/381), access remains a serious challenge in
many parts of the world, where civilians caught up in
conflict situations bear the brunt. In that context, this
debate is certainly very timely.
The protection of civilians is an important national
priority for Bangladesh, and we remain committed to all
efforts to strengthen the protection of civilians. Nearly
7,000 peacekeepers from Bangladesh are serving in some
of the most challenging missions, providing security
at civilian sites, ensuring unhindered humanitarian
services, supporting the delivery of health and social
services and community engagement and working for
the empowerment of women and young people.

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

We are also providing shelter and protection to more
than 1 million forcibly displaced Rohingya civilians,
who fled atrocities and persecution in Myanmar. We
remain concerned about the fact that the situation in
Myanmar is still unsafe for civilians, especially the
ethnic and religious minorities such as the Rohingya.
The continued defiance of the Myanmar authorities in
refusing to grant access to United Nations and other
humanitarian actors is a stark reminder of our failure
to uphold even the most fundamental tenets of the
protection of civilians. We reiterate our call for more
decisive action by the Security Council to ensure the
protection of civilians at risk in that country. I would
now like to highlight three specific points.
First, we must ensure that all parties to conflict
respect and comply fully with international
humanitarian law. We need to step up efforts to raise
awareness among all stakeholders concerning their
international humanitarian law obligations and those
arising from Security Council resolutions such as
resolution 2286 (2016), on the protection of medical
personnel, and 2573 (2021), on the protection of critical
civilian infrastructure. The International Committee
of the Red Cross and relevant United Nations agencies
working on the ground have a critical role to play, and
local organizations working at the grass-roots level
also need support in that regard. At the same time, the
Security Council itself should use its tools, including
sanctions regimes, to address and prevent the recurrence
of attacks on civilians, civilian infrastructure and other
soft targets such as schools and hospitals.
Secondly, ensuring the safety and security of
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers is critical.
Attacks on peacekeepers and aid workers are often
instigated by misinformation, disinformation and
hate speech, including through online platforms.
The relevant United Nations entities should develop
an effective communications strategy to combat the
problem. Peacekeeping missions should be adequately
resourced and equipped to fulfil their protection of
civilian mandates, including through community
engagement and intelligence-gathering and analysis,
among other things. The Security Council should
factor in those issues when setting the mandates of
peacekeeping missions.
Lastly, we have to break the culture of impunity
and hold perpetrators accountable for violations of
international humanitarian law. Targeting civilians,
schools, hospitals and humanitarian actors cannot be

22-3611727/46

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

condoned under any pretext, and such attacks must be
investigated and accounted for. In that regard, we would
like to point to resolution 2601 (2021), on protecting
the protectors, and call for its effective implementation.
While it is critically important to strengthen national
judicial institutions in host countries, the Council should
also support international accountability mechanisms,
including the International Court of Justice and the
International Criminal Court, and thereby send the
right message to the perpetrators.
As champions of the protection of civilians, we
remain committed to doing our part and contributing to
all efforts aimed at the protection of civilians.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Maldives.
Mrs. Ali (Maldives): I would like to thank the
United States for convening today’s debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I also want to
thank our briefers for their important insights and the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2022/381).
Armed conflicts have deep and far-reaching
consequences, particularly for civilians. Our priority,
and the mandate of the Security Council itself, is
the maintenance of international peace and security.
First and foremost, our goal must therefore be to
avoid armed conflicts through effective dialogue and
engaged multilateralism. That must always be our
highest priority. However, when conflict does arise,
it is absolutely crucial for all the parties, including
State and non-State actors, to comply fully with their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
ensure the protection of civilians.
In recent years, in conflicts the world over, we have
seen disturbing reports, videos and other evidence of
attacks on civilians and their infrastructure, including
schools, medical facilities, the media and journalists,
as well as housing and shelters. Humanitarian workers
have also come under attack. Maldives forcefully
condemns the targeting of civilians and emphasizes
the need for the full and effective implementation of
the relevant international obligations on the protection
of civilian infrastructure. Such attacks result not only
in civilian deaths but in psychological and mental
health trauma and conditions where sexual violence,
disappearances and family separation are rife. At
the same time, conflicts damage infrastructure and
undermine vital civic services such as water, sanitation,
electricity and health care, which can have further
28/46

25/05/2022

negative consequences. That is particularly distressing
given the current global pandemic.
Care must also be taken to ensure that we do
not rush to judgment based on limited facts and the
misinformation present in many of those cases. The
issues must not be adjudicated in the media. It is vital
to collect all information and proceed judiciously, using
internationally agreed mechanisms and frameworks.
In that regard, there is no need to reinvent the wheel.
We need countries to meet their existing obligations
under international humanitarian law. The words of
the esteemed jurist and United States Chief Prosecutor
at Nuremberg, Robert H. Jackson, are particularly
relevant to this point. He stated eloquently,
“It is futile to think […] that we can have an
international law that is always working on our
side. And it is futile to think that we can have
international courts that will always render the
decisions we want to promote our interests. We
cannot successfully cooperate with the rest of
the world in establishing a reign of law unless we
are prepared to have that law sometimes operate
against what would be our national advantage.”
No power can come from above to enforce those
international rules and norms. Our multilateral system
requires that we take a principled approach to violations.
A system where political motives guide which cases
and issues are further pursued will work to undermine
rather than foster our efforts to address violations, and
that must be avoided.
We also urge those who have yet to ratify the Rome
Statute to do so and demonstrate their fundamental
commitment to the rule of law and peace and security
and to preventing the most serious crimes under
international law — genocide, crimes against humanity,
war crimes and the crime of aggression. By having
more countries join the International Criminal Court
(ICC), we can work to make our international criminal
justice system more universal and provide access for
all. Once again, the work of the ICC and prosecutors
must be independent and not influenced by political
interests, or we risk undermining one of the key tools
we have in our arsenal to protect the rights of civilians
in situations of armed conflict.
Maldives, as a small country, has always considered
respect for and adherence to international law, the
Charter of the United Nations and the rules and norms
of our multilateral system to be vital. In situations of
22-36117

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

armed conflict, we have no winners. We must therefore
work with renewed vigour to prevent conflicts and,
in situations where armed conflict is taking place,
to guarantee that the parties ensure the protection
of civilians.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): As we commemorate protection-of-civilians
week, Costa Rica acknowledges and deplores the undue
human toll that armed conflicts continue to inflict on
innocent girls, boys, women and men caught in the
middle of hostilities. In that regard, let me highlight
two aspects.
First, Costa Rica regrets that the Security Council
continues to fall short in fulfilling its mandate under
Article 26 of the Charter of the United Nations. In
2021, global military spending exceeded $2 trillion for
the first time in history. We can expect that without a
corresponding regulatory effort, we will see increases
in the expansion of armaments that Article 26 was
intended to prevent, and a consequent impact on
conflict and armed violence.
It is therefore more urgent than ever that the
Security Council, with the assistance of the Military
Staff Committee, propose plans for a system for
regulating arms. It must include a more robust effort to
monitor and enforce Security Council arms embargoes
at the national and regional levels. Similarly, United
Nations actors such as peacekeeping missions and their
troop-contributing countries must also play a central
role in monitoring arms and ammunition and related
information-sharing with the Sanctions Committees, in
line with their mandates. However, they are not doing
so in a robust manner.
Those steps, complemented by substantial and more
transparent risk assessments of arms and ammunition
transfers, can help resolve the contradiction between
our efforts to ensure the protection of civilians and the
effects of the uncontrolled proliferation and misuse of
conventional weapons and their ammunition. Costa
Rica believes that disarmament starts at the beginning
of the life cycle of weapons, including the decision not
to produce or acquire them in the first place.
Secondly, the use of cyberoperations as a means
or method of warfare in situations of armed conflict
poses a genuine risk to the welfare of civilians and

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

critical infrastructure. Power grids, sewage systems
and hospitals remain vulnerable to cyberattacks, with
grave humanitarian consequences. This novel threat
requires novel solutions and a better understanding
of our conception of the protection of civilians that is
adapted to the digital age.
Costa Rica calls for the strengthening of
commitments for the protection of civilians and critical
infrastructure, including an understanding of the
applicability of international law in protecting civilians
from cyberoperations in contexts of armed conflict.
According to the World Bank, 55 per cent of the
global population lived in cities in 2021, and by 2050
that figure is expected to increase to 70 per cent.
Therefore, the impact of the uncontrolled production
and proliferation of weapons and their ammunition, as
well as the intensity of cyberattacks against civilian
infrastructure, will increasingly affect populations
living in densely populated areas. Costa Rica calls
on the Council to recognize and adopt the necessary
measures to prevent such scenarios and demonstrate its
commitment through concrete and sustained actions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Mainero (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Since
the inclusion of the protection of civilians as an item on
the Security Council’s agenda in 1999, it has been one
of the Council’s thematic priorities. It is essential that
the Security Council remain committed to the issue
through the promotion of full respect for international
law, in particular international humanitarian law,
international human rights law and refugee law.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2022/381) and appreciate its recommendations
and conclusions.
We regret that armed conflicts continue to be
characterized by high levels of death, injury, sexual
violence, torture, family separation and disappearances.
Today 55 per cent of the world’s population reside in
urban areas. The conduct of hostilities in densely
populated areas increases the risks of death and injury to
civilians, especially when explosive weapons are used
in combat. In 2021, more than 1,000 incidents involving
explosive weapons were recorded in populated areas,
resulting in more than 10,000 casualties. In that context,
there is an urgent need for parties to conflict to avoid

22-3611729/46

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the use of explosive weapons with wide-area effects in
populated areas.
It is also necessary to continue to include
and strengthen protection of civilians activities
on the ground in the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping missions. In that regard, we understand
that the protection of civilians is an integrated
mission-wide effort, requiring as an essential first step
close cooperation among military, police and civilian
components, in coordination with Governments, local
communities and humanitarian organizations on
the ground. The use of force to respond to threats of
physical violence against civilians must be authorized
in accordance with applicable legal obligations, the
mandate established by the Security Council and
mission-specific rules of engagement.
Regardless of how armed actors undertake their
operations, international humanitarian law obliges the
parties to a conflict to allow and facilitate humanitarian
access to affected areas and civilians in need.
Attacks on humanitarian personnel and unreasonable
bureaucratic impediments unduly hamper the delivery
of humanitarian assistance.
We regret the fact that, six years after the adoption
of resolution 2286 (2016), medical personnel, transport
and facilities continue to be targeted in armed conflicts.
According to the Secretary-General’s report, health
personnel, facilities and transport were targeted and
medical care were interfered with by parties to conflicts
throughout 2021.
During 2020 and 2021, the spread of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic had a devastating impact
on countries affected by armed conflict. The situation
led the Council to adopt resolution 2565 (2021),
which required all parties to conflict to immediately
implement a sustained and durable humanitarian pause
to facilitate the equitable and safe distribution of
COVID-19 vaccines in conflict-affected areas. Against
such a backdrop, the protection of medical personnel
and infrastructure is essential to ensure the large-scale
distribution of vaccines.
Another critical element in the protection of civilians
is the investigation of the facts and holding to account
those responsible for crimes against civilians. In that
regard, Argentina considers it appropriate to highlight
that, in addition to the ad hoc commissions of inquiry
that may be established, international humanitarian law
offers an instrument for the investigation of incidents
30/46

25/05/2022

that could constitute grave breaches of the Geneva
Conventions by an impartial entity — the International
Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission provided for
in Protocol Additional I to the Geneva Conventions.
On the other hand, Argentina wishes to highlight
the fundamental role of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) in the fight against impunity. Recourse to
the ICC is a key tool in the search for justice and in
many cases the key to access to the Court is held by the
Security Council.
Over 20 years since the adoption of the first Security
Council resolution on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, civilians continue to represent the vast
majority of conflict victims. The problem lies not in
the current normative framework, but in the translation
and implementation of those norms in practice. In
order to translate the normative advances of the past 20
years into demonstrable results, the Security Council,
together with the international community as a whole,
must advocate for a more robust implementation of the
existing normative framework.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): At the outset, I would like to
thank the United States for convening this open debate
and thank all of our speakers for their poignant briefings.
We are witnessing more civilians losing their
lives to armed conflict. The use of explosive weapons,
especially in urban and densely populated environments,
has resulted in devastating consequences for civilians.
Homes, schools and critical infrastructure that provides
livelihoods are completely destroyed, leaving those
who survive in devastating conditions. Once again,
the world wishes to see the Security Council exercise
more of its moral weight to protect civilians in armed
conflict, especially women and children. Allow me to
underline three points.
First, we must amplify our calls for the cessation of
hostilities and a global ceasefire. We have been briefed
many times in the Council on how armed conflict and
the pandemic are worsening humanitarian conditions. In
order to save the lives of innocent civilians in situations
of armed conflict, the cessation of hostilities and
ceasefires constitute the most essential preconditions.
There is no other option, as only then does lasting
peace stand a chance. Safe passage must be guaranteed
without impediment for civilians wishing to evacuate
22-36117

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and for humanitarian personnel to deliver assistance.
At the same time, respect for and full compliance with
international humanitarian law must be restored and
dialogue and negotiations must be intensified.
Secondly, community engagement is essential
for protecting civilians. Comprehensive strategies
to protect civilians should be strategic, inclusive
and anchored in a people-centred approach. Local
communities must become part and parcel of the
development and implementation of the strategy. It
should be tailor-made, and we must listen to the needs
of the communities affected. In that regard, Indonesia
would like to commend the approach taken in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, South Sudan
and Abyei in incorporating community engagement to
improve the protection of civilians.
As a major troop- and police-contributing
country, Indonesia is cognizant of the expectation that
peacekeepers should do more to protect civilians. But
such expectations should be accompanied by adequate
resources for them to do so. To that end, we urge
Member States to pay their financial contributions in
full, on time and without conditions, and the Secretariat
to settle any outstanding reimbursements for troop- and
police-contributing countries without delay.
Thirdly, women’s empowerment must be at the
centre of policies on the protection of civilians. As
agents of the protection of civilians, women bring a
unique perspective and approach that enable them to
gain wider access to communities. That is essential
to the trust and confidence-building that contributes
to the peace process. As the initiator of resolution
2538 (2020), Indonesia believes in the important role
of women peacekeepers in community engagement
and by extension in the protection of civilians. We
are therefore committed to increasing the numbers of
female peacekeepers. We also call on all Member States
to ensure that the resolution is fully implemented.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize that protecting
innocent civilians in armed conflict is a matter of basic
principles of humanity. We need to work together to
strive always for peaceful solutions to conflict. We
therefore urge all Member States to uphold the Charter
of the United Nations and the principles of refraining
from the use of force and respecting territorial integrity.
It is our duty to ensure that civilians are protected in
armed conflict, and it is our shared responsibility to
preserve humankind.

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala thanks the delegation of the
United States of America for convening today’s open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We also thank the briefers for their briefings. I would
like to acknowledge the concept note circulated as the
basis for discussion today. We agree with the comments
about the importance of the legal basis needed to ensure
humanitarian access and the protection of humanitarian
workers — a legal framework that already exists in
international humanitarian law but that regrettably is
disregarded all too often.
As a troop-contributing country, and because of the
importance that my delegation attaches to the mandate
of the protection of civilians, Guatemala is honoured to
have hosted a workshop on the review of the handbook
on The Protection of Civilians for Military Components
in United Nations Peacekeeping Operations. Over
the years, we have noted the developments in and the
strengthening of the protection of civilians component
within the United Nations framework, with resolution
1265 (1999), the first Security Council resolution
on the protection of civilians, as a reference, as well
as the various reports of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and discussions we have had
at ministerial meetings on peacekeeping.
Actual experience on the ground has demonstrated
that we must have a comprehensive focus on the
protection of civilians that takes into account and
addresses the various factors that have an influence
on or underpin the various threats, such as political,
economic and security factors. We must also ensure
that all components of peace missions — civilian,
police and military — work together. We are pleased
that the current United Nations policy on the protection
of civilians clearly stipulates the functions and
expectations of the relevant components in order to
ensure that the protection of civilians can be completely
integrated into the planning and activities of every
mission. It should be acknowledged that despite the
efforts of the Secretariat, through its various policies and
manuals; the troop- and police-contributing countries,
through various memorandums of understanding;
and host countries, through the various status of
forces agreements, there is still considerable room for
improving and strengthening efforts aimed at the full

22-3611731/46

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

implementation of the protection-of-civilians mandates
of United Nations peacekeeping missions.
In the near future, we hope that the Secretariat
will also have a policy with a broader scope and zero
caveats to ensure the full implementation of mandates
at the operational level, in particular with regard to the
implementation of the protection-of-civilians mandate
in peacekeeping operations, so as to be able to fully
cooperate with humanitarian organizations and provide
immediate assistance to the most vulnerable and needy
populations. We also hope that the Special Committee
for Peacekeeping Operations will update its mandate
next year in order to create renewed momentum in one
of the most crucial components of peacekeeping — the
protection of civilians.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Amorín (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, Uruguay would like to thank the Permanent Mission
of the United States for convening today’s open debate
and for making it possible for Member States to share
their views on the topic. We also thank the briefers for
their briefings and contributions today, in particular in
the current context, where we are witnessing violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. All such violations and situations
of armed conflict pose a threat to international peace
and security.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements of
the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect
and the Group of Friends of the Protection of Civilians
in Armed Conflict, and we would like to make some
additional remarks in our national capacity.
Uruguay is strongly committed to the agenda
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict and
acknowledges its extremely close links to the agendas
on women and peace and security and children and
armed conflict. We support the Kigali Principles on the
protection of civilians, the outcome of the International
Conference on the Protection of Civilians organized
by Rwanda, as we believe in the importance of the
protection of civilians as a way to preserve the physical
and moral integrity of people caught up in conflict,
especially the most vulnerable.
As a troop-contributing country, we would like to
underscore that our troops carry out tasks related to
the protection of civilians and have done so for many
32/46

25/05/2022

years. Our experience on the ground has shown that
this is a task that brings the United Nations closest
to the local populations suffering from the effects of
violence. Regrettably, despite the progress made on
legal and normative standards in recent years, as a
troop-contributing country we can attest to the fact that
civilians, especially women and children, continue to
be some of the worst affected in armed conflict and
post-conflict situations.
With regard to children and the protection of the
right to education, and bearing in mind the increase
in the number of attacks on institutions, particularly
educational institutions, in 2021 and again this year, we
call on all Member States to support the Safe Schools
Declaration and the Guidelines for Protecting Schools
and Universities from Military Use during Armed
Conflicts. We strongly condemn attacks on civilians,
including students and teachers, as well as on civilian
infrastructure, including schools and universities, in
line with resolution 2601 (2021).
With regard to peace operations, we again
acknowledge efforts to improve the protection of
civilians with the Action for Peacekeeping (A4P)
initiative and its implementation strategy, A4P Plus.
We reiterate our country’s support for the efforts of the
Secretary-General in that regard.
Peaceful solutions based on the principles of
justice, human rights and international law, early
warning, inclusive political dialogue, the strengthening
of State institutions and the promotion of sustainable
economic and social development, with a gender
perspective, are inextricably linked to prevention.
They are also essential elements in the establishment
of solid environments for protection. The conflicts we
are witnessing these days — not just in Ukraine, the
Middle East or various parts of Africa — are a painful
manifestation of the dire situation in which civilians
find themselves when facing conflict and violations of
their human rights and humanitarian law.
Finally, Uruguay calls for general respect for human
rights, international law and humanitarian law, and
underlines the need to ensure access to humanitarian
aid and to halt hostilities that limit or jeopardize
humanitarian operations, which are intended to meet
the basic needs of populations. The Security Council
has a crucial responsibility in upholding these principles
without prejudice to the obligations incumbent upon
22-36117

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

all States Members of the United Nations within the
framework of the General Assembly.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Cho (Republic of Korea): Mr. President, I
would first like to thank you for convening today’s
timely open debate.
One of the key elements to protecting civilians in
armed conflict, especially those facing a humanitarian
crisis, is to ensure humanitarian access. The
international community has repeatedly called upon
all parties in armed conflicts to ensure the safe and
unhindered access of humanitarian personnel and the
delivery of supplies and equipment. Unfortunately,
we are still witnessing a deeply concerning denial of
humanitarian access in armed conflicts, including in
parts of Ukraine.
As indicated in the report of the Secretary-General
this month (S/2022/381), humanitarian activities have
been continuously under pressure from a heightened
level of hostilities and the increased use of explosive
devices. It is simply unacceptable that more than 800
humanitarians have been killed or wounded in the
past five years and that the number of incidents of
kidnapping surpasses a thousand.
My delegation would like to make the following
comments with regard to some crucial ways forward
in ensuring better humanitarian access. First, my
delegation urges the Security Council to be more vocal
in ensuring humanitarian access, which is closely
related to its mandate of maintaining international
peace and security. We also request all States Members
of the United Nations to faithfully respect and act
upon relevant resolutions of the Security Council and
General Assembly.
Secondly, the international community must
redouble its sustained efforts to ensure respect for and
compliance with international law, including fulfilling
obligations under international humanitarian law in
relation to humanitarian activities and holding those who
violate such obligations to account. All parties to armed
conflict need to clearly understand what international
law dictates and that denial of humanitarian access and
attacks against humanitarian workers and objects may,
under certain conditions, constitute war crimes and
crimes against humanity.

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Thirdly, it is critical to ensure systematic
documentation of and evidence collection from
incidents related to the denial of humanitarian access
and violations of relevant international law, as well as to
make such information available to the public so that any
attempt to spread misinformation and disinformation
can be countered. In this regard, the Republic of Korea
supports all relevant efforts, including those undertaken
by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the International Criminal Court
and the International Court of Justice.
I would be remiss if I did not mention the current
situation in Ukraine. The international crisis caused by
Russia’s unprovoked and unjustified aggression against
Ukraine has been prolonged, and it has unleashed
various repercussions all over the world. The Republic
of Korea has paid close attention to the humanitarian
situation in Ukraine and in its neighbouring countries.
It is quite doubtful that the merciless destruction of
residential facilities and major infrastructure caused by
Russian forces’ heavy shelling and missile strikes in
the cities of Ukraine, let alone civilian casualties, can
be justified under international humanitarian law. All
of these situations have triggered great misery and are
a great cause for concern.
The Republic of Korea has supported the
international community’s efforts to assist Ukraine.
The Republic of Korea has, inter alia, provided
humanitarian aid to Ukraine and will keep looking
at possible ways to assist the country and impacted
neighbours. The desired effects of humanitarian
assistance would be significantly weakened if parties
to armed conflict ignored their obligation to protect
civilians—and the necessity of doing so — and to
respect relevant international norms. The Republic of
Korea demands full respect for such norms and, above
all, an immediate cessation of the hostilities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cyprus.
Mr. Hadjichrysanthou (Cyprus): Let me begin by
expressing our sincere condolences for the senseless
violence in Texas yesterday.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the European Union,
in its capacity as observer, and wishes to make some
additional remarks.

22-3611733/46

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We note the small reduction in civilian casualties
reported by the Secretary-General in his latest report
(S/2022/381). Still, the immense scale of suffering of
the millions of civilians who have to survive in dire
conditions, notwithstanding the clear obligation of States
under international law to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure in armed conflict, remains alarming.
The ongoing war in Ukraine is a demonstration of the
tragic repercussions of conflict on civilians.
In addition to upholding the prohibition of the use
of force and ensuring a ceasefire, the Security Council
must use all other tools at its disposal to protect civilians.
In that regard, my delegation wishes to highlight the
following areas of concern.
First, the number of persons displaced by conflict
continues to grow, with more than 80 million in 2021.
We are particularly concerned about situations of
protracted displacement, where we are convinced
that the Security Council can take more robust action
to ensure the right of return as early as possible, the
respect for the property rights of those displaced and
the prohibition of settling other populations in areas
of forced displacement. As a country subjected to all
the foregoing aspects as a result of foreign aggression,
we know just how powerful those phenomena are
in upending the lives of civilians and solidifying the
effects of the unlawful use of force.
Secondly, the number of persons who are
missing as a result of conflict is also exceedingly
high, and the humanitarian nature of this issue is
not always respected. We need better international
cooperation frameworks and to strengthen search and
identification mechanisms. We also need the Council
to build on resolution 2474 (2019), and we need more
robust provisions in Council resolutions on situations
where the fate and whereabouts of missing persons
remain unknown for decades, such as in Cyprus.
Thirdly, the issue of civilians living under
occupation has been largely overlooked by the Council.
Many of those civilians endure daily violations of their
human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the
right to privacy and family life, education, freedom
of expression, freedom of religion and property
rights. Moreover, the persistent harassment and
intimidation of civilians often indirectly result in the
forced displacement and ethnic cleansing of an area’s
indigenous population.
34/46

25/05/2022

Fourthly, accountability and the administration
of international criminal justice for serious crimes is
another area with room for improvement. By default, the
Council should consider the referral of such situations
to the International Criminal Court. At the same time,
the Council should reject peace agreements that include
amnesty for atrocity crimes, including sexual violence.
Finally, before concluding, I wish to refer to
the inextricable link between peacekeeping and the
protection of civilians. We consider this component
to form part of the mandate of every peacekeeping
operation, without prejudice to the primary
responsibility of host countries to protect civilians, and
we would like to see the reporting and other capacities
of peacekeeping operations enhanced in that respect.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Othman (Malaysia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this annual open debate. I would also like
to thank all the briefers for their valuable interventions.
Malaysia is pleased to see the Security Council’s
sustained commitment to discussing this important
topic, including implementing resolution 2286 (2016),
which we supported during our Council membership
in 2016.
We are appalled by the continued attacks on
civilians, including journalists, media workers and
humanitarian personnel in conflict situations. Impunity
continues to prevail in many armed conflicts due to the
persisting lack of accountability for crimes committed
against civilians. In many situations, such as in the
occupied Palestinian and other Arab territories, the
cycle of impunity enjoyed by the occupier continues to
encourage future violations.
Malaysia once again calls on all parties to armed
conflict to comply fully with their obligations under
international law. We also call on all parties to
facilitate safe and unimpeded passage for medical and
humanitarian personnel and to respect the humanitarian
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence. We also call on the Security Council,
as the custodian of peace and security, to ensure that
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law be consistently applied in all conflicts.
The Secretary-General’s latest report on the
protection of civilians (S/2022/381) underscores the
grim reality that armed conflict continued to be
22-36117

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

characterized by high levels of civilian death, injury,
psychological trauma, sexual violence, torture, family
separation and disappearance. In that respect, I would
like to focus on three central aspects that Malaysia
considers of particular importance.
First, my delegation continues to believe that
conflict represents a systemic risk for civilians. A
ceasefire must therefore be the first step to prevent
further civilian deaths and injuries, followed by efforts
to address the root causes of conflict in order to
ensure lasting peace. We continue to call on Member
States, and particularly on the Council, to honour the
commitment to support the Secretary-General’s call
in 2020 for a global ceasefire. We also stress that the
prevention, de-escalation and resolution of conflicts
must be achieved only by peaceful means.
Secondly, it is pivotal to recognize the critical
role of diverse local civil society and actors in the
protection of civilians. All actors should take advantage
of the expertise and perspective of local actors and
communities, including the meaningful engagement
of women, youth and marginalized populations, in
supporting the efforts of unarmed civilians to protect
themselves. That partnership should extend, but not
be limited, to financial resources, best practices
and mechanisms that communities use to protect
themselves. At the same time, Malaysia is also of the
view that much more could be done to recognize the
role of women and youth as agents of peace. That
recognition could further empower them to play an
active role in creating or supporting a safe environment
with and for the local community.
Thirdly, we need to strengthen the capacity and
mandate of our peacekeepers. Malaysia concurs
that the provision of civilian protection mandates
to peacekeeping operations by the Security Council
is vital in curbing violence against civilians. Our
peacekeepers must be trained appropriately and
adequately to protect civilians. We also believe that
operational plans and strategies to protect civilians that
are used by peacekeeping missions must be informed
by an analysis of the various impacts of conflict on all
populations, especially vulnerable groups.
Let me conclude by reiterating the need for us to
do more to ensure the protection of civilians, including
strengthening accountability for perpetrators of human
rights violations in armed conflicts.

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): Let me first express
my deepest condolences for the tragic murder of
innocent children and teachers in Texas. Our hearts
bleed from this horrific tragedy. Our prayers are with
you, Mr. President, and your country at this very
difficult time.
For Israel, a nation that has faced incessant conflict
from the moment of our foundation, the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is of the utmost importance.
As the ancient Jewish axiom goes,
“Whoever saves even one life, it is as if they saved
an entire world.”
That is the moral code by which Israel abides. Israel
goes to great lengths to develop different defensive
technologies such as Iron Dome to protect our citizens.
This commitment to saving lives goes far beyond our
borders. Recently, Israel became the first country to
establish a state-of-the-art field hospital in Ukraine,
providing humanitarian access to injured civilians.
Yet while Israel takes every measure to save
civilian lives, the brutal terrorist groups that all for
Israel’s destruction not only target Israeli civilians but
also use their own people as human shields. Hamas
digs terror tunnels under hospitals and schools and uses
them to store weapons and launch rockets. That is a
double war crime.
Almost exactly one year ago, during Operation
Guardian of the World, over 4,000 Hamas rockets fired
from densely populated residential neighbourhoods in
Gaza rained down on Israeli cities. But even when Israel
was under fire, we worked with the United Nations and
the international community to facilitate the entry of
humanitarian aid into Gaza. Tragically, Hamas targeted
the crossing, thereby preventing the aid from reaching
the Palestinians in Gaza.
That is the modus operandi of Hamas and of
Hizbullah, which runs and funds a terrorist army
entrenched along Israel’s northern border and now
has 150 rockets pointed at Israel. Just last month, on
25 April, rockets were launched from a populated area
in southern Lebanon, within the area of operation of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, towards
civilian communities in northern Israel. Hizbullah’s
arsenal of rockets are aimed directly at our towns
and our critical infrastructure. Just like Hamas,

22-3611735/46

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

25/05/2022

Hizbullah is storing them under the cover of innocent
Lebanese civilians.

as applicable, in situations of armed conflict endangers
the peace and security of the entire world.

I must mention one more important remark. Just
yesterday, I met Leah and Simha Goldin, the parents
of Second Lieutenant Hadar Goldin, who was abducted
and murdered by Hamas in 2014 during a humanitarian
ceasefire. I accompanied the parents as they met with
Member States in order to aid them in bringing their
son’s body home for burial. Sadly, the Goldins are not
alone. For the past eight years, Hamas has held the
bodies of both Hadar Goldin and Oron Shaul, who was
abducted and killed a week before Hadar. Moreover,
Hamas is holding two Israeli civilians hostage — Avera
Mangistu and Hisham Al-Sayed — without disclosing
any information about their well-being. This blatant
disregard for international law and deliberate targeting
of civilian populations must end, and it must end now.

Today’s debate on the protection of civilians and
safe and unhindered humanitarian access shines a
critical light on a defining challenge in many situations
where atrocities have already occurred or where there
is a high risk of atrocities being perpetrated. In conflict
settings, active hostilities severely constrain and
jeopardize humanitarian operations, hindering efforts
to meet the basic needs of populations. Moreover, we
have increasingly witnessed States Members of the
United Nations and other parties to conflicts engage
in the deliberate denial of humanitarian access,
including by blocking the passage and delivery of
humanitarian assistance and services or deliberately
attacking humanitarian and medical workers and
assets, in violation of international humanitarian law.
That has an alarming impact on vulnerable civilian
populations, who face neglect, grave protection risks,
potential starvation, significant public health crises and
an increased risk of sexual and gender-based violence,
including conflict-related sexual violence.

While Israel takes every measure to protect the
lives of the innocent, both Israelis and others, the
same cannot be said of those who seek our destruction.
Indiscriminate rocket fire on the civilian population, the
use of one’s own people as human shields and holding
civilians hostage must be condemned. But more than
that, it must end. We urge that all join us in condemning
those acts of terror.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): I have the honour of
delivering this statement on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Responsibility to Protect, consisting of
55 Member States and the European Union and this
year co-chaired by Botswana, Costa Rica and Croatia.
Today we bear witness to a continuing and pervasive
erosion of respect for civilian lives and objects and
an appalling disregard in some regions for the norms
and laws that States established to avert the impacts
of armed conflict. As a result of such disregard, on a
daily basis we are witnessing great levels of human
suffering and a high risk of mass atrocity crimes being
perpetrated against civilian populations. All Member
States have committed to the responsibility to protect
their populations from genocide, war crimes, crimes
against humanity and ethnic cleansing. Nevertheless,
we note that more than 100 million people are currently
displaced as a result of conflict, atrocities and
persecution worldwide. The commission of systematic,
egregious and widespread violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
36/46

It is in that context that the Group of Friends of
the Responsibility to Protect would like to stress the
following points.
First, the Group of Friends demands that all parties
allow and facilitate, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of international law and consistent with
humanitarian principles, the full, safe, immediate
and unhindered access of humanitarian personnel,
equipment and supplies and the timely delivery of
humanitarian assistance to populations in need,
including by lifting arbitrary bureaucratic impediments
to humanitarian operations, allowing the flow of
humanitarian aid and services into conflict areas
and protecting humanitarian and medical actors and
civilians from attacks. When protecting humanitarian
access to all people in need in conflict settings is a
matter of international peace and security, the Security
Council should continue to play a constructive role in
encouraging the protection of humanitarian access.
Secondly, compliance with international law is
fundamental to the protection of civilians and civilian
objects. Many civilian deaths, as well as suffering and
displacement, could be avoided if all parties to conflicts
respected international humanitarian law and human
rights. Some States have effective programmes in their
armed forces to comply with international humanitarian
22-36117

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

law. However, we are witnessing attacks directed
against civilian infrastructure, including health-care
facilities and schools, some in violation of international
humanitarian law. It is important to remember that
indiscriminate attacks and attacks targeting medical
facilities and civilian objects, including those that are
indispensable to the survival of the civilian population,
as well as attacks on the civilian population, including
those who are humanitarian workers, may amount to
war crimes.
Thirdly, it is of the utmost importance that States
that have not yet done so put in place appropriate
legislative
and
institutional
arrangements
to
comprehensively recognize and address violations
of international humanitarian law and violations and
abuses of human rights, and hold those who commit
such violations and abuses accountable. Accountability
not only helps to provide justice and support for victims,
but it is also key to efforts to deter future violations
and abuses and supports reconciliation processes and
the re-establishment of peace. Appropriate legislative
and institutional arrangements, as well as compliance
with international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, would significantly contribute to the
prevention and alleviation of human suffering.
Fourthly, support for the protection of civilians
should be responsive to gender, age and other core
demographic
considerations.
Security
Council
resolutions on women and peace and security note that
armed conflict and emergencies have a disproportionate
impact on women and girls. Their needs and rights
must be considered and addressed, alongside their full,
equal, safe and meaningful participation. The Group
urges the United Nations and other relevant actors to
ensure that affected populations, including women and
girls, are involved in the development, implementation
and monitoring of civilian protection strategies
and activities.
Far too many civilians are killed in both deliberate
and indiscriminate attacks in today’s complex and
protracted conflicts. The denial of humanitarian access
exacerbates risks to civilians who struggle to meet
their basic needs. The international community should
make every effort to protect civilians and assist those
impacted by conflict. The members of the Security
Council should continue to take timely and decisive
action aimed at ending and preventing atrocities and
should not hinder credible efforts to that end.

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

We call on the members of the Security Council to
respond to, and address, the risk or commission of mass
atrocities, noting in that context the initiatives on the
use of the veto in the case of mass atrocities, including
the French-Mexican initiative and the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group code of conduct.
Finally, the surest way to protect civilians is by
investing in the prevention of conflict and atrocity
crimes through early warning and in the peaceful
settlements of disputes, based on the principles of
justice, human rights and international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer Mission of the Holy See to the
United Nations.
Archbishop Caccia: The Holy See would like
to thank the United States of America for convening
today’s important debate. First, however, we would like
to express our heartfelt condolences for the tragic loss
of life in Uvalde, Texas.
In the past few months, we have witnessed the tragic
consequences of armed conflict return to Europe on a
scale not seen for a generation. Faced with violence,
nearly 13 million Ukrainians fled their homes to avoid
becoming casualties of war. The same reality is visible
in every country and region affected by conflict and
war across the globe. In the Middle East, the Sahel, the
Horn of Africa and South-East Asia, thousands upon
thousands have been forced to decide whether to flee
their homes or to remain in place and risk physical harm
and even death. Despite the humanization of warfare
being an aspirational concept for centuries, the brunt of
conflict still falls disproportionally on the innocent and
the defenceless.
Since first adding this item to its agenda in 1999,
the Security Council has elaborated on protections
owed to those who face heightened risks during
conflict, including humanitarian personnel, healthcare workers, journalists, displaced persons, women,
children and persons with disabilities. The Council has
also urged all parties to armed conflict to protect civilian
infrastructure critical to the provision of essential
services. The Holy See commends such efforts, while
underscoring the need to implement those protections
fully and further incorporate such protections in all
peacekeeping mandates. In that regard, my delegation
would like to offer some concrete recommendations on
three key issues for the Council’s consideration.

22-3611737/46

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

First, the Holy See urges the Council to keep the
protection of civilian objects high on its agenda. That
includes the protection of places of worship. Religious
sites not only provide believers with a place where
they can live their faith but often play a crucial social,
cultural and educational role in society and, especially
in conflict situations, are a source of assistance, aid and
even protection. Places of worship are objects akin to
schools or hospitals, and therefore should benefit from
similar protection.
Secondly, efforts to protect civilians must respond
to the secondary consequences of war and conflict,
which linger long after the guns fall silent. Of paramount
concern is ending the production, stockpiling and use of
indiscriminate weapons, such as anti-personnel mines
and cluster munitions. Such weapons, together with
other explosive remnants of war, contaminate the lived
environment and continue to threaten civilians with
severe injury or death, even after the end of hostilities.
For adequate civilian protection, greater resources are
needed for programmes to clear areas of unexploded
ordnance. In that regard, my delegation commends the
vital work of the Mine Action Service.
Thirdly, we express deep concern about the
growing number of attacks perpetrated against
humanitarian personnel, which impede the provision of
vital assistance and, as the world continues its efforts
to tackle the coronavirus disease pandemic, prevent
the widespread distribution of vaccines. Furthermore,
when perpetrators escape accountability a culture
of impunity takes hold, placing more humanitarian
workers at risk and weakening the rule of law more
broadly. In order to end that cycle, greater efforts are
needed by both States and the Council.
In conclusion, the Holy See reiterates its call for
all parties to conflict — State and non-State actors
alike — to fully comply with international humanitarian
law until the point when humankind reaches its highest
aspiration, as reflected in the Charter of the United
Nations, of abolishing war in all its manifestations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Vidal (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First of all,
we offer our sincere condolences to your country, Sir, on
the tragedy that occurred yesterday at Robb Elementary
School in Uvalde, Texas. We join other States Members
in our show of solidarity with the affected community
38/46

25/05/2022

and families, in particular the parents and siblings of
the child victims.
Chile thanks the Permanent Mission of the
United States for convening this timely debate in the
framework of protection of civilians week. We also take
this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2022/381) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
The protection of civilians has been entrusted
to us as a duty and warrants the utmost attention
and commitment in its treatment. To that end, we
acknowledge its central place on the agenda of this
organ. Similarly, we urge the Security Council to
continue discussing the protection of civilians beyond
the security aspect on the ground and in terms of
preventive approaches that identify the causes of
conflict, promote the rule of law and accountability and
prioritize the human rights of civilian populations as its
core value.
Of particular concern is the food security
situation — 140 million people experienced acute
food security crises last year. We also continue to
be alarmed by civilian casualties resulting from
improvised explosive devices; last year, 1,234 incidents
were reported involving the use of explosive weapons
in populated areas, 89 per cent of which resulted in
civilian casualties. Moreover, in the context of the
global pandemic, it is reprehensible that both healthcare personnel and hospitals continue to be targeted for
attack by parties to armed conflict.
We would be remiss not to draw attention to the
situation of children in various areas of conflict, as
school closures, including those caused by attacks,
have increased the vulnerabilities of tens of thousands
of children as they abandon their studies to march
towards the front lines. That has been exacerbated by
the occurrence of a variety of attacks, thereby exposing
children to increased risk of abduction, sexual violence
and recruitment and, consequently, to dire long-term
repercussions for their physical and mental health.
The protection of the most vulnerable people in
conflict depends to a large extent on strengthening
the application of the framework of international
law, including international humanitarian law and
instruments such as the Vancouver Principles and the
Safe Schools Declaration, of which Chile is a signatory.
In addition, we believe that our actions must be
grounded in the women and peace and security agenda.
22-36117

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Accountability measures must be implemented
by placing victims at the centre of every effort.
In that regard, strengthening the capacity of
national institutions for access to justice, as well as
international monitoring and reporting mechanisms,
is key to preventing impunity and crimes that affect
the most vulnerable populations. It is important that
we continue to develop efforts so that our contingents
in peacekeeping missions are properly equipped with
the protection elements and tools to effectively achieve
their goals, including through training during missions
to mitigate the impact of operations on civilians before,
during and after all operations.
In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that all
wars attest to the undeniable reality that civilians are
the major victims of armed conflicts, especially the
most vulnerable members of the population, including
women and children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): At the outset, I commend
the United States for convening this timely meeting.
Greece aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union, and I would like
to add the following remarks in my national capacity.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2022/381), which unfortunately paints
a grim picture of reality.
The world is currently faced with unprecedented
levels of food insecurity, owing to widespread and
protracted armed conflicts, including the war in
Ukraine, as well as longer-term factors, such as
climate change, the pandemic and displacement.
The international community is struggling to tackle
numerous simultaneous humanitarian crises from
Ukraine to Ethiopia and from the Sahel to Myanmar,
with millions of human lives at stake and with limited
and overstretched resources at hand. Ongoing crises,
such as in Syria and Afghanistan, seem no closer to a
solution, despite being so many years down the road.
Even when aid is available, active conflicts and political
obstacles often render it undeliverable. Impeding
humanitarian access — an act that could constitute a
war crime — appears to be used deliberately in cases
such as Mariupol.
Yemen is another indicative example of the fragility
of humanitarian access under the present circumstances.

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

The humanitarian ceasefire, which has held for over a
month now, has allowed sorely needed food aid to be
delivered to some of the most vulnerable people.
In order to tackle the unprecedented humanitarian
challenges we are currently faced with, no effort should
be spared to ensure humanitarian access to those in
need. The maintenance of humanitarian corridors is
vital for saving lives, as the world has so dramatically
witnessed during the Russian invasion of Ukraine. We
must therefore utilize and improve donor coordination
mechanisms, both in the field and at the political level,
ensure the compliance of State and non-State actors
with international humanitarian law and facilitate
cooperation among States and between States and
international institutions.
Moreover, we need to ensure that no attacks against
civilian infrastructure take place, in particular in the
case of schools and medical facilities. In that vein, we
need to place special emphasis on the protection of the
most vulnerable, such as women and children, primarily
from sexual exploitation and harassment.
Last but not least, accountability remains key in
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. It is up to
us to make sure that no attacks or crimes against them
go unpunished.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Nze (Nigeria): I would like to thank the
delegation of the United States, as President of the
Council for the month of May 2022, for organizing
today’s open debate.
The human, social and economic impacts of armed
conflicts in the society are massive. Terrorism and
violent extremism are the most challenging forms of
armed conflict and have become serious threats to
civilian populations. In recent times, schools have
become targets in situations of armed conflict, while
schoolchildren and educators have become vulnerable
to attacks, abuse, exploitation and recruitment by
armed groups.
The experience of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic has further exacerbated
the plight of those children by heightening their
vulnerability and depriving them of access to schools.
The impact of armed conflict on education requires
urgent humanitarian and developmental actions.
Education in Nigeria is key to national development.

22-3611739/46

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The quest for development will not be possible without
the analytic, inventive and critical thinking enabled by
a robust and uninterrupted education system. For those
reasons, Nigeria is open to every initiative that will
enhance education, both nationally and globally.
Nigeria has faced attacks on schools and educational
facilities in recent years by the terrorist groups Boko
Haram and Islamic State-West Africa Province. Their
activities in the north-eastern part of the country,
kidnapping of children for ransom, have also increased.
The groups have capitalized on the priority afforded
to education by targeting soft targets, especially
vulnerable students and institutions of learning. As
part of the commitment to ensure the protection of
schools and educational facilities, the Government
has prioritized the integration of safe schools and the
protection of education into national policies.
To that end, the Safe Schools Initiative was launched
in Nigeria in 2014 at the World Economic Forum on
Africa held in Abuja. It has become a major driving
force in response to the growing number of attacks
on the right to education, including the kidnapping
of over 200 girls of secondary school age in Chibok,
Borno state. The Safe Schools Initiative has also been
a major step in driving global action to protect the
learning environment. We continue to strive to attract
more countries to the Global Business Coalition for
Education, as it has allowed us to transform the way
in which school attacks are dealt with from social
problems into policy action.
It was in that spirit that Nigeria co-sponsored
General Assembly resolution 74/275, proclaiming
9 September as the International Day to Protect
Education from Attack. The resolution was adopted
under Nigeria’s presidency of the General Assembly at
its seventy-fourth session. Nigeria also led the important
effort towards the General Assembly’s declaration of
24 January as the International Day of Education in
2018, consistent with the high value our country places
on education.
In framing the Safe Schools Initiative, we have been
fortunate to benefit from the goodwill and partnerships
of friendly countries and corporate organizations.
Nigeria hosted the fourth International Conference
on the Safe Schools Declaration in 2021 in Abuja
together with our partners Argentina, Norway, Spain
and the African Union Commission in order to promote
40/46

25/05/2022

global cooperation and strengthen coordination on
implementing the Safe Schools Declaration.
On that note, allow me to take this opportunity to
express Nigeria’s appreciation to the United Nations
for its support for the Initiative through multi-donor
funding. That is also important, as policies can be
successful only with the collaboration of critical
stakeholders in terms of capacity and finance.
In Nigeria, the Safe Schools Initiative resulted in
the greater fortification of schools, as well as better
communication with local communities. That has
led to higher enrolment numbers in places where
children had previously abandoned formal learning.
There are also provisions under the Initiative for the
night-time illumination of schools, communications
devices, the development of safety manuals and skills
and the promotion of safe zones for education. Those
initiatives have also led to the improved protection of
school infrastructure.
Education is about our common future. It is the
most guaranteed enabler for a peaceful, just and
prosperous world, especially for those at risk of being
left behind. I would encourage all stakeholders, in
particular those experiencing threats from extremists,
to learn from Nigeria’s experience in that regard and
to protect schools from attack. We therefore call on
Member States to endorse and implement the relevant
initiatives as a tool to safeguard civilians, as well as the
educational system, from any form of attack.
We must stand together to build an educational
community on a global scale. People all over the world
now live in the same global village. Our countries are
more interconnected as we have become a community
that shares the same destiny. We can achieve lasting
stability and development only through strengthened
solidarity, partnership and cooperation. In order to
achieve a safe learning environment for our educational
community globally, the international community most
take joint action against the use of schools and facilities
by armed groups during conflict. The use of explosives
as weapons of conflict around schools and institutions
of higher learning is unacceptable because it deprives
children of their right to education and destroys their
hopes and dreams.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to join all Africans in celebrating Africa Day. Africa
Day is a day of celebration for Africans and people
of African descent all over the world. It is also an
22-36117

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

opportunity to reflect on the progress made by the
African Union in achieving its goals, especially with
regard to protecting the human rights and freedoms
of Africans. Just as last year, the commemoration of
Africa Day in 2022 comes at a very difficult time, with
challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, armed
conflict, climate change, violent extremism, terrorism,
poverty and hunger. Our message today will therefore
focus on the need to find and amplify innovative
solutions that are aimed at addressing challenges on
the continent. Africa has had its fair share of armed
conflict; now is the time to put an end to it and instead
focus on our development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): I deliver these
remarks on behalf of the Nordic countries, namely,
Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my own
country, Denmark.
We are extremely concerned about the devastating
impacts of compounding conflicts and crises on
civilians around the world. As always, people in the most
vulnerable and marginalized situations are impacted
the most. In order to save lives and alleviate human
suffering, there is an urgent need to end conflicts and
ensure full respect for international humanitarian law.
With the Russian aggression against Ukraine,
we are seeing an unprecedented scale of destruction
of critical civilian infrastructure and historically
rapid displacement. We call on Russia to immediately
end its unjustified war and spare civilian lives. We
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
efforts to push for an end to the aggression.
Devastating Russian attacks on cities such as
Mariupol have yet again shown the urgent need for full
compliance with international humanitarian law and
the tragic consequences for civilians when international
humanitarian law is so blatantly ignored. We must
never accept impunity for violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Let me repeat, we must never do that, and the Nordic
countries will never accept impunity for violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
The war in Ukraine is another tragic example of
the civilian consequences of war in urban and densely
populated areas, where civilians are at higher risk and

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

where civilian infrastructure, including schools and
hospitals, is too often hit or even targeted. We call
on all States to engage constructively in the ongoing
consultations on a political declaration to address the
humanitarian harm arising from the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas.
Armed conflicts also have devastating effects on
the natural environment, which further compounds
the long-term consequences of conflict for civilians.
International humanitarian law provides rules for
protecting the environment in armed conflict, and those
rules need to be put into action. The updated Guidelines
of the International Committee of the Red Cross on
the Protection of the Natural Environment in Armed
Conflict and the work done by the International Law
Commission should and must guide our endeavours.
We are extremely concerned about the rising
conflict-driven food insecurity in many parts of
the world, such as the Horn of Africa, the Sahel and
Yemen, which is further aggravated by the Russian
invasion of Ukraine. The Nordic countries support
international efforts to counter the crisis, including
the Secretary-General’s Global Crisis Response Group
on Food, Energy and Finance, in which the Prime
Minister of Denmark is one of six Global Champions.
More efforts are needed to alleviate hunger in armed
conflict, and caused by armed conflict, in line with
resolution 2417 (2018).
We are appalled by the number of humanitarian
workers who are kidnapped, wounded or killed around
the globe. Local humanitarians suffer by far the
greatest proportion of casualties, and the percentage is
increasing. We must take concrete measures to protect
humanitarian actors working to save lives, including by
investing in the safety and security of local staff.
It is vital that life-saving assistance and protection
reach the people most in need and people in hard-toreach areas. We once again call on parties to conflict
to ensure safe, rapid and unhindered access for
humanitarian actors, in accordance with international
humanitarian law, and to guarantee respect for
humanitarian principles. That is the responsibility of all
parties to conflict, and the importance of it cannot be
understated and the responsibility cannot be ignored.
We must work actively and on multiple fronts to ensure
safe, rapid and unhindered humanitarian access.
I would like to make three points.

22-3611741/46

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

First, we must counter the deeply worrisome trends
of misinformation and disinformation eroding trust
in the humanitarian mandate, putting humanitarians
at risk and denying civilians the protection they need
and require. To improve and maintain access, we must
all do our part to ensure that the neutral, impartial
and independent nature of humanitarian action is
understood and respected.
Secondly, the report of the Secretary-General’s
High-level Panel on Internal Displacement and Action
Agenda have created new momentum to design better
solutions for internally displaced persons (IDPs).
We must build on it. And a core priority should be
reaching internally displaced persons, who are often
in particularly vulnerable positions. We emphasize the
need to align and mainstream the protection of IDPs
as an integrated part of the protection of civilians,
including in United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Thirdly, we must be better at reaching persons
belonging to the most marginalized groups, such as
children and women, and do so by focusing on their
special protection needs, as well as on addressing the
gendered impacts of war. We must prioritize preventing
and responding to sexual and gender-based violence,
providing life-saving sexual and reproductive health
services and further integrating mental health and
psychosocial support into preparedness, response and
recovery, through meaningful and equal partnerships,
including with women-led organizations.
Ultimately, ending civilian suffering during
conflict is a question of political will, and parties
to conflict must actively pursue peace and protect
civilians. We must hold them accountable when they
fail to honour those responsibilities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Lagatie (Belgium): I would like to thank the
United States for organizing today’s important debate,
as well as the briefers for their compelling briefings.
My country aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union, as well as with the
statements of the Group of friends of the Protection of
Civilians in Armed Conflict and the Group of Friends
of the Responsibility to Protect.
Early this year in a debate here in the Security
Council, my delegation expressed its grave concern about
the fact that respect for international humanitarian law
42/46

25/05/2022

had dropped to an all-time low and that humanitarian
needs had increased to an all-time high (see S/PV.8953).
We deplored the resurgence of urban warfare in the
last decades and its devastating impact on civilian
populations, essential infrastructure and services, such
as schools and hospitals. We condemned the fact that
civilians represent close to 90 per cent of the casualties
and that impediments to humanitarian access persist in
far too many conflicts. We also expressed regret that the
coronavirus disease pandemic had further aggravated
an already critical situation.
If that were not enough, during the past three
months, Russia’s illegal and brutal aggression against
Ukraine has further exacerbated all of those trends.
Today the question facing us, with a renewed sense of
urgency, is an obvious one. When will we successfully
put an end to widespread civilian harm in conflicts?
The answer to that question is obvious — when parties
to conflict make it a political priority to strictly comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law and respect, at all times, its rules and principles, in
particular the prohibition of direct attacks on civilians
and civilian objects.
You, Mr. President, urged us to focus today’s debate
on practical ideas for ensuring better humanitarian
access and breaking the trend of denial of access in
conflict settings. My country would like to stress three
points in that regard.
First, Belgium calls on parties to armed conflicts to
facilitate rapid and unimpeded access to humanitarian
relief and to ensure the safety of humanitarian
personnel. My country further urges all parties to
remove barriers to humanitarian operations, starting
with administrative barriers. In cases of excessive
barriers, humanitarian actors should be granted the
means to safely and effectively monitor, document and
report on the denial and obstruction of and constraints
on humanitarian actions.
Consistent and long-term engagement with all
parties to conflict, including non-State armed groups
for humanitarian purposes, should be fostered as a
means to gain safe and timely access and to promote
respect for international humanitarian law. My
delegation welcomes the effort of Geneva Call in that
regard. Humanitarian organizations and donors should
also continue to support innovative initiatives such as
cash assistance and the localization of efforts to ensure
22-36117

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

that assistance reaches the most vulnerable, as well as
the use of new technologies for needs assessment.
Secondly, we call for the full implementation of
the commitments contained in resolution 2573 (2021)
in order to protect access to essential services. Parties
to armed conflict should integrate concrete measures
to safeguard the humanitarian space and protect health
care and essential civilian facilities, including in
counter-terrorism and sanctions contexts.
In the planning of military operations, greater
attention should be given to the possible effects of
hostilities on civilian infrastructure and services. My
country further calls on donors to provide flexible
multi-year funding to humanitarian organizations
to ensure longer-term systemic support to civilian
populations and to strengthen the resilience of
essential service systems in order to reduce the risk
of development reversal and to reinforce short-term
emergency response. The development of partnerships
with relevant actors, in particular local communities
and essential service providers, is also key.
Thirdly, the denial of humanitarian access is one
of the six grave violations identified and condemned
by the Council as affecting children in armed
conflicts. Children are the most vulnerable victims of
conflict and humanitarian disasters. Belgium remains
committed to addressing the needs of children affected
by armed conflict, while facilitating access to essential
services, such as health and education, and intensifying
efforts to prevent and address grave violations against
them. In that vein, my delegation calls on all parties
to address the plight of children in particular and
calls for the implementation of the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, the Safe
Schools Declaration, the Paris Principles and the
Vancouver Principles.
In conclusion, Belgium promotes a multidimensional
approach to the protection of civilians based on
prevention, protection, monitoring and accountability.
The fight against impunity for the most serious crimes,
at both the national and international levels, remains
one of Belgium’s priorities. We continue to support
international justice and accountability mechanisms
for violation of international law and urge all States
Members of the United Nations to do the same.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Akram (Pakistan): We thank the United
States delegation for convening this important annual
Security Council debate on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, and we thank all the briefers for their
insightful briefings.
The Secretary-General’s latest report on this item
(S/2022/381) paints a very grim picture. In 2021, the
United Nations recorded at least 11,075 civilian deaths
across 12 armed conflicts. Yet the number of recorded
civilian deaths actually declined in comparison to the
previous year. This decline was due, in large measure,
to the cessation of the conflict in Afghanistan after
15 August 2021. Following 40 years of fighting, there
is an opportunity now to restore peace, stability and
development in Afghanistan. One Government controls
the entire country. There is no civil war and no mass
civilian casualties.
We commend the Secretary-General and the
United Nations agencies for the extensive humanitarian
operation under way in Afghanistan. This has saved
millions of Afghan lives. Adequate external support
is essential to restoring the banking and financial
system, reconstructing infrastructure and reviving
the economy, including by the use of the financial
assets belonging to Afghanistan. Holding back such
support will not promote the international community’s
objectives of human rights or counter-terrorism. On the
contrary, it may result in the opposite. As Pakistan’s
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs stated the day
before yesterday in Davos:
“Both the international community and the interim
Afghan Government need to revisit their approaches
by prioritizing the interests and aspirations of
ordinary Afghans.”
Together with neighbouring and other countries,
Pakistan is working with the interim Afghan
Government to address all issues, including the threat
posed by terrorist groups. It is only through persistent,
patient and prudent engagement that the international
community can achieve the shared objectives of a
peaceful, stable and prosperous Afghanistan.
The question arises on how to protect civilians
when the suppression of civilians is the very object of
a military’s operations. This is the case when foreign
occupation forces resort to the forcible denial of the
right of peoples to self-determination and seek to
perpetuate their illegal occupation. This is vividly
illustrated in Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir,

22-3611743/46

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

where the objective of the 900,000 Indian troops is to
suppress the demand of the Kashmiri people for freedom
and their legitimate right to self-determination, which
has been promised to them in the resolutions of the
Security Council.
Since 5 August 2019, Indian troops have been
stationed in every city, town, village and neighbourhood
of occupied Kashmir in order to impose what India’s
leaders have themselves ominously referred to as a
final solution for Jammu and Kashmir. They have
resorted to cordon-and-search operations, extrajudicial
killing of innocent Kashmiris, collective punishments
by destroying entire Kashmiri neighbourhoods
and villages, violence against peaceful protestors,
including the use of pellet guns that have blinded
hundreds of Kashmiri children, and arbitrary detention
of 13,000 young Kashmiri boys and the entire Kashmiri
political leadership.
Like other colonialists, India has sought to portray
the Kashmiri freedom struggle as terrorism. It is India’s
suppression of this legitimate struggle that violates
international law and constitutes war crimes. The
conviction and sentencing today by an Indian kangaroo
court of the Kashmiri leader Yasin Malik is the latest
illustration of Indian oppression. As my Prime Minister
has declared, India can imprison Yasin Malik, but it can
never imprison the idea of freedom that he symbolizes.
To consolidate its occupation, India has also embarked
of transforming occupied Jammu and Kashmir from a
Muslim-majority State to a Hindu-majority territory,
in blatant violation of Security Council resolutions,
the Fourth Geneva Conventions and international law.
Indian authorities are issuing millions of fake domicile
certificates to non-Kashmiris, seizing and selling off
their land and gerrymandering electoral constituencies
through its so-called Delimitation Commission, to
reduce Muslim representation and install a Bharatiya
Janata Party-Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh puppet
government in Srinagar. The danger of another conflict
between Pakistan and India will remain ever present
until the dispute over Jammu and Kashmir is resolved.
The Secretary-General’s report notes:
“The prospect of nuclear conflict, once unthinkable,
is now back within the realm of possibility”
(S/2022/381, para. 2).
This observation applies not only to the dangerous
conflict now raging in Ukraine but also to a nuclearized
44/46

25/05/2022

South Asia. Pakistan therefore urges the SecretaryGeneral and the Security Council not to neglect the
Kashmir dispute, deploy diplomacy and mobilize the
political will to promote a just and peaceful resolution
of the Jammu and Kashmir dispute, in accordance with
the principles of the United Nations Charter, Security
Council resolutions and the wishes of the people of
Jammu and Kashmir.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank the United States presidency of
the Security Council for having convened today’s
important meeting.
In his report on the protection of civilians
(S/2022/381), the Secretary-General observed that
armed conflicts continued to be characterized by high
levels of civilian death, forced displacement, destroyed
civilian objects and the damaged natural environment.
Azerbaijan reiterates its strong condemnation of all
violations of international humanitarian law.
During its aggression against my country since the
early 1990s, Armenia committed multiple war crimes,
resulting in the deaths of tens of thousands of civilians,
massive ethnic cleansing, the extensive destruction
and cultural erasure of populated areas. The scale of
the brutalities is evidenced also by the almost 4,000
citizens of Azerbaijan who went missing in connection
with the conflict, including 719 civilians. Armenia fails
to clarify the whereabouts of the missing persons who
fell into its hands but have not been seen since.
This year marks the thirtieth anniversary of
the horrific massacre committed in the town of
Khojaly, where, in February 1992, hundreds of
Azerbaijani civilians were brutally killed by invading
Armenia forces. This tragedy, which independent
experts recognized as the largest and worst single
atrocity of the war, was condemned internationally as a
crime against humanity or an act of genocide.
The deliberate tactic of targeting the civilian
population was used again by Armenian forces in
the course of hostilities in the fall of 2020. Direct
and indiscriminate missile attacks that struck
Azerbaijani cities and districts, including with the
use of internationally banned cluster bombs, killed
and wounded hundreds of civilians and destroyed
numerous civilian objects. The frequency and timing
22-36117

25/05/2022

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

of the attacks, including a series of ruthless night-time
missile strikes on the residential areas in the cities of
Ganja and Barda, testify to the clear intent and purpose
to cause the greatest possible civilian casualties.
Moreover, since the end of the war, many civilians have
been killed or injured by mine explosions, as Armenia
fails to share accurate and comprehensive information
about the hundreds of thousands of landmines it laid on
Azerbaijan’s territory.
Accountability and broader transitional justice are
undeniable and must be an inevitable consequence of
the offences committed. They are also essential tools
to prevent the recurrence of violations and important
elements for building, strengthening and sustaining
peace and promoting reconciliation and development.
In conclusion, with regard to humanitarian
activities, the reasons leading to the erosion of trust
and the putting at risk of relief efforts, as highlighted
in the Secretary-General’s report, are often also rooted
in attempts to advance hostile political narratives,
including under the guise of feigned care for people in
need and by recourse to extensive disinformation.
It is imperative that the engagement of humanitarian
actors in both conflict and post-conflict situations be
exclusively humanitarian in nature, not misused for
political purposes, and that such engagement be in
conformity with the principles of neutrality, impartiality
and the consent of the country affected, while fully
respecting the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
national unity of States, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations.
As the Secretary-General underlined in his report,
the effective protection of civilians requires much
greater political will and commitment to respect
international law and implement good policies and
practices. That definitely must be the key objective.

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

However, in order to not let Pakistan get away with its
repeated falsehoods, I will have to present the correct
position in front of the world.
The union territories of Jammu and Kashmir and
Ladakh have always been and will always remain
integral and inalienable parts of India. That includes
the areas under the illegal occupation of Pakistan. No
amount of rhetoric or propaganda from any country can
deny that fact. The only contribution that Pakistan can
make is to stop State-sponsored terrorism.
We saw the spirited defence today by the
representative of Pakistan in support of a person who
has pleaded guilty to charges of terror financing. One
really cannot go lower than that.
With regard to his other remarks, we will not
dignify them with a response.
The President: The representative of Pakistan has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give him the floor.
Mr. Butt (Pakistan): My delegation would like to
reply to the statement just made by the representative
of India.
Let us examine the points she made, beginning
with the reference to Jammu and Kashmir. Jammu and
Kashmir is not an integral part of India. It is a disputed
territory, as evidenced by all United Nations maps
and official United Nations documents. In its fourth
preambular paragraph, resolution 47 (1948) notes the
desire of India and Pakistan that
“the question of the accession of Jammu and
Kashmir to India or Pakistan should be decided
through the democratic method of a free and
impartial plebiscite”.

Mrs. Maitra (India): We are obligated to take the
floor again at this late hour. In the interest of time, I
will be very brief.

That call for a plebiscite was reiterated in resolutions
91 (1951) and 122 (1957), among other resolutions of
the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan,
specifically its 13 August 1948 and 5 January 1949
resolutions. India accepted that decision and is bound
to comply with it, in accordance with Article 25 of the
Charter of the United Nations.

As has become a habit these days, the representative
of Pakistan, like a broken record, once again made
unwarranted remarks against my country. That
continuous misuse of the United Nations to propagate
false and malicious propaganda against my country
needs to be treated with the contempt it deserves.

So much for Jammu and Kashmir being an integral
part of India. Living in that alternative reality, India
continues to deny its illegal occupation of Jammu
and Kashmir. Only an occupier would oppose the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
that promise self-determination to the people of the

The President: The representative of India has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

22-3611745/46

S/PV.9042 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

disputed state of Jammu and Kashmir. If India had any
moral courage or respect for international law, it would
end its reign of terror, withdraw its troops and let the
Kashmiris freely decide their future in accordance with
Security Council resolutions.
One can grant that India knows a lot about terrorism.
It has the dubious distinction of being one of the world’s
pioneers and largest purveyors of State terrorism. It has
instigated, sponsored and abetted State terrorism in
each of its neighbouring countries, including against
my own country, Pakistan.
At home, the Hindutva raj is unleashing the worst
form of State-directed terrorism against all minorities.
Under the current Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh
(RSS)-Bharatiya Janata Party Government, India
is being guided by a supremacist ideology that has
masterminded Islamophobia in the political discourse.
One cannot expect anything new from the purveyors
of Hindutva. In today’s incredibly intolerant India, the
Muslim minority of 200 million faces frequent lynching

46/46

25/05/2022

by cow vigilantes and pogroms by RSS thugs, with
official complicity, discriminatory citizenship laws to
expel Muslims and a concerted campaign to destroy
mosques and the rich Muslim heritage of India.
With such a horrendous track record in democracy,
the rule of law and human rights, India surely does not
deserve a place on the Security Council, or in the wider
law-abiding world community.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
Before adjourning today’s meeting, I would like
to again, on behalf of the Council, thank our United
Nations colleagues from the Security Council Affairs
Division, the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management and the security team, as well
as our interpreters, who worked extra hours today and
throughout the week to ensure the success of today’s
important debate.
The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.

22-36117
