S/PRST/2019/9

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 August 2019
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 8608th meeting of the Security Council, held on 29 August 2019, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in the
Middle East”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council underlines its full support for the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen (the Special Envoy), Martin Griffiths, and calls
on the Government of Yemen and the Houthis (the parties) to engage
constructively and continuously with him. The Council commends the tireless
efforts of the Special Envoy to support the parties to implement the Stockholm
Agreement and to achieve a political solution to the conflict in Yemen.
“The Security Council expresses its deep concern at the escalation in
violence and the recent loss of life and injuries in Aden, Saa’da, Sana’a, Shabwa
and across Yemen. It calls once again on all parties to fulfil their obligations
under international humanitarian law, including in relation to ensuring the
protection of civilians, particularly to children and access for humanitarian
organisations, and their obligations under international human rights law, as
applicable. The Security Council underlines the need to ensure accountability
for violations in Yemen.
“The Security Council is particularly concerned by recent developments
in the south of Yemen, including the violent attempt to take over state
institutions. It calls on all involved parties to show restraint and to preserve
Yemen’s territorial integrity. The Security Council welcomes and fully supports
the efforts by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to convene a dialogue in Jeddah to
resolve the situation, and calls on all parties to engage constructively to make
those efforts a success.
“The Security Council fully supports the Special Envoy’s efforts to work
with the parties to pave the way for the resumption of comprehensive
negotiations, without delay, on the security and political arrangements necessary
to end the conflict and resume a peaceful transition. The Security Council
supports a negotiated political settlement that engages all parties in an inclusive
dialogue to resolve differences and address the legitimate concerns of all
Yemenis, including those in the south, in accordance with relevant Security
Council resolutions, including Resolution 2216 (2015), the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, and the outcomes of the
comprehensive National Dialogue Conference.

19-14776 (E)

290819

*1914776*

S/PRST/2019/9

“The Security Council condemns in the strongest terms the escalation of
Houthi attacks on civilian infrastructure in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and
calls on them to cease such attacks immediately without preconditions. It
underlines that such attacks, which have killed, injured and endangered
civilians, pose a serious national security threat to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
as well as a wider threat to regional security, and threaten to undermine the UN led political process.
“The Security Council reiterates its call on the parties to continue bro ader
implementation of the Stockholm Agreements. In particular, they urge the
parties to work closely with the Special Envoy and redouble efforts to finalise
arrangements for the Prisoner Exchange agreement, which would help build
confidence between the parties, and to work on the implementation of the
Statement of Understanding on Taiz.
“The Security Council welcomes the constructive meeting of the
Redeployment Coordination Committee (RCC) on 14 and 15 July and the
parties’ renewed commitment to implementing phase one of the Concept of
Operations (CONOPs) of redeployment from Hodeidah. It calls upon the parties
to engage constructively with the Special Envoy’s proposals for implementing
phase one without further delay. It notes the positive progress made by the
parties in agreeing phase two of the CONOPs and the enhanced ceasefire and
monitoring in Hodeidah Governorate. It calls on the parties to implement the
agreed CONOPS and continue to work towards full redeployment from
Hodeidah City and the ports of Hodeidah, Saleef and Ras Issa.
“The Security Council underlines the need for the United Nations Mission
in support of the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) to progress towards its full
deployment and reiterates its call on the parties, as set out in its resolut ion 2452
(2019) and 2481 (2019), to ensure the unhindered and expeditious movement
into and within Yemen of UNMHA personnel and equipment.
“The Security Council expresses deep concern at the gravity of the
humanitarian situation. It reiterates its call on all parties to facilitate safe and
unhindered access for humanitarian personnel and flows of humanitarian
supplies, including food and fuel, to prevent the diversion of humanitarian
assistance, and to ensure the effective and sustained functioning of all of
Yemen’s ports and road access across the country, which has seen a significant
deterioration in recent months.
“The Security Council also reiterates the need to increase the pace and
scale of the humanitarian response, and expresses its concern at reports that the
UN is increasingly running out of funding and scaling down or stopping
essential life-saving activities. Given the ongoing risk of famine and disease
outbreaks, they urge all donors to fulfil promptly the pledges they have already
made to the UN-led humanitarian response, and to provide any additional
funding they can.
“The Security Council also recognises the huge challenges po sed by
Yemen’s struggling economy. In this regard, it welcomes and encourages
continued progress on the Government of Yemen’s efforts to stabilise the
Yemeni Riyal and pay public sector salaries and pension payments across the
whole country. It also welcomes the deposits made by the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia to the Central Bank of Yemen to support the import of essential food
commodities and encourages replenishment of this funding to maintain the rial ’s
exchange rate. It further calls for the parties to cont inue to respect the integrity
of the Central Bank of Yemen and other institutions underpinning Yemen ’s
economic stability. It also calls for the lifting of restrictions on economic
2/3

19-14776

S/PRST/2019/9

activity and for the respect of national economic policy, and reiterates it s call
on the parties to continue to work with the Special Envoy on port revenues as
part of the Hodeidah Agreement to expand the payment of public sector salaries
across the country.
“Recognising the crucial peacebuilding role played by women in Yemen,
the Security Council reiterates the importance of the full, effective and
meaningful participation of women, as well as the meaningful engagement of
youth, in the political process. It calls on the parties to increase the participation
of women in their delegations to 30%, if necessary by adding additional
members to their delegations.
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong commitment to the unity,
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Yemen. ”

19-14776

3/3
