UNITED

NATIONS

,

Distr,

GENERAL

A/EES/33/91

ASSEMBLY

18 January 19T9

Thirty-third session
Agenda item k j

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
/on the report of the First Committee (A/33/^35, A/33/L.33i./
3 3 /9 1 .

General and complete disarmament
A

Report of the Disarmament Commission

The General Assembly,
Having resolved to lay the foundations of an international disarmament
strategy which aims at general and complete disarmament under effective
international control, through co-ordinated and persevering efforts in which the
United Nations should play a more effective role.
Recalling the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session, in which it
decided to establish the Disarmament Commission, 1/
Emphasizing the importance of an effective follow-up of the relevant
recommendations and decisions adopted at its tenth special session,
Having considered the report of the Disarmament Commission, ^/
1.
Endorses the report of the Disarmament Commission and the recommendations
contained therein;
2.
Requests the Disarmament Commission to continue its work in accordance
with its mandate, as set down in paragraph II 8 of the Final Document of the

1/ Resolution S-lO/2, para. II8 .
2^/ Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third Session,
Supplement No. k2 (A/33/^2).
^
^

79-OI9IT

a /r e s /33/91

Page 2

Tenth Special Session, as well as the recommendations contained in its report and
the decisions that the General Assembly has taken at its current session and
which have a bearing on the Commission's programme of work in 1979;
3.
Requests the Disarmament Commission to submit to the General Assembly
at its thirty-fourth session a report on its work, including any recommendations
and observations it may deem appropriate ;

k.
Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the Disarmament Commission
the Final Document, together with all the official records of the tenth special
session, so that the views and proposals presented by States during the session
will be available for the implementation of the Commission's programme of work;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to render to the Disarmament Commission
all the necessary assistance that it may require for implementing the present
resolution ;
6.
Further requests the Secretary-General to invite Member States to
communicate to him, by 31 March 1979, their views and suggestions on the
comprehensive programme of disarmament, for transmission to the Disarmament
Commission;
7.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its thirty-fourth
session an item entitled "Report of the Disarmament Commission".

86th plenary meeting
l6 December 1978

Confidence-building measiires
The General Assembly,
Concerned at the fact that the arms race is accelerating and that the world
figure for expenditures on armaments continues to increase.
Convinced that it is possible to develop effective international methods and
procedures to promote general and complete disarmament under strict and effective
international control.
Desiring to eliminate the sources of tension by peaceful means and thereby
to contribute to the strengthening of peace and security in the world.
Stressing the importance of the statement in the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session that it is necessary, in order to facilitate the process
of disarmament, to take measures and to pursue policies to strengthen international

/...

A/RES/33/91
Page 3

peace and security and to build confidence among States ^/ in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Considering that strict compliance by all States with the purposes and
principles of the Charter is essential to ease international tensions and to
create mutual confidence among States,
Recognizing the need and urgency of first steps to diminish the danger of
armed conflicts resulting from misunderstandings or from misinterpretations of
military activities.
Aware that there are situations peculiar to specific regions, which have a
bearing on the nature of the confidence-building measures feasible in those
regions,
Expressing its conviction that commitment to confidence-building measures
could contribute to strengthening the security of States,
Noting the fact that at its tenth special session a number of proposals for
such measures were submitted to that effect which deserve due consideration,
1.
Recommends со all States to consider on a regional basis arrangements
for specific confidence-building measures, taking into account the specific
conditions and requirements of each region;
2.
Invites all States to inform the Secretary-General of the United Nations
of their views and experiences of those confidence-building measures they
consider appropriate and feasible;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the views of Member States on
this question to the General Assembly during its thirty-fourth session;
U.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its thirty-fourth
session an item entitled "Confidence-building measures".

86th plenary meeting
l6 December 1978

С
Strategic arms limitation talks
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2б02 A (XXIV) of l6 December I 9 6 9 , 2932 В (XXVII)

3^/ Resolution S-lO/2, para. 93.

!..

A/RES/33/91
Pape U

of 29 November 1972, 3l8U A and С (XXVIIl) of l8 December 1973, 32б1 С (XXIX) of
9 December 197^, 3 U8 I; С (XXX) of 12 December 1975 and 3 1 /I89 A of 21 December 1976,
Reaffirming its resolution 32/87 G of 12 December 1977, in which, inter alia,
it noted with satisfaction:
(^) The declaration made by the President of the United States of America
on h October 1977 in these terms :
"The United States is willing to go as far as possible, consistent with
our security interests, in limiting and reducing our nuclear weapons. On a
reciprocal basis we are willing now to reduce them by 10 per cent, 20 per cent
or even 50 per cent. Then we will work for further reductions with a view
to a world truly free of nuclear weapons." W ,
(b) The declaration made by the President of the Supreme Soviet of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on 2 November 1977 in these terms:
"Today we are proposing a radical step: that agreement be reached on
a simultaneous halt in the production of nuclear weapons by all States. This
would apply to all such weapons - whether atomic, hydrogen or neutron bombs
or missiles. At the same time, the nuclear Powers could undertake to start
the gradual reduction of existing stockpiles of such weapons and move
towards their complete, total destruction.".
Bearing in mind that the Programme of Action contained in the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session ^/ included among those measures which
deserve the highest priority the one which is set forth in these terms:
"The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America should conclude at the earliest possible date the agreement they
have been pursuing for several years in the second series of the strategic
arms limitation talks. They are invited to transmit in good time the text
of the agreement to the General Assembly. It should be followed promptly by
further strategic arms limitation negotiations between the two parties,
leading to agreed significant reductions of, and qualitative limitations on,
strategic arms. It should constitute an important step in the direction of
nuclear disarmament and, ultimately, of establishment of a world free of
such weapons." 6 / ,
Noting that in the Programme of Action it was established that in the task
of achieving the goals of nuclear disarmament all the nuclear-weapon States, in

V Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second Session,
Plenary Meetings, l8th meeting, para. 15.
^/ Resolution S-lO/2, paras. U3-112.
6/ Ibid., para. 52.
/...

A/RES/33/91
Page 5

particular those among them which possess the most important nuclear arsenals,
hear a special responsibility, T_/
1.
Deeply regrets that, in spite of all that has been declared, resolved or
reiterated over the last decade, it has not yet been possible for the talks on the
limitation of strategic weapons, known as SALT, to achieve even the immediate
results envisaged in the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the
General Assembly, the first devoted to disarmament,
2.
Stresses once again with the greatest emphasis the necessity that the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America strive to
implement as soon as possible the declarations made in 1977 by their respective
heads of State and reiterates its invitation to the Governments of both countries
to adopt without delay all relevant measures to achieve that objective, which
coincides in essence with the one defined in this regard in paragraph 52 of the
Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly;
3.
Trusts that the two Governments will fulfil the invitation which the
General Assembly addressed to them in paragraph 52 of the Final Docinnent of the
Tenth Special Session, in order that they may transmit to it in good time the
text of the agreement which over the last four years has been pxirsued in the
second series of the strategic arms limitation talks.

86th plenary meeting
l6 December 1978

D
Study on nuclear vreapons
The General Assembly,
Conscious of its responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations for
disarmament and the preservation of peace.
Mindful of the important task of the First Committee, to evaluate the state
of the arms race and to deliberate on the issues of disarmament.
Recalling the Final Docximent of the Tenth Special Session in which it was
underlined that the most immediate goal of disarmament is that of the elimination
of the danger of a nuclear war, ^/
Recalling also that, in the same document, it was recommended that the

U

7bid., para. U8.

8^/ Ibid., para. l8.

A/RES/33/91
Page 6

United Nations should increase the dissemination of information concerning the
arms race and disarmament with the full co-operation of its Member States, 9./
Noting that the only study on nuclear weapons carried out by the United
Nations, entitled Effects of the Possible Use of Nuclear Weapons and the Security
and Economic Implications for States of the Acquisition and Further Development of
These Ueapons, was published more than 10 years ago, 10/
Noting also that since then many important developments have taken place in
the nuclear arms sector.
Convinced that a broad study on various aspects of nuclear weapons carried
out by the United Nations would make a valuable contribution to the dissemination
of factual information and to international understanding of the issues involved,
1.
Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of qualified
experts, to carry out a comprehensive study providing factual information on
present nuclear arsenals, trends in the technological development of nuclearweapon systems, the effects of their use and the implications for international
security as well as for negotiations on disarmament of:
(a)
weapons ;

The doctrines of deterrence and other theories concerning nuclear

(b) The continued quantitative increase and qualitative improvement and
development of nuclear-vreapon systems ;
2.
Recommends that the study, while aiming at being as comprehensive as
possible, should be based on open material and such further information that
Member States may wish to make available for the purpose of the study;
3.
Invites all Governments to co-operate with the Secretary-General so
that the objectives of the study may be achieved;
U.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit the final report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.

86th plenary meeting
l6 December 1978

E
Study on all the aspects of regional disarmament
The General Assembly,
Concerned about the armaments race and the continued increase in expenditures
on armaments.
£/ Ibid., paras. 99 and 100.
10/ United Nations publication. Sales No. E.68.IX.1.

.

/ •••

a /r e s /33/91

Page 7

Recognizing the importance of pursuing every effort which might contribute
to progress towards general and complete disarmament under strict and effective
international control.
Mindful of the importaлce of the regional measures already adopted, of
studies already carried out, notably in the field of nuclear-weapon-free zones,
and of regional efforts undertaken on the nuclear and conventional levels, both
in the field of measures designed to increase confidence and in that of
disarmament and arms control.
Recalling its resolution 32/87 D of 12 December 1977» on the regional
aspects of disarmament.
Taking note of national contributions made in a.ccordance with the
aforementioned resolution.
Taking fully into account the decisions and recommendations contained in
the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session 11/ and the views expressed by
Member States at its thirty-third session,
1.
Decides to undertake a systematic study of all the aspects of
regional disarmament;
2.
Specifies in that connexion that the study shall cover, inter alia, the
following subjects:
(a) Basic conditions governing the regional approach, particularly from
the standpoint of security requirements ;
(b) Definition of measures which, on the initiative of the States concerned,
may lend themselves to a regional approach;

{ c ) Link between regional measures and the process of general and complete
disarmament ;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to carry out the study with the
assistance of a group of qualified governmental experts, appointed by him on a
balanced geographical basis, and to submit it to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fifth session;
U.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session a progress report on the work of the Group of Governmental
Experts on Regional Disarmament.

86th plenary meeting
l6 December 1978
П / Resolution S-lO/2.
/...

A/RES/33/91
Page 8

Non-stationing of nuclear weapons on the territories of States
where there are no such weapons at present
The General Assembly,
Conscious that a nuclear war would have devastating consequences for the
whole of mankind,
Desiring to promote the halting of the nuclear arms race.
Bearing in mind the clearly expressed intention of m.any States to prevent
the stationing of nuclear weapons on their territories.
Considering that the territorial limitation of the stationing of nuclear
weapons is a measure closely related to the maintenance of peace and security in
various regions and to the prevention of nuclear war.
Considering that the non-stationing of nuclear weapons on the territories of
States where there are no such weapons at present would constitute a step towards
the larger objective of the subsequent complete withdrawal of nuclear weapons
from the territories of other States,
Bearing in mind the desire to promote the establishment of nuclear-weaponfree zones in various regions of the world, on the initiative of the States of
the region,
1.
Calls upon all nuclear-weapon States to refrain from stationing nuclear
weapons on the territories of States where there are no such weapons at present;
2.
Calls upon all non-nuclear-weapon States which do not have nuclear
weapons on their territory to refrain from any steps which would directly or
indirectly result in the stationing of such weapons on their territories.

86th plenary meeting
l6 December 19T8

G
Committee on Disarmament
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that all the peoples of the world have a vital interest in the
success of disarmament negotiations,

/..

A/RES/33/91
Page 9

Recognizing also that in accordance with paragraph 28 of its resolution S-lO/2
of 30 June 1978, all States have the right to participate in disarmament
negotiations,
Recalling that in paragraph 113 of the same resolution it declared that, in
order to achieve maximum effectiveness in the sphere of disarmament, two kinds
of bodies were required: deliberative, in which all Member States should be
represented, and negotiating, which for the sake of convenience should have a
relatively small membership.
Recalling that the membership of the Committee on Disarmament is to be
reviewed at regular intervals in accordance with paragraph 120 of the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 12/
1.
Recommends that the first review of the membership of the Committee on
Disarmament should be completed, following appropriate consultations among Member
States, during the next special session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament ;
2.
Requests the Committee on Disarmament to consider the modalities of
the review of the membership of the Committee and to report on this subject to
the General Assembly during its thirty-fifth session;
3.
Requests the Committee on Disarmament to make arrangements for
interested States not members of the Committee, to submit to it written proposals
or working documents on measures of disarmament that are the subject of
negotiation in the Committee and to participate in the discussion of the subjectmatter of such proposals or working documents ;

k.
Reaffirms that States not members of the Committee, upon their request,
should be invited by it to express views in the Committee when the particular
concerns of those States are under discussion;
5.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its thirty-fifth session
an item relating to a review of the membership of the Committee on Disarmament.

86th plenary meeting
l6 December 1978

H
Prohibition of the production of fissionable material for
v;eapons purposes
The General Assembly,
Conscious that effective measures on a universeil basis are necessary in order

12/ Ibid.
/...

A/RES/33/91
Page 10

to facilitate the process of nuclear disarmament and the eventual complete
elimination of nuclear weapons,
Convinced that efforts to halt and reverse the nuclear arms race will
facilitate the prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons and other
nuclear explosive devices.
Considering that the acceptance by all States of binding and verifiable
controls in the form of full scope safeguards, on a non-discriminatory basis, on
all production of fissionable material, so as to ensure that it is not used for
nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, would contribute towards the
efforts to promote non-proliferation, limit further production of nuclear weapons
and facilitate nuclear disarmament.
Recalling with satisfaction that, in paragraph 50 of the Final Document of
the Tenth Special Session, 13/ it recognized that the achievement of nuclear
disarmam_ent would require, inter alia, the urgent negotiation of an agreement,
at an appropriate stage and with adequate measures of verification satisfactory
to the States concerned, on the cessation of the production of fissionable
material for weapons purposes ,
Requests the Committee on Disarm.ament, at an appropriate stage of its
implementation of the proposals set forth in the Programme of Action lU/ contained
in the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session, to consider urgently the
question of an adequately verified cessation and prohibition of the production
of fissionable material for nuclear weapons and other nuclear explosive devices
and to keep the General Assembly informed of the progress of that consideration.

86th plenary meeting
l6 December 197^^

I
Disarmament and international security
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2б02 E (XXIV) of l6 December 19б9, in which it
declared the decade of the 1970s a Disarmament Decade,
Reaffirming the purposes and objectives of the Decade,
Bearing in mind the close relations between disarmament, international
security and development.

13/ Ibid.
lU/ Ibid. , paras. U3-112.

A/RES/33/91
Page 11

Recalling its resolution Ъ'2.!Ъ'\ С of 12 December 1977, in which it requested
the Secretary-General to initiate a study on the interrelationship between
disarmament and international security, parallel with the study on the
interrelationship between disarmament and development.
Recalling also that, in paragraph 97 of its resolution S-10/2 of 30 June 1978,
it requested the Secretary-General, with the assistance of consultant experts
appointed by him, to continue the study of the relationship between disarmament
and international security,
1.
Considers that the maintenance of international security through the
United Nations in accordance with the provisions of the Charter is an essential
objective of the Disarmament Decade;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to expedite action for the continuation
of the study of the relationship between disarmament and international security,
with a view to submitting a progress report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session and the final report to the Assembly at its thirty-fifth
session.

86th plenary meeting
l6 December 1978
