S/PV.9004

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9004th meeting

Friday, 25 March 202, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Nusseibeh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Mr. Gallagher
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-30027 (E)
*2230027*

S/PV.9004

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Japan and the
Republic of Korea to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2022/263, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, China, France, Gabon, Ghana,
India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, Norway, Russian
Federation, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
The President (spoke in Arabic): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2627 (2022).
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements after the voting.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): The United States would like to express
its appreciation to Council members for this mandate
renewal and for the important discussions that brought
us here.
The Panel of Experts of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) continues to be
indispensable in investigating the unlawful weapons
programme and sanctions evasion efforts of the
2/18

25/03/2022

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Despite the
limitations of the coronavirus disease pandemic, the
Panel has nevertheless continued to effectively monitor
the implementation of these sanctions. We remain
grateful to the Panel for its invaluable contributions to
the 1718 regime.
I have often reiterated the importance of effectively
overseeing the implementation of the 1718 sanctions
regime in the Chamber, which is made possible by
the critical work of the Panel. This is particularly
essential in the light of the escalatory provocations of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea since the
beginning of the year. There is more that we could and
should do to empower the Panel and ensure that its work
can be best leveraged by all Member States to fully
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Although we were unable to come to an agreement
on how to do that in the resolution we voted on today
(resolution 2627 (2022)), I look forward to collaborating
with my fellow Council members and all Member
States towards our shared objective of holding the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea accountable for
its unlawful behaviour.
I want to end by expressing the United States
concern over the report leakage — a concern I know
many Council members share. I hope that all parties
protect the report until it is publicly released moving
forward. The United States also asked that the Panel
deliver the incident report requested by multiple
Council members on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s unlawful ballistic missile launches earlier
this year.
I look forward to working with the Council to
continue supporting the Panel’s mandate and fully
implementing the international sanctions regime
addressing the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
unlawful weapons of mass destruction and ballistic
missile programme.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China supports the Panel of Experts of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) in
performing its duties in strict adherence to its mandate.
There is a need for the Panel to improve its working
methods and carry out its work in an objective and
impartial manner with a view to genuinely helping
Member States to better implement Council resolutions
relating to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
22-30027

25/03/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

We voted in favour of resolution 2627 (2022),
renewing the Panel’s mandate. However, at the same
time, we note with concern that both the 2021 interim
and final reports of the Panel were leaked before their
public release, triggering false speculation in the
media. Some media outlets even blatantly cited detailed
material, as dictated by outgoing experts of the Panel,
describing the inner workings of both the Committee
and the Panel. China is seriously concerned about
that and believes it necessary for the Council to raise
the issue of leaked reports and the confidentiality of
information in this year’s resolution on the mandate
renewal and, accordingly, put forward a relevant
language proposal.
During consultations on the text, China’s views
were supported by a large number of Council members,
but the resolution penholder declined to take China’s
legitimate concerns on board. We hereby register our
deep discontent and regret.
The issue of leaked reports and confidentiality
has become a chronic problem for the Panel. If it is not
taken seriously and addressed in a timely manner, it
will severely damage the credibility of the Panel and
interfere with the normal functioning of the Committee.
That would ultimately add to the complexities of the
Council’s handling of issues relating to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and create a negative chain
reaction among other expert groups.
We therefore call on all parties in the Council to
pay greater attention to those issues. The Committee
and the Secretariat should strengthen their guidance of
and discipline within the Panel, urging members to act
strictly in accordance with their mandate and maintain
confidentiality both during and after their tenure with
a view to preventing future leaks. China reserves its
right to raise this issue, both in the Council and in the
Committee, and looks forward to the support of all
parties when required.
Regarding the issue of the Korean peninsula, I
will give a full presentation of China’s position later in
this meeting.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia supported the adoption of resolution
2627 (2022), extending the mandate of the Panel of
Experts of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006) on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.

S/PV.9004

At the same time, we regret that the penholders
were not able to consider our wishes and theproposals
of our colleagues on preventing leaks of expert reports
and on the investigation of such incidents. We hope
that this question will be considered in detail at the
Committee level, with the aim of adopting measures to
put an end to that flawed practice.
Ms. Juul (Norway): First, allow me to thank the
United States, as penholder of resolution 2627 (2022),
on the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006), for facilitating the process that led to the
renewal of the mandate of the 1718 Committee’s Panel
of Experts for one year. That process has given all
Council members an opportunity to contribute, and we
appreciate the fact that consensus has been reached on
a technical rollover.
I wish to express our great support and appreciation
for the Panel’s hard work, which provides the Committee
with concrete findings and recommendations. The
reports produced by the Panel continue to offer
invaluable insights and background information for
Committee members and United Nations Member
States alike.
The numerous missile launches of the past month,
reports from Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
State media on the development of new missile
technologies and the lack of international presence
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, due to
its self-imposed coronavirus disease restrictions, all
show that assessments by the Panel of Experts are more
crucial than ever. We therefore welcome the Panel’s
assessment of and reporting on incidents of possible
non-compliance with relevant Security Council
resolutions, including in the interim periods between
the submission of its interim and final reports.
I would also like to retreat the importance of the
confidentiality of the reports of the Panel of Experts
and related information before publication. Any leakage
of confidential information, especially the Panel’s
report, before the Committee has had an opportunity to
consider and discuss it only diminishes the credibility
of the work of the Committee and severely impacts its
effort to oversee the sanctions measures and address
non-compliance.
We once again thank Council members for their
valuable efforts to renew the mandate and extend our
sincere thanks to the entire Panel of Experts for its
continued work on the topic.

22-300273/18

S/PV.9004

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico supports the renewal of the mandate
of the Panel of Experts of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006). Its work has been
fundamental in monitoring the implementation of
Security Council resolutions related to the nuclear
and ballistic missile programmes of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
However, we regret that despite the efforts of the
penholder of resolution 2627 (2022) during negotiations
on the text, we were unable to reach agreement among
all members of the Council on explicit instructions
to the Panel of Experts to investigate and report, in a
timely manner, on incidents relating to the launch of
ballistic missiles, in addition to its interim and final
reports. That is especially relevant in light of the
missile-launching activities that have been reported
since the beginning of the year.
We believe that the Panel is the technical and
impartial body that should provide information
expeditiously on the type of missiles, the technology
and the capacities involved in those launches in order
to establish, without any room for doubt, whether those
actions violated the relevant Council resolutions.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: The State news agency of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has reported that
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea launched a
new type of intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM)
at approximately 2.34 p.m. local time on 24 March.
The missile, the so-called Hwasong-17, was reportedly
launched from Sunan, an area north of Pyongyang. it
covered a range of 1,090 kilometres and reached an
apogee around 6,200 kilometres. It made impact in
the sea within Japan’s exclusive economic zone. The
last time the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
conducted an ICBM test was on 29 November 2017.
The Secretary-General strongly condemns the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s latest ICBM
launch. It is a flagrant breach of the Democratic People’s
Republic’s own 2018 moratorium and a clear violation
of relevant Security Council resolutions. This launch
risks triggering a significant escalation of tensions in
the region and beyond.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has conducted 12 launches using ballistic-missile
technology this year alone. This is the fifth time in
4/18

25/03/2022

2022 that the Secretariat has been asked to brief the
Council in this regard.
According to public statements by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, the launches involved,
among other things, a test of so-called hypersonic
weapons, railway-borne missiles, an intermediate-range
ballistic missile and tests of systems related to the
development of so-called military reconnaissance
satellites. It should be recalled that, in resolution 2397
(2017), the Security Council reaffirmed its decisions
that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea shall
not conduct any further launches using ballistic-missile
technology.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea did
not issue airspace or maritime safety notifications
for any of these launches. The International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO) has repeatedly informed
the Democratic People’s Republic that unannounced
missile launches represent a serious risk to international
civil aviation. ICAO has also called on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to act in accordance with
the Convention on International Civil Aviation.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea also
appears to be actively pursuing its nuclear programme.
On 7 March, the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) reported that there
were
“ongoing indications consistent with the operation
of the 5-megawatt reactor at the Yongbyon site”.
The IAEA added that it continued to observe
construction activities at the Yongbyon site, including
the construction of an annex to the reported centrifuge
enrichment facility. The same day, satellite-imagery
analysis indicated that there was renewed activity at
the Punggye-ri nuclear-test site for the first time since
Pyongyang announced its closure and dismantlement in
2018. In pursuing its nuclear-capability and ballisticmissile programmes, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea is defying the repeated demands of the Council
to cease such activities. We have consistently conveyed
these concerns to the Democratic People’s Republic.
The Secretary-General reiterates the importance
of addressing humanitarian imperatives in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The United
Nations remains engaged and stands ready, along with
its humanitarian partners, to assist people in need in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, whose
vulnerability has likely increased since the pandemic
22-30027

25/03/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

outbreak and border closures in 2020. We reiterate
our call for the entry of international staff, including
the United Nations Resident Coordinator, and the
unimpeded entry of humanitarian supplies, to allow for
a timely and effective response.
The Secretary-General reaffirms his commitment
to working with all parties for sustainable peace and
the complete and verifiable denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula. He urges the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to comply with the decisions of the
Security Council, reset the course to dialogue and build
on previous diplomatic efforts.
Further, the United Nations welcomes the regular
contact and cooperation among the key parties on the
Korean peninsula. We commend the parties for their
willingness to engage in dialogue with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea without preconditions.
Let me close by reiterating that the unity of the
Security Council in this matter is essential to ease
tensions, overcome the diplomatic impasse and avoid a
negative action-reaction cycle.
The President (spoke
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
for her briefing.
The United States, along with Albania, France,
Ireland, Norway and the United Kingdom, calls for
today’s open meeting on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, the first since 2017, because of the
urgency of the escalating situation.
Let me be crystal clear: the United States absolutely
condemns the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
intercontinental-ballistic-missile (ICBM) launch on
24 March. This launch violated multiple Security
Council resolutions. It was an egregious and unprovoked
escalation and poses a threat to the global proliferation
regime and the entire international community. This
launch warrants an immediate response from the
Council.
This is the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
thirteenth ballistic-missile launch this year. The United
States and allies assessed that two of these previous
launches were also of ICBM systems.

S/PV.9004

The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
long-range ballistic-missile system can threaten nearly
every State Member of the United Nations. Although
the Democratic People’s Republic tried to mask recent
launches under the guise of supporting a reconnaissance
satellite, the 24 March launch unequivocally
demonstrates the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s intent to continue to advance its long-range
ballistic-missile systems. Council members may have
also seen media reports that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is reconstructing a nuclear-testing
site that has been closed since 2018. The imagery and
the analysis are alarming.
It is therefore clear that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has escalated its provocations with
impunity, while the Council has remained silent. And
it is clear that remaining silent, in the hope that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea would similarly
show restraint, is a failed strategy.
We must pivot to a successful one. The Security
Council must speak publicly and with one voice to
condemn the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
unlawful actions and encourage the country to return
to the negotiating table. The United States remains
committed to a diplomatic solution. We hope the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will accept our
repeated offers of dialogue, but we also cannot stand
idly by in the face of the Democratic People’s Republic’s
repeated Security Council resolution violations.
We have also heard recent calls for sanctions relief
for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, but why
should the Security Council reward bad behaviour? The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has broken its
self-imposed moratorium on launching ICBMs and has
repeatedly shown that it is more interested in advancing
its unlawful weapons programme than in investing in
the welfare of its own people. This is not my opinion,
and it is not a secret. At its 2021 Party Congress, the
regime itself openly outlined this strategy to develop
increasingly sophisticated and advanced weapons-ofmass-destruction and ballistic-missile capabilities.
Offering sanctions relief without substantive
diplomatic progress would only funnel more revenue to
the regime and accelerate the realization of its weaponsof-mass-destruction and ballistic-weapons goals. It
also sends the wrong message to other proliferators of
weapons of mass destruction, namely, that the Security
Council will reward them for repeatedly undermining
the non-proliferation regime.

22-300275/18

S/PV.9004

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Meanwhile, the sanctions regime has undeniably
restricted the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
unlawful weapons advancements, so now is not the time
to end our sanctions; now is the time to enforce them.
The United States calls on all Member States to fully
implement the existing Security Council resolutions,
and, because of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s increasingly dangerous provocations, the
United States will be introducing a draft Security
Council resolution under Chapter VII to update and
strengthen the sanctions regime.
In resolution 2397 (2017), which we adopted
unanimously, the Council decided that we would take
further action in the event of an ICBM launch by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, This is
precisely what happened, so now is the time to take
that action. No matter what sanctions regimes require
regular updating and maintenance to be effective, now
is the time to make these critical updates. I therefore
call on all my fellow Council members to approach
the negotiations on a text constructively towards our
shared goal of denuclearization.
This is not a bilateral issue. It is not a regional
issue. It is an issue for all of us. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s pursuit of weapons of
mass destruction and its ballistic-missile delivery
system pose a threat to every member of the global
community. History, especially recent history, has
shown us that Council silence and sanctions relief do
not work. Instead, we must come together, just like we
did in 2016 and 2017, to send an unequivocal message
to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that the
Security Council and the international community will
not ignore its flagrant violations of Security Council
resolutions and its wilful disregard for regional and
global stability
Let us act now before the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea escalates further to send the
message that the Security Council will not waver in
its responsibility to protect the world from weapons
of mass destruction and maintain international peace
and security.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her update. We are sad that it
confirms our assessment that the Pyongyang regime is
continuously, stubbornly, unilaterally and dangerously
escalating tension in the region, threatening its
neighbours, snubbing the Security Council and
violating the Council’s resolutions. This is intolerable.
6/18

25/03/2022

This is the thirteenth missile launch this year in the
very same pattern of defiance. In a previous meeting,
we asked: Is there a threshold of defiance and contempt
of this organ before we come together and speak
with one voice? The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea might think that the attention of the Council is
elsewhere. It is mistaken. We will condemn its reckless
actions, and we will not let this or any of its other
provocations go unnoticed.
The defiant attitude and renegade acts of the
Pyongyang regime must be met by a united and
resolved Council with an open and determined
response. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
must be told in clear terms that it cannot defy the
international community and that it cannot disrespect
Security Council resolutions. Resolutions are not to
be contemplated; they are to be implemented. That is
why Albania joined others in requesting this public
meeting today. The Council cannot continue to meet
behind closed doors. It has shown patience, but it has
been met with indifference by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Therefore, the regime must know
that we will not accept such behaviour and that it
will be held accountable for such flagrant breaches of
international law.
The failure of the Council to denounce such
unlawful acts will only serve to encourage the regime
in Pyongyang to continue to blackmail its neighbours,
threaten the region and endanger the wider world.
Inaction is tantamount to tacit approval. As we have
said before, it is a license to do more of the same. The
latest launch is a new level of provocation. It represents
another and repeated breach of its self-announced
moratorium of 2018. Albania strongly condemns such
provocative acts and aggressive actions. We call on
the regime to stop and return to the negotiation table,
urgently and without preconditions.
We have just adopted resolution 2627 (2022),
renewing the mandate of the Panel of Experts. The
repeated missile launches by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea require comprehensive and timely
analysis from the Panel of Experts and incident reports
of any breach of Security Council resolutions by the
regime. We look forward to working with the Panel in
this regard.
While the regime is investing millions in research
into its ballistic programmes, its population continues
to starve, isolated from the world, as it keeps its people
undereducated and inflicts untold poverty, pain and
22-30027

25/03/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

suffering upon women, men and children throughout the
country. The regime needs to also be held accountable
for its mistreatment of the population, human rights
violations, slavery and economic starvation.
The population needs food. The regime is giving
them weapons — weapons that go higher, faster and
further, starving the population and threatening the
region. But make no mistake — missiles will not make
North Korea any stronger or better. They will rather
make it more isolated and poorer, as is unfortunately
and regrettably the case.
The catastrophic humanitarian situation will not
be resolved by itself. The Pyongyang regime must
allow unimpeded entry of humanitarian assistance
in the country, which requires unfettered access for
international staff, including the Resident Coordinator.
It is high time for the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to return to the negotiation table for an
unconditional and meaningful dialogue through
diplomacy, not provocations.
We encourage all members of the Council to
show unity. That means issuing common, simple and
factual press elements. Our goal is and must remain a
complete, comprehensive, irreversible and verifiable
denuclearization of the entire Korean peninsula.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland):I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her useful briefing.
Ireland condemns yesterday’s launch of an
intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We are gravely
concerned about the ongoing, intensive and escalatory
series of launches by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea since the end of last year, in violation of Security
Council resolutions. The ICBM launch represents
a serious escalation in the continuing destabilizing
actions of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. It
is designed to raise tensions, threatening the peace and
stability of the Korean peninsula and the wider region,
as well as to undermine the global non-proliferation
architecture. It is a further, flagrant challenge to the
serious concerns of the international community and
the authority of the Council.
The launches are all the more worrisome given the
continuing nuclear activities of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. The Council has been silent too long.
It must speak now with a clear, strong and unified voice
to make clear to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea that it cannot continue down this path without

S/PV.9004

repercussions. We therefore strongly support a Council
press statement on the matter.
We must be clear that further ballistic missile tests
or a nuclear test are utterly unacceptable. We must
together urge the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to end its destabilizing activities. We must together
press the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
take up the good-faith offers of talks by the United
States and South Korea, without preconditions. And we
must together hold the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to its obligations to abandon its ballistic-missile
programme and its nuclear and other weapons of mass
destruction programmes in a complete, verifiable and
irreversible manner.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea should
also heed the Council’s long-standing calls to resume its
obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and the International Atomic
Energy Agency safeguards and to sign and ratify the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty.
The Council has been clear in resolution 2397
(2017) that it has a responsibility to act in response
to an ICBM launch, and we will need to look at
appropriate actions. We must counter the sophisticated
sanctions evasion efforts of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, which fund and assist procurement
for the country’s illegal programmes. The Council’s
resolutions, including those relating to the sanctions
regime established by resolution 1718 (2006), must be
fully and effectively enforced. The Panel of Experts of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) has repeatedly, with detailed evidence, set out
important recommendations, including on designations
of the vessels and entities involved and the need to
update relevant control lists. We must act urgently on
these recommendations.
Finally, we again urge the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to respond to the concerns and
offers of assistance from the international community
regarding the dire humanitarian situation in the
country. We urge the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to allow access for the United Nations and
other humanitarian actors to assess needs and provide
appropriate assistance.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has,
over the past 30 years, prioritized its illegal military
programmes over the livelihoods, well-being and rights
of its own citizens, with disastrous consequences for its
own people.

22-300277/18

S/PV.9004

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

It is clear that there must be a diplomatic and
peaceful resolution to the issues on the Korean
peninsula. Unfortunately, it appears that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea alone does not understand
this. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must
respond concretely and credibly to the concerns of the
international community. It will then find the Security
Council in a position to reciprocate with concrete
measures. It is, as it has always been, in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s hands.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
France condemns in the strongest terms the
launch of an intercontinental ballistic missile by North
Korea on 24 March. This launch represents a threat to
international peace and security. It is a new violation of
the Council’s resolutions. This provocation is the most
serious in nearly five years. It is the twelfth series of
launches since the beginning of the year. By ending the
moratorium on long-range missiles, the North Korean
regime has clearly chosen escalation.
It is essential that the Council unanimously
condemn this provocation. North Korea has just tested
a new intercontinental ballistic missile that is probably
more powerful than those tested in 2017. The Council
must act. We cannot allow a violation of this magnitude
to go unanswered. Doing nothing would pose a
major risk to regional stability and the international
non-proliferation architecture.
Since the adoption of resolution 1718 (2006) in
2006, North Korea has steadily updated its ballistic
arsenal. At the same time, it has strengthened its nuclear
programme. We must recall that North Korea has
already conducted six nuclear tests and has announced
its intention to develop tactical nuclear weapons. We are
very concerned about reports of construction activities
at the Punggye-ri nuclear testing site.
In the face of these repeated provocations, it would
not make sense to ease sanctions. What is needed is to
put in place a sanctions regime that is stronger and more
effective. Currently, North Korea is circumventing
these sanctions. It is finding ways to finance its weapons
programmes. We should therefore update the sanctions
regime, including in new areas, such as on cyber issues,
which allows North Korea to obtain information and
currency on the order of hundreds of millions of euros.
That must be stopped.
8/18

25/03/2022

France urges North Korea to commit to a process
of complete, verifiable and irreversible dismantling
of its weapons of mass destruction programmes. We
also call for a resumption of dialogue. All actors in the
region should invest in this. North Korea must seize the
proposals made in this regard.
In conclusion, I stress our concern about the
humanitarian situation in North Korea. We regret that
the North Korean regime continues to use the bulk
of its limited resources to develop its proliferation
programmes instead of meeting the basic needs of
its people.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.
Norway strongly condemns the launch of an
intercontinental ballistic missile by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea on 24 March.
The continued development of nuclear weapons
and ballistic missiles by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is a direct threat to regional and
international peace and security and is in violation
of several Security Council resolutions. We deeply
regret that this latest launch — along with the tests on
27 February and 5 March — leaves no doubt that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has ended its
moratorium on such tests. It also falls into a pattern of
numerous missile tests over the past months, including
a variety of missiles and technologies. These are cause
for great concern.
We continue to stress that the Government of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must comply
fully with its international obligations, reverse its
course and rejoin the international non-proliferation
regime through the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and International Atomic Energy
Agency safeguards.
The behaviour and threats of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea have reached a new
magnitude, and we are concerned that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea will continue to escalate
its illegal activities. Previous reports by the Panel of
Experts Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006) show the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s high level of commitment to sustaining and
further developing its weapons of mass destruction
programmes. The current path not only threatens
international peace and security, but also aggravates
22-30027

25/03/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

an already deteriorating economic, humanitarian and
human rights situation within the country.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s desire
to develop nuclear capacities and missile systems does
not contribute to the future of the North Korean people.
It keeps them stuck in the past.
We are profoundly sad to see that the Government
continues to channel its resources to weapons
development instead of delivering basic services to
its own people. We call on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to end its self-imposed blockade
and allow the United Nations, its Resident Coordinator
and other international organizations to re-enter and
resume their humanitarian work. And we call on
North Korea to respond to repeated offers of dialogue
and to take concrete steps to abandon its weapons of
mass destruction and ballistic missile programmes in a
complete, verifiable and irreversible manner.
Until concrete steps are taken, the sanctions
measures imposed by the Security Council must remain
in force and be fully implemented by all States.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I join others in thanking Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo for her briefing.
The United Kingdom condemns the test of an
intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) by North
Korea on 24 March, as well as tests of new ICBM
capabilities on 27 Feb and 5 March. This year alone,
13 ballistic missiles have been launched across 10
sets of tests — each a violation of Security Council
resolutions. We are deeply concerned by the increased
tempo of these launches and the growing capability
they represent. Let there be no doubt — the clear
threat that North Korea poses to international security
is increasing.
These violations of Security Council resolutions
should be met with a firm and united response from the
Council. The last time North Korea launched ICBMs
in 2017, the Council responded decisively by adopting
resolution 2371 (2017). We look to the Security Council
to display the same unity and resolve to protect the
safety of this and future generations as it displayed then.
We look forward to constructive discussions on further
measures proposed by the United States of America.
We should urgently therefore consider further
steps that the Security Council can take, including
updated and targeted sanctions, to disrupt North
Korea’s unlawful testing and illicit proliferation.

S/PV.9004

We call on all Member States to implement fully the
Security Council’s resolutions and enforce sanctions
unanimously adopted in order to limit North Korea’s
illicit nuclear and ballistic missile programmes.
As the North Korean Government continues to pour
resources into weapons programmes, the humanitarian
situation in the country may be worsening. The United
Kingdom is clear that the Council’s measures against
these illicit weapons programmes, including sanctions,
are not targeted at the North Korean people. We fully
support the delivery of humanitarian aid to the most
vulnerable in North Korean society. We call upon North
Korea to allow United Nations humanitarian workers to
carry out an independent needs assessment and to allow
aid to flow freely into the country.
We urge North Korea to refrain from further
provocations, engage meaningfully with the United
States in dialogue and abandon all of its nuclear
weapons and existing nuclear programmes in a
complete, verifiable and irreversible manner.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting today. We thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
We also welcome the participation of Japan and the
Republic of Korea in today’s meeting.
We have noted the concerns expressed by countries
of the region on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s launch of an intercontinental ballistic missile
(ICBM). India deplores the country’s launch of an
ICBM. It is a violation of the resolutions of the Security
Council relating to the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and affects the peace and security of the
region and beyond. Further, the launch contravenes
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s own selfdeclared moratorium against the launch of ICBMs
and goes against the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula, an objective endorsed by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea itself.
We call for the full implementation of all Security
Council resolutions related to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
The Council has met several times since the
beginning of the year to discuss the series of missile
launches by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
In that context, we would like to recall our request to
the Panel of Experts under the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) for incident reports
on those launches in the context of the relevant Council

22-300279/18

S/PV.9004

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

resolutions. We hope that the Panel will soon issue
reports in that connection.
India also believes that there is a pressing need
to address the proliferation of nuclear and missile
technologies related to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in our region. These linkages have
an adverse impact on peace and security in the region,
including on India.
India supports dialogue to resolve the issues on the
Korean peninsula.
India is sensitive to the humanitarian situation in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. That is why
we granted humanitarian assistance of $1 million for
its people in the form of anti-tuberculosis medicines,
routed through the World Health Organization. We
also note that the 1718 Sanctions Committee has been
extending approvals for humanitarian assistance, as
and when they are received.
Finally, India reiterates its continued support to
denuclearization efforts in order to achieve peace and
security on the Korean peninsula.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
listened carefully to the briefing of Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo.
The situation on the Korean peninsula has long
been an important item on the Council’s agenda. Over
the past few years, we have witnessed, by and large,
detente on the peninsula thanks to the efforts of various
parties concerned. It is a hard-won achievement.
The leaders of the United States and the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea have met a number of times
since 2018. Through those meetings, they reached
important consensus on improving their bilateral
relations and advancing the peninsula’s denuclearization
process. It was on that basis that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea pledged a moratorium
on nuclear tests and test launches of intercontinental
ballistic missiles (ICBMs), which marked a major step
forward towards the peninsula’s denuclearization.
However, beginning in 2021 and, in particular,
in May 2021, the dialogue between the United States
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
became deadlocked and has remained that way. The
denuclearization process was marking time and more
variables were added to the mix, causing tensions to
rise and reversing the detente.
10/18

25/03/2022

As the peninsula’s next door neighbour, China
has been consistent in advocating and promoting the
peninsula’s peace and stability, denuclearization and
the approach of seeking a solution through dialogue
and consultation. We had hoped that the United States
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea would
actively pursue dialogue and engagement in search
of an effective solution to manage and settle their
differences. Regrettably, that did not occur. Days and
months elapsed while the relevant parties failed to take
concrete, practical actions in response to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s justified concerns — other
than speaking about “talks without preconditions”.
Now that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has announced an ICBM test launch, China is
concerned about how things are evolving. Under the
current circumstances, we call on the parties concerned
to stay calm, exercise restraint, stay on the right track of
dialogue and consultation and avoid taking any action
that may exacerbate tensions and lead to misjudgments.
The direct parties to the peninsula issue, namely
the United States and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, should re-engage in direct talks without delay.
It is right and proper for the United States side to show
its goodwill, take actions that are of practical relevance
and work harder to stabilize the situation, build mutual
trust and relaunch dialogue.
Given the evolving situation before us, the
international community should resort to prudence
and reason on the peninsula issue and play a positive,
constructive role in bringing about a political solution.
First, we should do all we can to maintain the
peninsula’s peace and stability, which must be treasured.
Right now, all is not quiet on the international front. No
party should take any action that could lead to greater
tensions, and the peninsula cannot afford the risk of any
dramatic change, much less a reversal of the situation,
with dire consequences.
What needs to happen now, as a matter of urgency,
is for the parties concerned to actively seek a political
way out of the impasse on the basis of existing
understandings in the light of the latest developments.
China calls on the parties to put the greater good of
peace and stability on the peninsula first, speak and
act with caution, pursue dialogue and consultation,
take the dual-track approach guided by the principle
of moving forward in phases, with synchronized steps,
and work tirelessly to denuclearize the peninsula and
build a peace mechanism thereon.
22-30027

25/03/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Secondly, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s justified concerns must be addressed. The
peninsula issue, fraught with ups and downs, has
remained unresolved for decades. There is a reason
that the situation has come to where it is today. The
crux of the matter is that external security threats to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea have persisted
for decades, and its justified security concerns have
remained unaddressed throughout the process. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has made it
clear that
“following the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea-United States summits, the United States
side, instead of honouring its promise to stop joint
military exercises with the Republic of Korea, went
ahead and deployed its strategic nuclear weapons
in the surrounding areas of the Korean peninsula,
putting the security of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in serious jeopardy”.
Those pronouncements by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea ought to be taken seriously by the
parties concerned and the Council ought to consider
how to accommodate the country’s justified security
concerns, in keeping with the principle of indivisible
security.
Thirdly, the United States and the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea must resume direct talks
as soon as possible. Facts have shown time and again
that dialogue and diplomacy up front is the only way
to avert a crisis. Allowing the situation to go down a
slippery slope is not in anyone’s interest.
Starting in 2018, there was a major positive
turnaround in the peninsula situation. Regrettably,
a range of steps taken by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea were not duly reciprocated. This is
not consistent with the principle of “action for action”
that forms part of their consensus. It also reveals all the
offers of dialogue for what they are — mere jingles that
ring hollow. Where things are headed going forward
depends, to a large extent, on what the United States
is going to do. Is it going to come up with concrete
actions that can actually solve problems, or is it going
to continue using the issue as a bargaining chip in its
geopolitical strategy?
The United States must not continue to brush
aside the justified demands of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. It should offer an attractive proposal
to pave the way for an early resumed dialogue.

S/PV.9004

Fourthly, it is imperative to interpret and implement
the Security Council resolutions on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea in a comprehensive manner.
Those resolutions should be implemented completely
and accurately. Advancing a political solution and
easing the sanctions at appropriate times are also
important aspects of the resolutions. The fact that the
issue on the peninsula is deadlocked is to some degree
attributable to the absence of effective implementation
of certain provisions therein. The parties concerned
should take this issue seriously and take practical
actions rather than put one-sided emphasis on the
sanctions provisions.
The Council should play a constructive role when
it comes to the issue of the peninsula. It should not
stress the need for sanctions and pressurization to the
exclusion of all other considerations. The China-Russia
draft resolution on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea serves one purpose and one purpose only, that
is, to ease the humanitarian and livelihood situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, create
an enabling atmosphere for greater trust between the
parties with a view to dialogue, and thereby give rise
to an impetus for a political solution to the issue of
the peninsula. The draft resolution is still valid. We
encourage all parties to give it positive consideration
and the support that it deserves.
It is in the common interests of all countries to
safeguard the international nuclear non-proliferation
regime. At this important juncture, where the Korean
peninsula nuclear issue persists, certain countries,
ignoring the concerns of the international community,
stubbornly went ahead with cooperation on nuclearpowered submarines, which poses a serious risk of
nuclear proliferation. That runs counter to the purposes
and principles of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, harms regional peace and
stability and undermines the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime.
China urges the countries concerned to faithfully
fulfil their non-proliferation obligations and to play
a constructive role in promoting the resolution of
hot-button non-proliferation issues and maintaining
regional peace and stability.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo.
I wish to start to thank by expressing our concern
about the need for the Security Council to meet once

22-3002711/18

S/PV.9004

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

again, this time in a public meeting, in response to
the launch of another ballistic missile, yesterday, on
24 March, by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. This is yet another provocation, although it is
qualitatively different because we are talking about
an intercontinental longer-range missile than those
previously launched.
Mexico condemns in the strongest terms the
launching of missiles in violation of the decisions of the
Security Council. Such actions, far from contributing to
the possibility of a diplomatic solution, only fuel distrust
and undermine regional security. The implications for
international peace and security of that launch cannot
be looked at in an isolated manner. We wish to express
our concern about the pattern of actions that simply
confirm that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea is continuing to move ahead with its intended
actions and to develop its technological capacity for
military purposes.
It is clear that the sanctions that the Council has
imposed to curb the nuclear and ballistic programme
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are not
working, as has, unfortunately, been confirmed by
the reports of the Panel of Experts. The International
Atomic Energy Agency has also reported the restart of
nuclear activity, with resulting obvious concern on the
part of the international community.
The Security Council has a duty to uphold its
decisions and to restrict all pathways to the acquisition
and proliferation of nuclear and missile technology.
That is why I wish to reiterate my country’s commitment
to the full implementation of the sanctions regime. I
also appeal to all Member States to implement the
relevant resolutions more strictly and to adhere to
established mechanisms.
We call for maximum restraint and stress the need
for dialogue with the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea leading to the complete, verifiable and irreversible
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. Actors with
influence, including members of the Council, should
spare no effort to establish such a dialogue. We also
believe that in addition to bilateral contacts, it would be
advisable to explore multilateral formats involving all
concerned regional actors.
I conclude by recalling what was said by former
Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon, namely, that there
are no right hands for bad weapons. I also take this
opportunity to reiterate our call to abide unequivocally
by the commitments undertaken in the area of
12/18

25/03/2022

disarmament by those States that possess nuclear
weapons, with a view to creating a world free from
nuclear weapons.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this open meeting.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing to the Council and welcome
the representatives of Japan and the Republic of Korea
to this meeting.
We are meeting today under heavy clouds of
escalating tensions on the Korean peninsula and in
the wider North-East Asia region. Those tensions
have been occasioned not only by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s launch of the Hwasong-17
intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) yesterday but
also by its 11 previous launches of ballistic missiles this
year alone.
The fact that the Council has agreed to hold an
open meeting after six closed consultations since the
beginning of the year shows the grave concern that
the international community has in connection with
the situation.
The present missile launch represents an end to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s selfimposed moratorium on ICBM tests and the first longrange ICBM test since 2017. The implications of this
new development for international peace and security,
including for the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s immediate neighbours, are grave, and we all
must acknowledge that. Equally worrying is the fact
that the launch was carried out without regard for
aviation or maritime safety.
Ghana is therefore gravely concerned about this
current launch, which is in blatant violation of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s international
obligations as expressed in multiple Security Council
resolutions. The reported intention of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to develop a nuclearwar deterrent in preparation for a long-standing
confrontation with another Member State runs
counter to its obligations under the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons regime and the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which
enjoin all Member States to be peace-loving.
The actions of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea have heightened tensions on the Korean peninsula
at a time when the international community is focused
on finding a pathway for dialogue and diplomacy to
22-30027

25/03/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV.9004

address the worrying developments in Ukraine and
their consequences.

needs of the people of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea are addressed.

In that regard, we urge the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to refrain from further missile test
launches and to take the urgent steps necessary to ease
tensions in the region. We also reiterate our call on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to adhere to the
relevant Security Council resolutions. The world can ill
afford to have multiple crises at this time, when we are
still grappling with many deaths on both sides of the war
in Ukraine, the displacement of more than 10 million
people from that country and the transmission of the
shocks of food and energy insecurity across several
parts of the world, with an associated rise in the cost
of living.

Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing and
welcome the participation of the Republic of Korea and
Japan.

Ghana therefore reiterates its call for the resumption
of a constructive and credible dialogue between the
relevant parties and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to find an enduring, comprehensive and
peaceful solution to the issues on the Korean peninsula,
in a manner that recognizes regional and global security
concerns as well as those of the parties.
In that regard, we encourage the United States
to sustain its offer of dialogue with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea without preconditions and
urge the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
accept the offer in good faith, in support of the cause
of peace.
It is worth noting that while tensions on the Korean
peninsula are high, the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continues to be
dire. Ghana commends the Council and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006) for their proactive approach in addressing
the humanitarian situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea within the framework of exemptions
in the existing sanctions regime, and it calls on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to streamline its
internal processes to enable the much-needed medical
and other humanitarian supplies to reach the people
of the country. We also urge the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to allow United Nations humanitarian
agencies back into the country. We support the efforts
of the United Nations system to re-establish the banking
channel in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
We hope that the Council and other relevant parties
will be able to act in a manner that preserves peace
while, at the same time, ensuring that the humanitarian

Kenya is gravely concerned about the most recent
intercontinental ballistic missile test launch by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, in clear
violation of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
This thirteenth test launch since the beginning of the
year clearly demonstrates an escalation of the situation
on the Korean peninsula. Indeed, regrettably, the
prospects for resuming the testing of nuclear weapons
are increasing by the day. Moreover, the launches
carried out, without notifying the relevant maritime
and aviation regulatory bodies, pose a serious threat to
maritime and air safety.
The successive provocative acts are driving the
region into an arms race, with attendant destabilization
effects and grave implications for global peace and
security. With the prevailing security situation already
posing serious socioeconomic and security challenges,
particularly in developing countries, the international
community can ill afford another crisis. Regrettably,
the escalation of armaments also diverts resources from
the much-needed social protection and development
for the people of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.
Kenya calls on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to halt any further test launches and recommit
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. We reiterate that the only path acceptable to
the international community is that of genuine dialogue,
without preconditions. It is dialogue that considers the
interests and perceptions of threat of all parties in the
region. In that regard, Kenya urges the international
community to help restart diplomatic efforts in order
to find a lasting solution to the threat on the Korean
peninsula, for the sake of global security.
Amid that development, we call upon all parties
concerned to spare a thought for the humanitarian plight
of approximately 11 million citizens of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea who are in need. Both
sides have a responsibility to ensure that any actions
they take do not exacerbate the suffering of the people.
However, it is up to the Democratic People’s Republic

22-3002713/18

S/PV.9004

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

of Korea to demonstrate its commitment in that regard
by ceasing its ballistic missile programme.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.
Yesterday, 24 March, North Korea launched an
unidentified projectile. It was the thirteenth such launch
since the start of the year, which demonstrates not only
an increase in the frequency of the launches but also an
increase in the power and range of projectiles. With that
development, North Korea has followed through on its
threat to renege on its commitment to its moratorium
on long-range missile testing, which could undermine
the confidence-building measures agreed by the sides
during negotiations in 2017.
Gabon condemns the launches, as well as the
use of weapons or military material that could have
indiscriminate effects. I reiterate my country’s
commitment to international conventions on nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation, in particular the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, as
well as to respect for Council resolutions aimed at
preserving international peace and security.
My country is very concerned about the exponential
deterioration of the international security climate,
which, in the light of the current situation, points to
an arms race, in particular in unconventional arms.
That further strengthens our conviction that weapons
that are manufactured to be used in conflicts are not
instruments of peace and security and, by nature,
cannot provide sufficient deterrence to contribute to
international peace and security; quite the opposite.
Lessons must be urgently drawn from the inability
of sanctions to offer an appropriate and effective
response, given the potential threat that missile
launches pose in this densely populated area, as well as
the extreme suffering of the civilian population in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.

25/03/2022

Russia stands against any military activity that
poses a threat to the security of the Korean peninsula
and the States of North-East Asia. We deplore the
recent developments in the region. We are convinced
that the quest for mutually acceptable diplomatic
solutions is the only way to peacefully resolve the
issues on the Korean peninsula and establish a stable
security mechanism in North-East Asia. That should be
our main goal, which, once achieved, will normalize
the situation in the region.
We note with regret that, over the past four years,
the Security Council has been unable to respond to the
dismantling by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea of its nuclear test site, as well as to its compliance
with the moratorium on nuclear and intercontinental
ballistic testing. In each if its resolutions on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea from 2006
onwards, the Council has expressed its readiness to
review the restrictions, depending on the level of
Pyongyang’s compliance with the provisions of the
relevant documents.
Regrettably, to date, the Security Council has only
strengthened these restrictions, while ignoring the
positive signals from North Korea. Therefore, to a large
extent, the current developments are but the consequence
of the short-sightedness of some colleagues present
today, who are unable to move beyond the limits of a
sanctions-based paradigm, which for several years has
been unable to guarantee security in the region. We
have seen no other viable initiatives from them.
We believe that the further strengthening of
sanctions against the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea would overstep the framework of measures
that curb the funding of banned nuclear and missile
programmes and expose the people of North Korea to
unacceptable socioeconomic and humanitarian turmoil.

My country calls on the various parties to resume
dialogue on the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula
and to focus on finding a diplomatic and peaceful
solution to the crisis. For us, that is the only credible
option to bring about development and peace in
the region.

We remind our American colleagues that
negotiations are a two-way street. There is no point
waiting for Pyongyang to disarm without conditions,
when in return it receives only unsubstantiated
promises as guarantees. The establishment of new
military alliances in the region, such as the trilateral
security pact among Australia, the United Kingdom,
and the United States, casts serious doubts about the
good intentions of those countries, including from the
perspective of Pyongyang. Such alliances do not help
foster dialogue.

Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.

We have repeatedly stressed that it is essential to
create spaces that provide integrated and indivisible

14/18

22-30027

25/03/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

security. Lasting results cannot be achieved if the
legitimate security concerns of the States of the region
are not taken into account.
The institutions and mechanisms of the United
Nations and the Security Council should be utilized to
support settlement processes and intra-Korean dialogue
and should not be an obstacle to them. Only then would
we be able to discuss the effective resolution of the
problems that have accumulated in the region, including
the nuclear issue, on the basis of dialogue and mutually
acceptable agreements. Sanctions and pressure will
hardly help to achieve that.
Further resentment has also been caused by the
so-called autonomous secondary sanctions against the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and other States
that have been imposed by Washington and its allies, in
circumvention of and in addition to Security Council
sanctions. Unilateral restrictions undermine not only
the sovereignty and legal interests of Member States,
contradicting the norms and rules of international
trade, but also the integrity of the limitations agreed
within the Security Council.
It is unacceptable to attempt to enshrine those
restrictions through the Security Council’s authority or
that of its Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006). In that connection, we call on all parties to
exercise restraint and reaffirm their readiness to renew
dialogue in line with the agreements that have already
been reached and the commitments entered into.
A Russian-Chinese political and humanitarian
draft is still on the table. It would help provide the
parties with the impetus to enter into negotiations. We
wish to note that the lack of progress on the political
track — part of which could be served by the draft
resolution I have just mentioned — would then threaten
to further exacerbate tensions in the Korean peninsula,
which is unfortunately what we have witnessed in
recent months.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Let me thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for once again coming to
brief the Council on this file.
Brazil strongly condemns the launch of an
intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. That is
a flagrant violation of multiple Security Council
resolutions and a clear breach of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s own moratorium on ICBM
launches. In January, North Korea broke the record

S/PV.9004

for most launches in a single month. Now, it appears
to have broken yet another ominous record, as that
seems to be the longest-reaching missile ever launched
by Pyongyang.
The pattern of escalation is self-evident. First
came multiple short-range ballistic missile launches,
then intermediate-range artifacts. A few weeks ago,
we witnessed alleged launches of reconnaissance
satellites, which were rehearsals for yesterday’s launch.
Furthermore, it is the responsibility of the Council to
avoid any risks of nuclear testing in violation of its
resolutions and international treaties. The issue becomes
all the more pressing at a time when different countries
are emphasizing the relevance of nuclear weapons in
their defence doctrines and deterrence strategies.
The Security Council must work tirelessly
and transparently in order to pave the way for the
de-escalation of tensions and for a sustainable solution
to the matter. It is our common responsibility to
halt any further escalation. The Council should be
proactive and point in the direction of dialogue and
effective negotiations.
We call upon the key actors in the region to
redouble efforts to engage with Pyongyang with a
view to bringing the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea back to the negotiating table. The Council
should stand ready to support such a course of action.
In the same vein, we cannot condone inaction on the
issue of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
nuclear programme. We must strive to find a platform
for dialogue to push forward the realization of the
transparent, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula.
We avail ourselves of this opportunity to once
again call upon the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to review its nuclear status, join the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as a non-nuclearweapon State, and accede to the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty without delay.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United Arab Emirates.
I thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, for
her valuable briefing.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
continues to demonstrate its disregard for international
law by resuming missile tests in September. The

22-3002715/18

S/PV.9004

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has launched 13
ballistic missiles since the beginning of this year alone,
including the recent test of an intercontinental ballistic
missile. Accordingly, the United Arab Emirates
condemns, in the strongest terms, those missile tests,
which constitute a flagrant violation of international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. We
also support the statement issued by the SecretaryGeneral yesterday regarding the recent escalation by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
While we express our deep concern over the
continued escalation by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, in the absence of deterrent measures
by the Security Council for those violations, we stress
the importance of the Council’s unity in responding to
that dangerous escalation, which, we repeat, undermines
regional security on the Korean peninsula and affects
international security and stability.
At this critical juncture, my country reiterates the
importance of pursuing peaceful solutions and giving
priority to dialogue and diplomatic endeavours to avoid
further escalation. In that regard, we commend the
diplomatic efforts to resume dialogue and we strongly
urge the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
respond positively to those endeavours and return to
the negotiating table without preconditions. We also
emphasize the importance, in this critical situation, of
the key parties finding a common formula to define an
acceptable framework for moving forward.
While the decision-makers in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea continue to devote their
country’s limited resources to developing nuclear and
missile capabilities, the people of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea continue to suffer in the
difficult humanitarian situation caused largely by their
country’s policies. We therefore urge the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to alleviate the growing
human suffering of its people by providing for their
basic needs and necessities and by cooperating with the
United Nations to allow its humanitarian personnel to
return to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and carry out their work.
In conclusion, my country reiterates that
compliance with and the full implementation of Security
Council resolutions by all Member States remain an
essential pillar for maintaining international peace
and security. For its part, the United Arab Emirates
affirms its continued cooperation with members of the
Security Council to address regional and international
16/18

25/03/2022

proliferation threats. The United Arab Emirates also
understands concerns related to the development and
supply of ballistic missiles and their role in undermining
regional security. The Council should be able to address
those concerns.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
The representative of the United States of America
has asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Some of our colleagues are trying to frame
this as a United States-Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea problem; it is a threat that impacts all of us and it
is our collective responsibility to respond.
In terms of the humanitarian impact of sanctions,
the experts have repeatedly told us that the primary
barrier to sending humanitarian assistance into the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is the country’s
self-imposed border closures, not international
sanctions, as some of our colleagues have alleged.
The United States remains committed to addressing
the humanitarian situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, which is why we have offered to
discuss those issues with the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea directly. However, we have yet to
receive a response. We have also continued to support
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) in its swift processing of sanctions exemptions
to aid organizations and it is why we are now working
closely with the Secretariat to establish a reliable
banking channel.
We call on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to commit to the well-being of its own people
by respecting human rights, defunding its unlawful
weapons-of-mass-destruction and ballistic-missile
programmes and prioritizing the needs of vulnerable
North Koreans.
The draft resolution that China and Russia
have proposed is predicated on their assessment
that Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is
showing goodwill through a moratorium, as
understood by the People’s Republic of China and
Russia,
on
intermediate-range
ballistic-missile
and intercontinental-ballistic-missile (ICBM) and
nuclear tests. In addition to its 30 January launch, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has now ignored
its own moratorium on ICBM tests three times, with the
27 February, 5 March and 24 March ICBM launches. In
the light of these escalating provocations and a return
22-30027

25/03/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

to testing long-range systems, the purported impetus
for the draft resolution is no longer valid. We need
quickly to return to strengthening the sanctions regime
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), and not
to considering sanctions relief.
And, finally, on the new enhanced trilateral
security partnership known as AUKUS, although I
do not want to stray from the serious matter at hand,
I do want to correct the erroneous claims about it. The
AUKUS initiative is to provide conventionally armed
nuclear-powered submarines to Australia. It does not
include nuclear-armed submarines. The Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) does
not prohibit naval nuclear propulsion, and Australia
does not and will not seek nuclear weapons consistent
with its NPT obligations as a non-nuclear-weapon
State. We take our NPT commitments very seriously,
which also drives our strong support for the complete
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of the United Kingdom has asked for the floor to make
a further statement.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
As we have discussed, North Korea’s illegal nuclear
and ballistic-missile programmes are in violation of
numerous Security Council resolutions. The trilateral
cooperation between Australia, the United States and
the United Kingdom will be fully consistent with the
three parties’ respective non-proliferation obligations
and will be pursued in a manner that preserves the
integrity of the non-proliferation regime. We remain
fully committed to peace, stability and prosperity in
the Indo-Pacific and worldwide.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.

S/PV.9004

international community. It is also a significant threat
to the global non-proliferation regime. This launch
means that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has reneged on its own commitment to the moratorium
on ICBM tests that it had announced in April 2018.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s strong statement
yesterday and look forward to a firm and united response
by the Security Council. My delegation also expresses
his support for the United States initiative to pursue
a new draft resolution in response to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s ICBM launch and calls on
other members of the Council to join in this effort.
Despite the international community’s repeated
calls for de-escalation and dialogue, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has, in the last couple
of months, continued its provocative activities, as
evidenced through countless ballistic-missile launches.
Reports on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s movements to restore its nuclear-test site and
its ongoing nuclear-related activities, are all deeply
concerning. They must stop immediately.
Throughout the past few years, my Government has
spared no effort to restart dialogue with North Korea to
seek progress towards the complete denuclearization of
and lasting peace on the Korean peninsula. We have
offered to hold dialogue at the time and place and in the
format that North Korea prefers. My Government has
also expressed its willingness to support North Korea
in responding to the global pandemic. Regrettably, all
of these sincere efforts have been met not only with a
cold silence, but also with continued provocations. Let
me be clear. No one harbours any hostile policy towards
Pyongyang, nor is there any reason to do so.

Mr. Cho Hyun (Republic of Korea): Let me begin by
thanking the President for convening today’s emergency
meeting of the Security Council. I appreciate this
opportunity to participate in the Council’s discussions
to address the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
intercontinental-ballistic-missile (ICBM) launch on
24 March. I also thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.

We strongly urge the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to refrain from further provocations, fulfil
its obligations under the relevant Security Council
resolutions and engage in meaningful dialogue with
the Republic of Korea and the United States towards
the denuclearization of and lasting peace on the Korean
peninsula. We also call for all States Members of the
United Nations to fully implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions and continue to support a peaceful
and diplomatic solution for the Korean peninsula.

The Republic of Korea condemns in the strongest
terms the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
ICBM launch, which constitutes a flagrant violation of
multiple Security Council resolutions. It poses a serious
threat to the Korean peninsula, the region and the

My Government firmly believes that dialogue and
cooperation is the only possible way forward, regardless
of the hurdles we face. Our commitment to improving
inter-Korean relations remains unchanged. The door for
dialogue remains open.

22-3002717/18

S/PV.9004

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

We strongly urge the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to choose the path of engagement and
cooperation instead of confrontation and escalation.
The Republic of Korea, along with the international
community, stands ready to work constructively with
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to make
a better future for us all, if the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is willing to do so as well.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I also thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing.
Yesterday, North Korea launched a ballistic missile
in the intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) class,
which flew an estimated 1,100 kilometres with an
apogee of an estimated 6,000 kilometres, the longest
reach of any North Korean launch to date. It splashed
down in the Japanese exclusive economic zone (EEZ),
just 150 kilometres from Japanese soil.
Japan strongly condemns this dangerous and
destabilizing act. It endangered vessels in our exclusive
economic zone and exposed aircraft in the surrounding
area to great safety risks. It poses an imminent and grave
threat to Japan’s security. This is yet another serious
violation of multiple resolutions adopted unanimously
by the Security Council. It increases proliferation risks
in every corner of the world and threatens international
peace and security.
This is a clear escalation. We need concrete
and immediate action by the Council. Let me make
three points.
First, the latest launch is the first full-scale launch
of an intercontinental ballistic missile since November
2017. Japan was a non-permanent member of Council
at that time, and we recall that the event led to the
subsequent adoption of resolution 2397 (2017). The
resolution stipulates that if the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea conducts a launch of a ballistic
missile system capable of reaching intercontinental
range, the Council will take action to restrict further the

18/18

25/03/2022

export to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of
petroleum. I urge the Council to follow up and do what
it has already agreed to do. In that regard, I welcome
the initiative to introduce a new resolution.
Secondly, none North Korea’s repeated missile
launches can be viewed in isolation. They are part of its
reinvigorated nuclear and missile programmes. North
Korea has publicly declared that it intends to acquire
various weapons, including tactical nuclear weapons.
Those wilful and repeated violations of Council
resolutions are partly the result of the long, regrettable
silence of the Council. This should end now.
Thirdly, this is taking place as the world is
struggling to restore peace in Ukraine and save many
innocent civilian lives there. We must not allow North
Korea to take advantage of the situation to further
develop its prohibited capability.
The Council has repeatedly made clear that it is
necessary to achieve the dismantlement of all of North
Korea’s weapons of mass destruction and ballistic
missiles of all ranges in a complete, verifiable and
irreversible manner, in accordance with the relevant
Council resolutions. Those resolutions are about not
only what North Korea needs to do, but also what
we, the other Member States, are obliged to do. Japan
strongly urges all Member States to fully implement the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Now is not the
time for easing sanctions.
In conclusion, Japan expects that the Council
will fulfil its responsibility by swiftly taking united
action. Japan will continue to work closely with
Council members and all other Member States to reach
a comprehensive solution to the problems related to
North Korea.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no more
names inscribed on the list of speakers. I shall now
adjourn the meeting so that the Council can continue
its discussion in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

22-30027
