S/2019/461

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 June 2019
Original: English

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction and Mission priorities
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), by which the Council established the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and requested me to report at regular intervals on the
implementation of its mandate. The report covers the activities of UNMIK, and
developments related thereto, from 16 January to 15 May 2019.
2.
The priorities of the Mission remain to promote security, stability and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and in the region. In furtherance of its goals, UNMIK
continues its constructive engagement with Pristina and Belgrade, all communities in
Kosovo and regional and international actors. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Kosovo Force continue to perform their roles within
the framework of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). The European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continues its presence in Kosovo, in line with
the statement by the President of the Security Council of 26 November 2008
(S/PRST/2008/44) and my report of 24 November 2008 (S/2008/692). The United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes work closely with the Mission.

II. Key political and security developments
3.
Tensions between Belgrade and Pristina remained high during the reporting
period, continuing to hinder prospects for the resumption of a productive dialogue
and to raise concerns among local and international stakeholders about the related
risks to stability on the ground. The increased tariff on goods imported from Serbia
and Bosnia and Herzegovina, which had been introduced by authorities in Pristina in
November 2018 in response to perceived attempts by Belgrade to weaken the
international standing of Kosovo, remained in place. That increase resulted in threats
by Kosovo Serbs to withdraw from Kosovo institutions by mid-April and prompted
the President of Serbia, Aleksandar Vučić, to announce, on 16 April, that Belgrade
would introduce countermeasures if Pristina failed to lift the tariff.
4.
On 8 April, almost five months after the mayors of the four Kosovo Serbmajority municipalities in northern Kosovo announced their resignations in response
to the increase of the import tax, the President of Kosovo, Hashim Thaçi, announced
that extraordinary mayoral elections would be held in northern Kosovo on 19 May.

19-08713 (E)

040619

*1908713*

S/2019/461

Following a meeting with President Vučić in Belgrade on 10 April, the Kosovo Serb
representatives announced that they would take part in the elections. On 23 April, the
Central Election Commission of Kosovo certified candidates from two Kosovo
Albanian parties, the ruling Democratic Party of Kosovo and the opposition
Movement for Self-Determination (Vetëvendosje), but failed to certify those from the
Serbian List party. This was because two Commission members from Vetëvendosje
abstained from voting in protest against alleged plans by the Serbian List candidates
to resign the mayorship again upon re-election, in opposition to the import tariff. The
decision was condemned by Belgrade, including President Vučić, who expressed
concern about what he characterized as efforts by Pristina to prevent the Serbian List
party from participating in the mayoral elections. The Serbian List appealed to the
Election Complaints and Appeals Panel, which, on 25 April, decided in favour of
certifying the Serbian List candidates.
5.
During the reporting period, persistent differences in the approaches of Belgrade
and Pristina to the dialogue process inhibited the creation of conditions conducive to
its meaningful resumption. While on several occasions Serbian President Vučić
insisted that lifting the import tax was a condition to resuming talks with Pristina,
President Thaçi and the Prime Minister of Kosovo, Ramush Haradinaj, argued that
the import tax should remain in place unless and until there was a visible change in
Belgrade policy on Kosovo. The Prime Minister further suggested that recognition of
Kosovo was a “starting point” for progress in the dialogue with Belgrade, and that the
acknowledgement of past crimes was a necessary condition for Belgrade and Pristina
to move forward.
6.
Repeated calls by Pristina for greater acknowledgment by Belgrade of past
alleged war crimes coincided with the dismissal of two Serbian List members of the
Kosovo government, the Minister of Local Government Administration and the
Deputy Minister of Justice, for alleged denial of such crimes. On 6 May, a recently
established ad hoc committee of the Assembly of Kosovo adopted a non-legally
binding draft resolution on the Serbian genocide in Kosovo, in which authorities in
Belgrade are called upon “to acknowledge war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide committed in Kosovo during the period 1998–1999”. The Serbian List
characterized it as a “move against dialogue and normalization” and an attempt to
“destabilize the situation.”
7.
Meanwhile, on 7 March, following the establishment in December 2018 of the
negotiating team of Pristina to the European Union-facilitated dialogue with
Belgrade, the Assembly of Kosovo adopted a law on “the duties, responsibilities and
competencies of the State delegation of the Republic of Kosovo in the dialogue
process with the Republic of Serbia”. It also adopted a non-legally binding “platform
for dialogue on a final, comprehensive and legally binding agreement on the
normalization of relations between the Republic of Kosovo and the Republic of
Serbia” for future negotiations with Belgrade. The Serbian List did not participate in
the vote. In both the law and the platform, the Assembly laid out the mandate of the
negotiating team of Pristina, while at the same time introducing further stringent
conditions for dialogue with Belgrade.
8.
The main opposition parties, the Democratic League of Kosovo and
Vetëvendosje, criticized the adoption of the law and the platform and filed a referral
to the Constitutional Court on 15 March. They argued that the law on the dialogue
violated the Constitution of Kosovo. In addition, the Serbian List and the au thorities
in Belgrade stated that the initiatives left no room for dialogue and compromise. The
Serbian leadership dismissed the negotiating platform set out by Pristina,
characterizing it as an “ultimatum” to which Belgrade would “never agree”.

2/18

19-08713

S/2019/461

9.
In a separate development, on 2 February, the Assembly of Kosovo adopted the
statute of the mining company, Trepça/Trepča, transforming its business units on both
sides of the Ibër/Ibar river into a joint-stock company, with 80 per cent of its shares
under the ownership of the government of Kosovo. That decision evoked criticism
from officials in Belgrade and political representatives of Kosovo Serbs, who
considered the statute to be illegitimate and drafted without consultation with Kosovo
Serbs.
10. According to the European Union Special Representative and Head of the
European Union Office in Kosovo, more than two years after the launch of the first
European reform agenda for Kosovo, its institutions showed some progress duri ng
the reporting period in the implementation of priority measures in the governance and
economic sectors and, to a lesser extent, in the employment and education sectors.
The adoption of public administration reform laws by the Assembly of Kosovo in
February and the proposed amendments to the legal framework on political party and
campaign financing to strengthen accountability and transparency were positive
developments. Nevertheless, representatives of the international community in
Pristina have criticized the government of Kosovo for exerting political influence
over senior-level appointments for independent institutions, including the
appointment of a convicted war criminal as the representative of Pristina in Albania.
11. During the reporting period, Kosovo authorities took further steps in the fight
against corruption. An Anti-fraud Unit was established under the National Audit
Office of Kosovo on 19 March, and a new Criminal Code entered into force on
15 April, both of which are aimed at promoting effective prosecution of high-level
corruption and organized crime. Acknowledging progress made by Kosovo in that
area, the European Parliament voted on 28 March in favour of a non-binding
resolution granting Kosovo visa liberalization and called on the European Council to
do the same.
12. Occasional incidents were reported during the period under review in ethnically
mixed areas. On 19 January, a Kosovo Serb-majority school and infirmary in the
ethnically mixed village of Novak/Novake in the municipality of Prizren was
vandalized by unknown perpetrators. On 2 February, a memorial plaque
commemorating the disappearance of two Serbian journalists on August 1998 in the
municipality of Rahovec/Orahovac was damaged by a Kosovo Albanian, who was
subsequently arrested by the Kosovo police and admitted the crime to the prosecutor.
On 12 April, an explosion occurred in the vicinity of Jasenovik i Poshtëm/Donji
Jasenovik in Zubin Potok municipality in northern Kosovo, damaging two vehicles
and a business office.
13. Kosovo institutions have advanced efforts to prevent violent extremism. On
13 March, on the basis of an international arrest warrant, Kosovo police apprehended
a foreign citizen on suspicions of terrorism. On 4 April, the Special Prosecution of
Kosovo filed an indictment for “incitement to commit a terrorist offence” against a
Kosovo Albanian who was suspected of sharing materials on social media in support
of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL, also known as Da’esh). The same
individual had also allegedly used social networks to issue threatening messages
against the Prime Minister of Kosovo. On 20 April, with the support of the United
States of America, 110 people were repatriated from the Syrian Arab Republic to
Kosovo: 74 children (including 9 unaccompanied minors or orphans), 32 women and
4 men. All 32 women are under investigation by the Special Prosecutor’s Office on
suspicion of having joined or participated in a foreign army or police force and are
currently under house arrest, together with the children. The four men and one minor
are being detained in a high-security prison while investigations are ongoing; they are
awaiting indictment and trial on the grounds of having joined or participated in a
foreign army or police force.
19-08713

3/18

S/2019/461

III. Northern Kosovo
14. On 16 January, the mayor of South Mitrovica, Agim Bahtiri, submitted a petition
to the President and the Assembly of Kosovo with approximately 16,000 signatures
for the unification of the city of Mitrovica. President Thaçi expressed support fo r the
petition and encouraged its consideration by the appropriate Kosovo institutions. The
Serbian List condemned the initiative and organized a protest against it on 1 February.
Some 4,000 people gathered in front of the North Mitrovica branch of the European
Union Office in Kosovo to protest against both the petition and the adoption of the
statute of the Trepça/Trepča mining company. Kosovo institutions had not taken
further action to pursue the unification by the end of the reporting period. During the
reporting period, the investigation into the murder of the Kosovo Serb politician
Oliver Ivanović on 16 January 2018 remained inconclusive.

IV. Normalization of relations between Belgrade and Pristina
15. During the reporting period, no meetings were held between Belgrade and
Pristina within the framework of the European Union-facilitated dialogue. On
29 April, the leadership of Belgrade and Pristina attended a meeting of Western
Balkans leaders in Berlin, convened by the Chancellor of Germany and the President
of France. Belgrade and Pristina agreed to press ahead with their efforts to implement
existing agreements and to engage constructively in the dialogue for the
normalization of relations, through the European Union, with the aim of reaching a
comprehensive and final agreement. The parties also agreed to participate in a
follow-up meeting to be convened in Paris in early July. On the margins of the Summit
of the Brdo-Brijuni Process, held in Tirana on 8 and 9 May, the European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the
European Commission expressed concern about the stalemate in the European Unionfacilitated dialogue, stating that the responsibility to relaunch talks lies with decisionmakers in Pristina and their willingness to lift the import tax.

V. Returns, reconciliation, cultural heritage and
community relations
16. During the reporting period, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) recorded 43 voluntary returns by members of
non-majority communities who had been displaced within and outside Kosovo. They
included 22 women and 21 men (34 Kosovo Serbs, 5 Kosovo Roma and 4 Kosovo
Ashkali). That brings the total number of displaced members of non -majority
communities that have found durable solutions in Kosovo since 2000 to 28,154,
including 13,815 women and 14,339 men (11,979 Kosovo Serbs, 7,581 Kosovo
Egyptians and Ashkali, 3,930 Kosovo Roma, 1,875 Kosovo Bosniaks, 1,464 Kosovo
Gorani, 1,281 Kosovo Albanians, 21 Kosovo Montenegrins, 19 Kosovo Turks and
4 Kosovo Croats). There remain 16,200 displaced persons within Kosovo and
69,627 persons with displacement-related needs across the Western Balkans region,
out of the approximately 200,000 displaced persons from Kosovo residing in the
region, most of them in Serbia.
17. Challenges relating to property restitution, the allocation of land for housing
construction, security and socioeconomic opportunities for returnees continued to
negatively affect progress on sustainable returns. During the reporting period, the
government of Kosovo, with support from the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and UNHCR, provided training to 280 municipal officials to
4/18

19-08713

S/2019/461

facilitate returns of displaced persons throughout Kosovo, in line with the government
regulation on the return of displaced persons and durable solutions. In addition,
28 municipalities in Kosovo have established municipal commissions on returns.
18. The government of Kosovo, with support from an international
non-governmental organization, the European Centre for Minority Issues, continued
to work closely with the University of Mitrovica to issue individual certificates to its
graduates that can be used to apply for positions in public institutions in Kosovo.
During the reporting period, the independent commission of the government of
Kosovo for the verification of degrees issued by the University received 49 new
applications and approved 202 applications in all, bringing the total number of
certificates issued by the commission since its establishment in 2015 to 1,552.
19. The Implementation and Monitoring Council, which oversees the special
protective zones surrounding religious sites, met twice during the reporting period.
On 5 February, the Council discussed two new proposed construction projects within
the special protective zone of the Serbian Orthodox Church of the Presentation of the
Virgin in the municipality of Lipjan/Lipljan: an administrative centre for the Islamic
community and a residential building project. It concluded that both proposals needed
to be further developed before a decision could be reached. At the same meeting, in
response to concerns expressed by representatives of the Serbian Orthodox Church
that the municipality of Deçan/Dečani had not abandoned its previous plans to build
a transit road to Montenegro through the special protective zone of the Visoki Dečani
monastery, the Council reiterated that the Law on Special Protective Zones should be
upheld and that no works should take place without the consent of the Serbian
Orthodox Church. The mayor of Deçan/Dečani attended the Council meeting held on
10 April, at which the Council discussed, among other issues, the ongoing concern of
the Serbian Orthodox Church about the non-implementation of the Constitutional
Court ruling of 19 May 2016 in favour of the Church’s ownership right to 24 ha of
land. The mayor and the Council acknowledged the need for regular dialogue between
the concerned parties at the local level, which the Council agreed to facilitate and
support.
20. According to the annual report of the Kosovo Office of the Language
Commissioner on language compliance in municipalities, which was published on
28 March, residents from mostly non-majority communities in Kosovo faced
obstacles in exercising their basic rights in relation to judicial remedy, property
registration and health care owing to language constraints. In 2018, the Office
received 23 complaints related to language rights, of which 17 have already been
addressed by Kosovo institutions.
21. During the reporting period, UNHCR continued to support members of the
Ashkali, Egyptian and Roma communities in Kosovo in obtaining civil
documentation and resolving civil status issues to enable their access to public
services. UNHCR assisted 54 individuals (23 women and 31 men) in obtaining civil
documentation. Efforts also continued to mobilize voluntary contributions to the trust
fund to support the Ashkali, Egyptian and Roma communities affected by lead
poisoning in Kosovo, established in 2017 pursuant to the recommendations of the
UNMIK Human Rights Advisory Panel. An initial contribution was received by the
trust fund in May 2019.

VI. Rule of law and human rights
22. During the reporting period, Kosovo courts issued decisions on a number of
high-profile organized crime and corruption cases. On 5 February, the Basic Court of
Pristina convicted a former judge of money laundering and sentenced him to one year
19-08713

5/18

S/2019/461

of imprisonment and a fine. On 3 April, the same Court confirmed the indictment
against 11 defendants, including members of the ruling coalition, the Democratic
Party of Kosovo, for granting unlawful privileges and advantages to people seeking
posts in government agencies and public firms. On 8 April, the Basic Court of
Pejë/Peć confirmed an indictment against the mayor of Istog/Istok, for awarding a
public construction tender to a relative.
23. Kosovo courts also issued a number of decisions in war crimes cases. On
8 March, the Basic Court of Pejë/Peć acquitted a Kosovo Serb who had been charged
with the murder of two Albanian nationals and the expulsion of the Kosovo Albanian
population from a village in the municipality of Klinë/Klina in 1998, owing to
contradictory testimony by witnesses. On 5 April, the Court of Appeals of Kosovo
confirmed the sentencing of a Kosovo Serb, by the Mitrovica Basic Court, to six and
a half years in prison in relation to crimes against Kosovo Albanian civilians
committed in 1999.
24. On 27 March, the Kosovo Institute of Forensic Medicine, with support from
EULEX, assessed a possible mass grave site in Kishnicë/Kišnica village in the
municipality of Graçanicë/Gračanica. The assessment was conducted on the basis of
data previously collected through ground-penetrating radar surveys of five possible
mass grave sites, carried out with UNMIK support on both sides of the administrative
boundary, but did not yield any findings.
25. During the reporting period, the Kosovo government commission respo nsible
for the verification and recognition of the status of survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence received 92 applications, bringing the total number of applications received
since its establishment, in February 2018, to 982. To date, 308 applicants (283 women
and 25 men) have been granted survivor status.
26. During the period under review, the preparatory team for the establishment of
the Kosovo truth and reconciliation commission held public consultations with
members of civil society, academia and local communities across Kosovo to discuss
the functional modalities of such a commission. The preparatory team, which had
been established at the initiative of President Thaçi in February 2017, consists of
representatives of central institutions and civil society groups from majority and
non-majority communities.
27. On 28 February, the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment presented a report to the Human Rights Council,
at its fortieth session, on his visit to the region in 2017. In the report, the Special
Rapporteur pointed to numerous and consistent allegations of torture and ill-treatment
of people held in police custody in Kosovo and stressed the need to strengthen fair
trial guarantees, in particular access to a lawyer and the exclusion of evidence
obtained through torture or ill-treatment, and to improve conditions of detention. The
Special Rapporteur recommended that Kosovo authorities criminalize other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in the same comprehensive terms as
torture. The report also recommended that Kosovo authorities avoid unnecessary,
excessive or otherwise arbitrary deprivation of liberty and strengthen existing
preventive mechanisms in Kosovo through independent funding and adequate
staffing.
28. In March, the Ombudsperson Institution of Kosovo issued its annual report,
which assessed a wide range of human rights issues in 2018, including the lack of
comprehensive child protection legislation and inadequate institutional responses to
gender-based violence. In the report, the Institution provides recommendations aimed
at reducing delays in judicial proceedings, enforcing the execution of judgements and
protecting and upholding equality before the law, including gender equality.

6/18

19-08713

S/2019/461

VII. Women and peace and security
29. On 8 March, the Jahjaga Foundation, the Embassy of Germany and the United
Nations Kosovo team organized a conference in Pristina aimed at promoting
international collaboration in addressing legal, social and institutional challenges
faced by the survivors of conflict-related sexual violence in Kosovo. In a video
message, my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict called upon
public institutions and society to continue to strengthen tools to restore the dignity of
survivors. The conference provided an opportunity for the survivors of conflictrelated sexual violence to express their concerns. At the end, participants issued a
communiqué aimed at raising awareness of survivors’ perspectives, demands and
needs.
30. On 12 March, UNMIK, in collaboration with the United Nations Kosovo team
and the European Union, organized the ninth annual Global Open Day on Women,
Peace and Security in Kosovo, entitled “Trust-builders and deal-makers: advancing
the women, peace and security agenda in Kosovo”. The event, which was opened by
my Special Representative and Head of UNMIK, the European Union Special
Representative in Kosovo, the United Nations Development Coordinator in Kosovo
and the Chair of the Assembly of Kosovo women’s caucus, brought together more
than 250 participants from Kosovo, including parliamentarians, politicians,
government officials, civil society activists and representatives of the international
community. It included a UNMIK-sponsored televised debate, in which participants
stressed the need for the priorities and views of women to be reflected in ongoing
political processes, including the European Union-facilitated dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina. Event participants also called for the establishment of formal
mechanisms to support greater inclusion and engagement of women in political
dialogue processes, including women from non-majority communities. On the
margins of the event, UNMIK, in cooperation with the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), organized a training
workshop for municipal community leaders and the Regional Women’s Lobby for
Peace, Security and Justice in Southeast Europe on community-based mediation.
31. During the reporting period, as part of an UNMIK-funded project, UN-Women
trained 50 members of the newly established women’s association within the Kosovo
Correctional Service on international standards and Kosovo legislation relating to the
promotion of gender equality and non-discrimination. The training was focused on
ways to achieve gender parity, in particular in senior management positions within
the corrections service, such as through improved retention and promotion of women
personnel.

VIII. Trust-building, partnerships and cooperation
32. During the reporting period, UNMIK, in close collaboration with the United
Nations Kosovo team, continued to implement several programmatic trust -building
activities in the areas of language, human rights, youth empowerment, gender equality
and intercommunity dialogue. To date, through the implementation of its mandated
tasks and funded projects, UNMIK has addressed half of the recommendations
developed during the United Nations Kosovo Trust-Building Forum, held in Ljubljana
in May 2018.
33. In the area of justice, UNMIK continued to support efforts to reduce the backlog
of court cases in Kosovo, in furtherance of the recommendations of the Trust-Building
Forum. The backlog of cases has been substantially reduced in the past two years,
which is expected to continue, in part through the furnishing and equipping, through
19-08713

7/18

S/2019/461

UNMIK funding, of the appellate courtroom in North Mitrovica, inaugurated by my
Special Representative on 16 April. During the reporting period, UNMIK also
provided 10 interpreters and 2 legal associates to the Mitrovica Basic Court and
funded the contract of an administrator to refer cases to mediation. On 8 May, my
Special Representative inaugurated a legal aid support centre in Pristina, which was
established with financial support from UNMIK and is administered by a local
non-governmental organization, the Kosovo Law Institute. The aim of the support
centre is to ensure access to free legal aid for vulnerable groups, in compliance with
Kosovo legislation. During the event, my Special Representative expressed the
Mission’s commitment to continue to provide support to the justice institutions of
Kosovo.
34. UNMIK also supported a project, implemented by the Balkan Investigative
Reporting Network, to produce a series of televised town hall debates to enable local
communities to discuss key issues identified during the Trust-Building Forum. During
the reporting period, six debates were organized on a variety of topics, including the
participation of women in political decision-making, religious tolerance and youth
priorities. In addition to reaching in-person and televised audiences of more than
700 women and men, the debates enjoyed robust online viewership, with over
80,000 social media views.
35. On 1 April, UNMIK and the International Organization for Migration (IOM)
brought together seven language experts (two women and five men) from Belgrade
and Pristina to collaborate on the development of an electronic dictionary and
associated mobile application (Albanian-Serbian and Serbian-Albanian). That trustbuilding initiative is aimed at promoting the learning of both official languages in
Kosovo, in line with relevant legislation and international human rights standards.
36. As a follow-up to the Trust-Building Forum, on 18 April, the mayor of Prizren
municipality organized a conference on environmental challenges. The conference,
which was sponsored by UNMIK, brought together mayors and officials from
12 municipalities in the Pejë/Peć and Prizren regions and representatives of the
international community. The conference resulted in project proposals to promote
urban green space in the municipality of Gjilan/Gnjilane and to engage young people
in environmental sustainability initiatives in the municipality of Malishevë/Mališevo.
The conference was the first in a series of similar initiatives that UNMIK supports
across Kosovo.
37. UNMIK continued to support the participation of young people in decision making processes and intercommunity dialogue initiatives, in line with the Mission wide framework strategy on youth, peace and security. From 9 to 10 March, UNMIK
organized a training on peace education and mediation for a multi-ethnic team of
30 young leaders (16 women and 14 men). On 24 April, UNMIK and the United
Nations Children’s Fund jointly organized the third United Nations Youth Assembly
in Kosovo, which brought together more than 250 young people, government
representatives and United Nations participants, including my Envoy on Youth.
During the event, young people from different ethnic communities engaged with
Kosovo decision makers in discussions on empowering youth leadersh ip across
Kosovo. The activity was part of a project supported by the Peacebuilding Fund,
entitled “Empowering youth for a peaceful, prosperous and sustainable future in
Kosovo”.
38. UNMIK continued to provide document certification services. During the period
under review, a total of 1,279 documents were processed: 766 relating to pensions
and 513 to civil status, such as high school and university diplomas and marriage,
birth and death certificates. UNMIK also continued to facilitate bilateral police
cooperation between Kosovo authorities and the Ministry of Interior of Serbia, for a
8/18

19-08713

S/2019/461

total of 44 requests received and processed. UNMIK facilitated the issuance of 12 Red
Notices, 1 Yellow Notice and 7 extradition requests from States members of the
International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) to Kosovo. It also opened
618 cases for investigation within the INTERPOL database, bringing the total number
of currently open cases related to the territory or people of Kosovo to 1,607. Overall,
UNMIK processed 3,743 items of official correspondence related to its INTERPOL
liaison function during the reporting period.

IX. Observations
39. I remain concerned about the heightened tensions between Belgrade and Pristina
and urge all stakeholders to refrain from inflammatory rhetoric and provocative
actions that could fuel discord. I am also concerned about the prolonged
disengagement between the parties in the dialogue and its potential negative effects
on the situation on the ground. It is imperative that the obstacles to the resumption of
the dialogue, under European Union auspices, be effectively addressed, so as to
create, without further delay, conditions conducive to a productive dialogue and the
normalization of relations between Belgrade and Pristina.
40. I appreciate the important role that the European Union continues to play in
guiding the political process between Belgrade and Pristina and I value the efforts it
has made during the reporting period to maintain engagement with the parties.
41. I urge greater involvement by all segments of society on both sides of the
political process, and I am especially pleased that the Global Open Day on Women,
Peace and Security, which was organized by the United Nations in collaboration with
the European Union and held in Pristina, highlighted the need for greater inclusion
and engagement of women in the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. In that
respect, I urge political leaders to take specific measures to ensure a genderresponsive political process, in line with commitments made under the women and
peace and security agenda.
42. Impartial and credible justice is crucial to ensuring effective trust-building and
sustainable reconciliation in Kosovo. It is essential that survivors of conflict -related
sexual violence from all communities be able to both access and qualify for
reparations and that the process be fully rights-based. I also underscore the continuing
need for more effective institutional responses to gender-based violence and more
robust child protection legislation and policies in Kosovo. I am pleased that the newly
established legal aid support centre in Pristina will assist, among other vulnerable
groups, the survivors of conflict-related sexual violence in seeking recognition of
their status.
43. Upholding language rights is essential for the enjoyment of other civil and
political rights. Initiatives aimed at promoting multilingualism in Kosovo are needed
more than ever to bridge the rift between communities and overcome decades of
mistrust. I therefore commend the concerted efforts of UNMIK and IOM to promote
the learning of the Albanian and Serbian languages through innovative and engaging
activities.
44. I welcome the convening of the third annual Kosovo Youth Assembly, which
brought together young people from all communities in Kosovo to engage with
decision makers on identifying ways to empower youth leadership across Kosovo.
The initiatives highlighted in the present report reflect the concerted efforts made by
my Special Representative and the Mission, in close collaboration with the United
Nations Kosovo team and in partnership with local and international actors, to foster
trust-building and promote political and societal reconciliation. I strongly support that

19-08713

9/18

S/2019/461

collaborative approach, which has substantially strengthened the implementation of
the Mission’s mandate to promote long-term peace and stability.
45. I welcome the initial contribution to the trust fund established in support of the
Ashkali, Egyptian and Roma communities. More contributions are needed, however,
to implement community-based assistance projects focused on the most pressing
needs of those communities, which are the most vulnerable. I therefore encourage
Member States and other actors and organizations to contribute to the fund.
46. I thank my Special Representative and all UNMIK staff for their dedication in
advancing the Mission’s objectives. I also express my gratitude to the long-standing
partners of the United Nations in Kosovo, the Kosovo Force, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the European Union Special Representative and
offices on the ground, and to the United Nations Development Coordinator, as well
as to the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, for their continued
teamwork and collaboration with UNMIK.

10/18

19-08713

S/2019/461

Annex I
Report of the European Union High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy to the Secretary-General on the
activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
from 16 January to 15 May 2019
1.

Summary
With its reconfiguration process completed, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) has fully dedicated itself to the implementation of its
core mandate for 2018–2020, through its monitoring and operations pillars. With
regard to the work undertaken through the monitoring pillar, the Mission was well
received by local counterparts in its new role of monitoring former EULEX and other
cases, as well as systemic issues and thematic areas on the police, prosecutorial and
judicial levels.
The Mission noted a positive trend in the court hearings that it monitored, with
a significant increase in productive over unproductive hearings. 1 The Kosovo
Correctional Service concluded its recruitment of 120 staff, although certain
weaknesses remained.
In support of the implementation of the European Union-facilitated dialogue,
the Mission successfully advocated, on the technical level, the renewal of several
ministerial decisions to facilitate freedom of movement agreements, although overall
implementation in that area continued to lag behind. The construction of two of the
three common crossing points hosted by Pristina was nearly completed, while work
on the third remained blocked by Belgrade. Meanwhile, EULEX continued to play a
facilitating role in the implementation of the Justice Agreement. In one area of
intervention, that resulted in the Mitrovica division of the Court of Appeals being
allocated a greater number of cases in the first months of 2019 than the total number
of cases for all of 2018.
Within the scope of work of the operations pillar, the Mission continued its
facilitation of international police cooperation matters with the Kosovo police,
maintaining its Witness Security Department and its capability as a second security
responder in Kosovo. After receiving an invitation by the Minister of Justice in
January, EULEX also fully resumed its work on missing persons cases in an executive
capacity. The Mission experienced political interference by some government
representatives, however, in particular when attempting to find missing persons from
minority communities. EULEX also provided logistical and operational support to the
Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office.

2.

Activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo

2.1.

Monitoring
During the reporting period, EULEX monitored selected cases and trials in the
Kosovo justice system, including former EULEX cases, to assess their compliance
with Kosovo law and human rights standards.
Monitoring at the Kosovo police level was focused on the prioritized thematic
areas of crimes under international law, gender-based violence and hate crimes, for
which EULEX provided expertise and advice on addressing those issues in a coherent
manner.

__________________
1

19-08713

Unproductive hearings are those immediately adjourned by the competent judge for reasons
associated with the absence of parties, witnesses or experts.
11/18

S/2019/461

At the prosecution and court levels, continuous tendencies were observed in
cases of gender-based violence, where the prosecution opted for more lenient legal
qualifications of criminal acts and the courts for more lenient sentences, and both the
prosecution and the courts disregarded the aggravating factors outlined in the law.
In the cases that it monitored, EULEX identified a positive trend in the ratio of
productive versus unproductive hearings, which rose from approxim ately 50 per cent
productive hearings in 2018 to over 80 per cent by the end of April. Meanwhile, the
slow pace of criminal proceedings, notably in complex or high-profile cases,
remained a major concern. Equally worrying was the identification of a tenden cy to
delay the scheduling of hearings for long periods of time in a number of high -profile
cases.
The Mission closely monitored the establishment of the Special Department in
the Basic Court of Pristina, expected to become operational by 1 July to deal with all
cases assigned to the Special Prosecution of Kosovo, in line with the new Law on
Courts. As different courts have interpreted the jurisdiction of the Special Department
differently, the result has frequently led to proceedings being withheld, alle gedly
awaiting transfer to the Special Department. EULEX is concerned that the Special
Department may fail to meet the necessary standards in terms of the number and
quality of judges as well as in terms of transparency in allocating cases to judges. It
is noteworthy, in that context, that the same group of judges repeatedly received most
of the high-profile cases of the Basic Court of Pristina, indicating that the planned
blind draw system was not always implemented. EULEX has advocated with local
counterparts, also in cooperation with the European Union Special Representative,
that such practices be avoided in the new Special Department.
On 23 January, EULEX began the practice of regularly sharing the findings from
its monitoring activities, along with tailored recommendations, with relevant local
counterparts and international partners through board meetings of the Ministry of
Justice-led Justice 2020 initiative.
The Mission continued to monitor, mentor and advise the senior management of
the Kosovo Correctional Service, in order to support the further development of a
consolidated and professional senior management team and to develop its capability
to, inter alia, ensure the equal enjoyment of rights by removing undue interference
and eliminate the preferential treatment of inmates.
EULEX organized a three-day workshop for 50 female correctional staff
between 5 and 7 March, delivered by trainers from the Prison and Probation Service
of Sweden. The workshop dealt primarily with the career challenges facing female
staff members in a male-dominated environment. The workshop will be followed by
a study visit to Sweden in May.
Previously a major concern, the preferential treatment of high-profile prisoners
was not much of an issue during the reporting period, as the number of such prisoners
remained low throughout most of the period. Nevertheless, as six high-profile
convicts from the Drenica II war crimes case were arrested in mid-April, the impact
of that change remains to be seen.
The Mission continued to facilitate the implementation of the integrated border
management technical protocol derived from the European Union-facilitated dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade. More than a year has passed since Belgrade withdrew
from participating in integrated border management meetings at all levels with
Pristina counterparts and EULEX officials, following the arrest of the Director of the
Office for Kosovo and Metohija of the Government of Serbia, Marko Ðurić, in North
Mitrovica on 26 March 2018. The level of cooperation between the two sets of
authorities has decreased since that time, although EULEX has regularly visited all
12/18

19-08713

S/2019/461

common crossing points and engaged separately with both sets of officials. That
withdrawal of cooperation has affected the construction of the three common crossing
points hosted by Pristina. Although construction has continued, nearing completion
at Merdarë/Merdare and Mutivodë/Mutivode, Serbian officials did not move their
staff into the new administrative building at the common crossing point at Merdarë/
Merdare. They also refrained from taking action on resolving technical issues that
would allow the start of construction of the common crossing point at Bërnjak/
Tabalije.
On 22 March, the Ministry of Internal Affairs finalized its integrated border
management strategy for the period 2019–2023, and the action plan was expected to
be completed in mid-May. The documents were drafted with the support of EULEX
and provide an outline of the role of the different actors in combating cross -border
crime, with a focus on current challenges and emerging threats concerning border
security.
In support of the technical implementation of the European Union-facilitated
agreements relating to freedom of movement, EULEX advised the Ministry of
Internal Affairs to renew a decision allowing the replacement of Serbian driver ’s
licences issued between 10 June 1999 and 14 September 2016 and which had expired
at the end of 2018. The Minister signed the renewal of the decision on 13 March,
which remains in effect until the end of 2019. Similarly, on 25 March, following the
advice of EULEX, the Ministry extended, by a period of six months, the decision on
exempting fees for the reregistration of vehicles bearing Serbian licence plates (issued
for Kosovo between 10 June 1999 and 14 September 2016) to Kosovo plates.
The Mission supported the President of the Mitrovica Basic Court and the Head
of the Mitrovica division of the Court of Appeals in the implementation of the
European Union-facilitated Justice Agreement. As a result of the facilitation
conducted by EULEX, by the end of April 2019, the Mitrovica division had been
allocated a total of 66 cases by the President of the Court of Appeals. That was a
significant and positive increase to the workload of the judges of the Mitrovica
division, who had been allocated only 40 cases for all of 2018.
Following disagreement on the allocation of criminal cases at the Court of
Appeals level that would have prevented criminal judges from the Mitrovica division
from adjudicating cases tried at the Court of Appeals in Pristina, EULEX raised the
issue with the President of the Court. As a result, the President has begun to allocate
criminal cases from the southern Kosovo Serb-majority municipalities to the
Mitrovica division for adjudication, a practice that should ideally be fully formalized
in the future.
2.2.

Operations
EULEX maintained its support for the Kosovo police in international police
cooperation. The Mission facilitated the exchange of information between the
National Central Bureaus of INTERPOL and the International Law Enforcement
Coordination Unit of the Kosovo police, under the umbrella of the UNMIK
INTERPOL Liaison Office. EULEX continued to foster local capacities through the
Mission’s small-scale projects by supporting Kosovo police officers in fighting illicit
trade. EULEX organized three study visits for the Coordination Unit, to Brussels,
Vienna and Prague, to further familiarize them on best practices adopted on the
concept of the single point of operational contact. 2

__________________
2

19-08713

The concept of the single point of operational contact refers to the practice of countries appointing
one person with whom to liaise on information exchanges between law enforcement agencies.
13/18

S/2019/461

The Mission also facilitated the exchange of information between the Ministry
of the Interior of Serbia and the Kosovo police, in line with the protocol on police
cooperation between the two entities. The EULEX Witness Security Department
continued to support permanently relocated operations and operations awaiting
permanent relocation. As requested by local authorities, EULEX assisted the Kosovo
police Witness Protection Directorate with the long-term planning of its first
independent regional conference, which was to be held in mid-May, aimed at
strengthening regional cooperation.
EULEX maintained its readiness to support the Institute of Forensic Medicine.
On 31 January, the Mission received a letter from the Ministry of Justice, requesting
its continued support in the development of local capacities at the Institute, including
the continuation of work on missing persons cases in an executive capacity. The letter
was issued as a result of intense liaising and coordination with both the Office of the
Prime Minister and the Ministry of Justice over a period of several months.
With regard to assistance provided by EULEX on missing persons cases, the
Mission conducted four site assessments of possible missing persons’ graves in
Istog/Istok, Gjakovë/Đakovica, Gllogovc/Glogovac and Graçanicë/Gračanica. Despite
having been invited to continue its executive work with the Institute of Forensic
Medicine, EULEX faced difficulties in the search for the missing. An example of that
was the ongoing case in Gjakovë/Đakovica: after the local prosecution office granted
an order for excavation, an adviser to the Prime Minister on missing persons
expressed his discontent with the granting of the order.
The Institute of Forensic Medicine continued to face challenges in reaching a
sufficient level of productivity. With regard to institutional developments, the draft
regulation on the internal organization of the Institute was still not finalized. The
regulation is a supplementary document to the Law on Forensic Medicine, adopted in
April 2016, and is essential for the international accreditation of the Institute.
The EULEX formed police unit maintained its capability as a second security
responder in Kosovo. In order to ensure the operational readiness of the unit, internal
training sessions, as well as joint training sessions with the Kosovo Force of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization, have been held.
EULEX continued to provide logistical and operational support to the Specialist
Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office, in line with relevant legislation and
within its means and capabilities.
3.

Other key issues
Nothing significant to report.

14/18

19-08713

S/2019/461

Annex II
Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office
During the reporting period, the Specialist Chambers increased its judicial
activity, triggered by the activity of the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office in summoning
individuals with respect to its investigation. The Specialist Chamber of the
Constitutional Court issued its first rulings on 7 and 20 February 2019, concerning a
referral from a suspect summoned for questioning by the Specialist Prosecutor. The
Specialist Chamber of the Constitutional Court dismissed the referral as inadmissible.
On 25 March 2019, a single judge of the Specialist Chambers rendered a
decision on the first request for the review of a decision by the Registrar, which
related to legal aid. In his decision, the judge upheld the original decision on the basis
of sound financial management.
More than 150 lawyers have now been admitted to the lists of defence counsel
and victims’ counsel. On 1 March 2019, the Registrar adopted the Code of
Professional Conduct for Counsel and Prosecutors before the Kosovo Specialist
Chambers, following consultation with the judges of the Specialist Chambers, the
Specialist Prosecutor and the representatives of the counsel on the lists of counsel and
upon the approval of the President of the Chambers. The Code regulates professional
conduct in judicial proceedings and provides for a disciplinary procedure in case of
any breach of the Code, with the aim of ensuring the integrity of the proceedings and
the fair and proper administration of justice. The establishment of an independent
representative body for all counsel is also being encouraged.
On 7 and 8 March 2019, the judges of the Specialist Chambers convened in The
Hague for their fourth plenary session. The judges received updates and addressed
issues that may arise in future proceedings.
During the reporting period, the Specialist Chambers further finalized the legal
framework and procedures relating to detention, in compliance with the applicable
legal framework and the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment
of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules).
To mitigate the risk of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland leaving the European Union with no withdrawal agreement and/or no
participation in the European Union Common Foreign and Security Policy and
Common Security and Defence Policy, the Specialist Chambers and Specialist
Prosecutor’s Office continue to remain abreast of developments in that regard in the
light of the potential impact on operational and business continuity. Since the previous
reporting period, 33 new staff members joined the Specialist Chambers and Specialist
Prosecutor’s Office.
The Specialist Chambers remains committed to ensuring a dynamic and
receptive outreach strategy. From 5 to 8 February 2019, the Specialist Chambers
outreach team, along with the Victims’ Participation Office, and in cooperation with
various non-governmental organizations in Kosovo, carried out outreach meetings
and round-table discussions with representatives of civil society in different parts of
Kosovo, including Pristina and North Mitrovica. From 1 to 4 April 2019, the outreach
team met with students in Pristina and Fushë Kosovë/Kosovo Polje. In February and
April, the Victims’ Participation Office organized information sessions for
representatives of the Association of Families of Kidnapped and Missing Persons in
Kosovo and Metohija and is reaching out to the Serbian diaspora, as well as to
representatives of the Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian communities. The Office of the
Ombudsperson also participated in outreach activities in Kosovo during the reporting
period. The Specialist Chambers received eight student groups during the reporting
19-08713

15/18

S/2019/461

period, as part of the continuing visitor programme. Media queries and viewings of
the website have increased, largely in response to the activities of the Specialist
Prosecutor’s Office. The Specialist Chambers continues to provide outreach products
explaining its work and, on 22 February 2019, issued a strategic paper on its outreach
programme.
On 6 February 2019, the President of the Specialist Chambers met with the
Civilian Operations Commander of the European External Action Service, General
Vincenzo Coppola. On 8 February 2019, the Committee for Civilian Aspects of Crisis
Management of the Council of the European Union visited the future premises and
courtroom of the Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office.
The Specialist Chambers continues to coordinate closely with the Government
of the Netherlands regarding the completion of the renovation of the permanent
premises. The handover of the permanent premises to the Specialist Chambers was
scheduled to take place in mid-May 2019. The Registrar has maintained regular
contact with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Justice and Security
of the Netherlands to ensure a smooth transition for all staff, assets and operations by
June 2019. Further preparatory work required prior to the move in June 2019 is
ongoing, including verifying that the functional specifications for the permanent
premises are met. Following their deployment in March 2019, 30 new security staff
members received role-specific training to operationalize the permanent premises and
support core activities.
Throughout the reporting period, the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office continued
its investigation into the allegations contained in the report of the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe, entitled “Inhuman treatment of people and illicit
trafficking in human organs in Kosovo”, requesting the presence of suspects, victims
and witnesses for questioning and collecting and reviewing evidence. Assistance from
national authorities in Belgrade and Tirana, as well as the wider international
community, is essential to the investigation. The Office is appreciative of the support
it has received to date. In order to advance the investigation rapidly and meet its
mandate, the Office requires the continued engagement and full support of the
international community, international organizations and individual States in all its
activities.

16/18

19-08713

S/2019/461

Annex III
Composition and strength of the police component of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 15 May 2019)
Country

Women

Men

Total

Austria

1

–

1

Finland

–

1

1

Germany

1

–

1

Hungary

–

2

2

Russian Federation

1

2

3

Turkey

–

1

1

Ukraine

–

1

1

Total

3

7

10

Composition and strength of the military liaison component of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 15 May 2019)

19-08713

Country

Women

Men

Total

Czechia

1

1

2

Poland

–

1

1

Republic of Moldova

–

1

1

Romania

–

1

1

Turkey

–

1

1

Ukraine

–

2

2

Total

1

7

8

17/18

S/2019/461

18/18

19-08713
