S/2015/453

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 June 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the request contained in the
statement by the President of the Security Council of 12 February 2013
(S/PRST/2013/2).
2.
The present report, which is my eleventh on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, covers the period from November 2013 to May 2015. It reviews the
state of the protection of civilians in key conflict-related crises, identifies existing
and emerging protection challenges and highlights ongoi ng efforts to strengthen the
protection of civilians. Finally, it provides recommendations for strengthening the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and promoting a more consistent and
systematic approach by the Security Council.
3.
Over the past decade, the number of people in need of international
humanitarian assistance has tripled. The overwhelming majority of those people are
civilians affected by armed conflict or complex emergencies, which account for
about 80 per cent of the crises requiring an international humanitarian response.
Approximately 42 per cent of the world’s poor now live in conflict-affected and
fragile States, and that figure is expected to rise to 62 per cent by 2030. Protecting
those people from harm and preserving their dignity, in particular by upholding
international law and seeking accountability for violations, should be at the very top
of the international community’s agenda.
4.
Yet shocking levels of brutality and casual disregard for human life and
dignity have come to characterize most of today’s armed conflicts. Civilians are
killed and maimed in targeted or indiscriminate attacks. They are tortured, taken
hostage and disappeared, forcibly recruited into armed groups, displaced from their
homes, separated from their families and denied access to the most basic necessities.
Sexual and gender-based violence is widespread. Direct attacks on schools and
hospitals have become common features of many armed conflicts. Humanitarian and
health-care workers are deliberately targeted. In many conflicts, the most basic rules
of international humanitarian law are routinely violated with little or no
accountability. Impunity remains widespread across conflicts and fuels further
violations.
5.
The human cost of this dynamic is devastating. Displacement due to conflicts
and violence has reached its highest level since the Second World War: an estimated
15-09182 (E)

250615

*1509182*

S/2015/453

38 million people have been displaced within their own country and a further
13 million are refugees abroad. In 2014 alone, about 11 million people had to flee
their homes and seek safety within their own country to escape attacks or for fear of
being attacked. This is the equivalent of 30,000 people uprooted from their homes
every day, with little hope of return. The average length of conf lict-induced internal
displacement is about 17 years. For many, displacement marks the beginning of a
lifelong struggle for security and stability.
6.
Upholding humanity is at the core of humanitarian action and of the Charter of
the United Nations. Civilians caught in armed conflict are among the world ’s most
vulnerable. They have a right to be protected. Yet the commitment and the ability of
the international community to protect civilians in conflict and preserve their
dignity are being challenged at every turn. Over the past 16 years, the Security
Council has established a robust normative framework on the protection of civilians,
embodied in various resolutions and presidential statements and founded on the
principles of international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law. The Council
has also significantly strengthened the protection and human rights mandates of
many United Nations peace operations. This has been bolstered by the regular
updating of the aide-memoire for the consideration of issues pertaining to the
protection of civilians and the establishment of the Council ’s informal expert group
on the protection of civilians. The establishment by the Council of thematic
mandates on children and armed conflict and conflict-related sexual violence has
been crucial in garnering political momentum and promoting responsive action on
those issues. However, despite those improvements in the normative sphere, the task
of protecting civilians on the ground has been more pronounced in its failures than
its successes.
7.
The five core challenges to the protection of civilians, outlined in my previous
reports, continue to be highly relevant. First, we must strengthen compliance with
international law by parties to conflict, in particular in the conduct of hos tilities. A
united Security Council has a critical role to play in this area. The lack of
enforcement and continued violations have eroded international humanitarian and
human rights law. Second, we must ensure more systematic engagement with
non-State armed groups to press for their compliance with the law and their
assurance of the protection of civilians and humanitarian access to people in need.
Third, building on the progress to date, we must further strengthen the role of
peacekeeping operations in the protection of civilians. Peacekeepers must be given
the resources and capabilities necessary to fulfil these mandates while actively
engaging national authorities in fulfilling their primary responsibility to protect
civilians. Fourth, we need more concerted action from all relevant actors, including
those with leverage over parties to conflict, to ensure rapid and unimpeded
humanitarian access to people in need of protection and assistance. Where parties to
conflict withhold consent to relief operations on arbitrary grounds, there must be
consequences. Fifth, there remains an overwhelming need to ensure that those who
violate the law are held accountable for their actions. Anything less promotes a
culture of impunity within which violations flourish. My p revious reports include
numerous recommendations to assist the Council, Member States and parties to
conflict in meeting the challenges. Those recommendations warrant serious
consideration and action. States have the primary responsibility for protecting
civilians on their territory, and the ultimate aim of my recommendations is to
reinforce, not replace, the responsibility of States.

2/18

15-09182

S/2015/453

8.
We need to use the World Humanitarian Summit, to be held in 2016, to launch
an ambitious agenda for change and measurably reduce violence and the impact of
conflicts on civilians, with clear goals and targets. We also need to build on the
work of the post-2015 process to truly ensure that “no one is left behind”, least of
all the displaced and others affected by conflict. Cl early articulating our ambitions
to reduce violence by 2030 and identifying concrete targets and indicators will
promote measurability, dialogue and action in this critical area.

II. Country-specific concerns
9.
Despite some progress at the normative level in the past 18 months, the
general state of protection on the ground remains bleak. Civilians continue to
constitute the vast majority of victims of armed conflict, and widespread violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law are frequently accompanied by a
complete lack of accountability.
Afghanistan
10. There was a sharp rise in civilian casualties and displacement in 2014, with
women and children disproportionately affected. The United Nat ions Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) reported that there were more civilian casualties
in 2014 (10,548) than in any other year since 2009, a 22 per cent increase over
2013. Of particular concern was the dramatic increase (40 per cent) in child
casualties. There was also a sharp rise in civilian casualties resulting from the use of
explosive weapons in populated areas. More than 166,000 people were newly
displaced in 2014, bringing the total number of internally displaced persons to more
than 805,000. In addition, since June 2014, Afghanistan has received 280,000
refugees from Pakistan, while Pakistan continues to host about 1.5 million Afghan
refugees. In February 2014, the Government adopted a comprehensive national
policy on internal displacement; the international community must support the
Government’s efforts to ensure its effective implementation. Humanitarian access
remains a serious challenge owing to high levels of insecurity. Attacks on
humanitarian personnel and assets continued to increa se throughout 2014, including
the abduction and murder of five national staff of Save the Children International.
Central African Republic
11. Sectarian violence, significant levels of displacement, persistent insecurity and
fear continued to mark the country in 2014. Despite progress in 2015 on the
political front, the humanitarian situation remains dire: more than 60 per cent of the
population now require humanitarian assistance. While the security situation in
Bangui and some other areas improved following the deployment of international
forces and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic in 2014, clashes between armed groups and attacks on
civilians remain widespread. The ongoing difficulties of local and national
institutions in re-establishing State authority have made the protection of civilians
extremely challenging. The International Commission of Inquiry on the Central
African Republic has documented extrajudicial killings, arbitrary ar rests and
detention, abductions and torture. Anti-Balaka armed groups are systematically
targeting minority groups. Nearly the entire Muslim population of the western part
of the country, including Bangui, has fled, and many have been deliberately

15-09182

3/18

S/2015/453

attacked. Some 6,000 to 10,000 children have been recruited or used by armed
groups, and sexual exploitation and abuse by the parties to the conflict and by
international forces continues to be reported. About one fifth of the population has
been displaced, with 463,000 internally displaced persons and 430,000 refugees in
neighbouring States. Some 36,000 internally displaced persons from religious and
ethnic minorities are trapped in enclaves surrounded by anti -Balaka elements and
effectively cut off from food and medical supplies. Reports have emerged of Fulani
herders being enslaved, tortured, raped, maimed and killed. Humanitarian access
remains difficult in many areas owing to active hostilities, violence against
humanitarian personnel and interference in the implementation of humanitarian
activities. Eighteen humanitarian workers were killed in the past 12 months alone.
Colombia
12. Although 2014 saw welcome progress in the peace negotiations between the
Government and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia-People’s Army
(FARC-EP), this was not matched by an overall improvement in the humanitarian
situation on the ground, with indigenous groups and Afro -descendant Colombians
particularly affected by the ongoing violence and insecurity. FARC -EP has
maintained its control over communities, including through mobility restrictions,
extortion and threats. Moreover, conflict with the National Liberation Army (ELN)
and violence by post-demobilization armed groups and other local armed structures
continues. The risk of landmine accidents remains high in large areas of the country.
Concerns have been raised that proposed military justice legislation may undermine
the fight against impunity for extrajudicial executions and other alleged grave
violations committed by the military during the conflict. More than 150,000 people
were newly displaced by conflict and violence in 2014, bringing the total number of
internally displaced persons to more than 6 million. The Victims and Land
Restitution Law (2011) offers an important opportunity to provide remedies for
millions of internally displaced persons, but so far only a small number have
benefited from it.
Democratic Republic of the Congo
13. For two decades, persistent conflict in the eastern provinces and instabi lity in
other parts of the country have led to recurrent and protracted humanitarian crises,
high malnutrition rates and outbreaks of disease. In the past 18 months, armed
groups and government forces have continued to commit violations, including
unlawful killings, torture, rape and looting, especially in the east. These include the
summary execution by the Allied Democratic Forces of at least 237 civilians in the
territory of Beni, North Kivu, between October 2014 and May 2015. Conflict related sexual violence remains endemic. Concerns remain about attacks on schools
and the recruitment and use of children by armed groups. Almost 2.8 million people
have been internally displaced and 443,000 people have sought refuge in
neighbouring States. While in some areas of relative calm the displaced have
returned to their places of origin, overall displacement is increasing. In Katanga
Province alone, 180,000 people were displaced between December 2013 and
October 2014 as a result of fighting and insecurity. In addition, some 10,000
refugees arrived from Burundi in April and May 2015. Humanitarian access is
limited in many areas as a result of insecurity, poor infrastructure and attacks on
humanitarian workers and other constraints.

4/18

15-09182

S/2015/453

Iraq
14. The scale of the crisis in Iraq has increased dramatically since my previous
report (S/2013/689) as targeted attacks on civilians, sexual and gender-based
violence, and intimidation, often along ethnic and sectarian lines, have soared over
the past year and continue unabated. The number of Iraqis requiring humanitarian
assistance has risen sharply to more than 8.2 million people, an increase of 3 million
in the past five months. More than 12,000 people were killed and 23,000 injured in
2014. The use of explosive weapons in populated areas remains a major cause of
civilian deaths, injuries and displacement. The rapid expansion of armed groups, in
particular Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), has also had a devastating
impact. Children have been targeted and recruited by armed groups, while thousands
of women and girls have been abducted, forcibly married and subjected to sexual
and gender-based violence. All parties to the conflict have been accused of
perpetrating sectarian and ethnically motivated abuses and killings. Almost
3 million people, half of them children, have been internally displaced since the
conflict began in Anbar Governorate in January 2014. Internally displaced persons
reside in substandard shelters with limited water and sanitation. The return of
internally displaced persons is hampered by the widespread use of booby traps and
improvised explosive devices, damaged public infrastructure, lack of basic services
and access limitations imposed by security forces. Internally displaced males are
often denied entry to safer governorates. Iraq also continues to host some 248,000
refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic. Humanitarian access remains a key
challenge, with ongoing violence and insecurity affecting humanitaria n operations,
particularly for the 2.3 million Iraqis in need of humanitarian assistance who live in
areas outside government control in northern and western Iraq, including areas
under ISIL control. Across the country, nearly 7 million people, or 20 per c ent of the
population, are unable to gain access to essential health, water and sanitation
services.
Libya
15. The humanitarian situation has deteriorated dramatically since fighting
intensified in mid-2014. The widespread use of explosive weapons in populated
areas has taken a heavy toll on civilians, causing death, injury, displacement and the
destruction of homes and essential infrastructure, while also leaving dangerous
explosive remnants of war. Fighting between armed groups has been marked by
extensive violations of international law, including unlawful killings, arbitrary
executions, torture, enforced disappearances, abductions and forced displacement.
Violent confrontations between tribal groups in the south of the country continued.
The conflict has had a disproportionate impact on children. Schools have been
damaged by shelling and used as bases for launching attacks. There are about
400,000 internally displaced persons, many of whom have been repeatedly
displaced as a result of the widening conflict. The situation of migrants, refugees
and asylum seekers, already of serious concern before the escalation in fighting, has
deteriorated further. Humanitarian access is severely limited in several areas owing
to insecurity and fears of violent extremism, reducing the possibility of assessing
needs and providing protection and assistance.

15-09182

5/18

S/2015/453

Mali
16. Renewed conflict in northern Mali in May 2014 has led to heightened
violence, intercommunal tensions and displacement. Clashes between parties to the
conflict and the use of mines and improvised explosive devices in the northern and,
more recently, central regions of Mali have resulted in civilian casualties. The
recruitment and use of children by armed groups continues, and arbitrary arrest and
detention and the ill-treatment of detainees remain a concern. As at 31 May 2015,
there were more than 100,000 internally displaced persons in Mali and 137,500
Malian refugees in neighbouring countries. In conjunction with the Government, the
United Nations has developed a national strategy on durable solutions for internally
displaced persons, returnees and repatriated refugees, but the Government has yet to
formally endorse it. The lack of basic services in many areas of origin poses a
challenge for the return of internally displaced persons. Humanitarian operations
have been hampered in a number of areas as insecurity and violence triggered the
temporary relocation of humanitarian workers and the suspension of their
operations.
Myanmar
17. Renewed clashes in Kachin and northern Shan States triggered further
displacement and the breakdown of community structures, heightening the risk of
sexual and gender-based violence. In Rakhine State, more than 416,000 people
remain in need of humanitarian assistance following intercommunal violence
between Buddhists and Rohingya Muslims in June and October 2012. In Kachin and
northern Shan, concerns have been raised about the parties’ failure to distinguish
between civilians and combatants during hostilities, as well as the con tinuing
recruitment and use of children. Almost four years since the outbreak of the conflict,
approximately 100,000 people remain displaced in Kachin and northern Shan. In
Rakhine, there are 140,000 internally displaced persons in camps, the majority of
whom are Rohingya who remain segregated from the rest of the population, with
limited freedom of movement. They represent only a portion of the more than
1 million Rohingya who remain stateless as a result of the country’s 1982
Citizenship Law denying them equal access to citizenship, and marginalized by
decades of discrimination and persecution, which have prompted thousands to flee
on perilous boat journeys. Greater efforts are required to decongest the camps and
find sustainable solutions for the displaced, as well as address the root causes of the
intercommunal tension and violence. Humanitarian access continues to pose a
serious challenge. Relief operations have been undermined by insecurity in Kachin
and northern Shan, resulting in a lack of access to areas beyond government control.
The environment for humanitarian workers in Rakhine remains deeply hostile. In
March 2014, the premises of the United Nations and other humanitarian
organizations were attacked, forcing the relocation of 300 humanitarian wor kers.
Nigeria
18. North-east Nigeria witnessed a significant increase in violence during the
reporting period, in particular the first few months of 2015, instilling fear in the
civilian population and triggering extensive displacement. An estimated 5, 000
civilians have been killed since January 2014. In addition, at least 2,000 women and
girls have been abducted by Boko Haram during that period, and many have been
forced into sexual slavery or combat. Boko Haram has recruited and used children,
including as suicide bombers and human shields. In January 2015, in the run -up to

6/18

15-09182

S/2015/453

the national elections, Boko Haram attacks on communities in the three most
affected states (Borno, Yobe and Adamawa) occurred almost daily, including
through the use of explosive weapons in populated areas, causing civilian deaths,
injuries and displacement. In April 2015, the Nigerian army freed more than
700 women and children, and a multinational counter-insurgency effort is
understood to have made significant progress against Bo ko Haram in April and May
2015. Nevertheless, counter-insurgency efforts by the national security forces,
armed militias and the security forces of neighbouring countries are also linked to
reports of very serious human rights violations allegedly involvin g a high number of
victims. As at 30 April 2015, an estimated 1.5 million people were internally
displaced. Some 90 per cent of internally displaced persons live in host
communities, generally in desperate conditions, with little or no access to
humanitarian assistance. Others reside in poorly equipped camps, collective centres
and informal sites. A further 210,000 people have fled to neighbouring states. The
Government has stated its intention to support the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees. However, insecurity and the presence of unexploded ordnance
in return areas pose serious challenges. Humanitarian access remains challenging in
some parts of the country, in particular the north-east, owing to high levels of
insecurity.
Occupied Palestinian territory
19. Hostilities in Gaza in 2014 resulted in the highest civilian death toll since
1967, as well as extensive civilian property damage and displacement. More than
1,500 Palestinian civilians were killed, including more than 500 children, and
11,000 were injured during hostilities in Gaza in July and August 2014. There was
also extensive damage to homes and civilian infrastructure, including schools and
hospitals. Explosive weapons were widely used in populated areas, and explosiv e
remnants of war remain widely dispersed across Gaza. The hostilities also had a
serious impact on Israeli civilians owing to indiscriminate rocket and mortar fire
from armed groups in Gaza, which killed five Israeli civilians and caused
displacement in southern Israel. In addition, Palestinian and Israeli fatalities
occurred in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, largely as a result of
confrontations between Palestinian demonstrators and Israeli forces. Those incidents
highlighted long-standing concerns over the use of live ammunition for crowd
control. Almost 500,000 Palestinians were internally displaced at the height of the
hostilities in Gaza, and some 100,000 remain displaced. The continued demolition
of Palestinian homes and the forced displacement of Palestinian civilians, many of
whom are registered refugees, in relation to the construction of illegal settlements in
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, remain a serious concern. Despite the
recent easing, prevailing restrictions of movement into Gaza impede access to
services and resources, undermine livelihoods and reconstruction, compound the
fragmentation of the occupied Palestinian territory and hinder humanitarian
assistance. Israel must allow and facilitate rapid and unimpeded humanitar ian access
to and from Gaza and the West Bank to ensure that civilians’ basic needs are met.
Pakistan
20. Military operations continued in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas.
While military operations continued throughout the reporting period, th ey appear to
involve better advance planning to limit the effect on civilians. On 16 December

15-09182

7/18

S/2015/453

2014, nine gunmen stormed the Army Public School in Peshawar, killing
145 people, including 132 schoolchildren, and injuring at least 133 others.
Approximately 1.6 million people remain displaced in Pakistan, including 700,000
who were displaced in 2014 alone, largely as a result of the conflict in the Federally
Administered Tribal Areas. An additional 39,000 families fled to Afghanistan in
2014. At the end of 2014, the Government announced its intention to return all
displaced persons over a two-year period in a phased and supported manner.
Humanitarian access to return areas of internally displaced persons is critical in
order to plan for, support and monitor returns. Yet bureaucratic delays continue to
affect humanitarian organizations’ access to people in need.
Somalia
21. The humanitarian crisis in Somalia remains among the largest and most
complex in the world. High levels of insecurity prevail in most dist ricts of southern
and central Somalia, with an estimated 2,170 violent incidents reported during the
first nine months of 2014. In Mogadishu, Al-Shabaab has continued to use
asymmetric combat techniques, including attacks targeting government institutions,
politicians and journalists using improvised explosive devices. More than 1 million
internally displaced persons continue to face a range of protection challenges,
including forced evictions, discrimination and sexual violence. Some
43,000 internally displaced persons have been evicted from settlements in
Mogadishu since the beginning of 2015, forcing many to move to areas with poor
living conditions and limited services and security. All parties to the conflict have
deliberately restricted humanitarian access, including through road access
limitations and administrative restrictions, in particular in southern and central
Somalia. Attacks on humanitarian actors continued, with 75 incidents against aid
workers, including 10 deaths and 22 abductions, during the first nine months of
2014. During the past three months alone, 7 aid workers were killed, 11 were
injured and 20 were arrested and detained. In April 2015, four United Nations
humanitarian workers were killed in an attack by Al -Shabaab in Garowe (Puntland),
previously considered one of the most permissive security environments for
international assistance in the country.
South Sudan
22. It has been 18 months since the start of the conflict that has devastated South
Sudan. Both parties to the conflict are accused of targeting civilians, including
through killings, arbitrary detention, abductions, disappearances, sexual violence
and attacks on civilian objects, such as houses of worship, schools and hospitals.
Both parties are reported to have used sexual violence as part of military tactics. An
estimated 184 health facilities have been destroyed or occupied or no longer
function. Access to education has been disrupted, with some 400,000 children
dropping out of school since December 2013, and 70 per cent of schools in conflictaffected areas have closed. Several thousand children may have been recruited and
used by armed forces and groups since 2014. In this context, I welcome the recent
release by the South Sudan Democratic Army’s Cobra Faction of more than
1,700 child soldiers. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan continues to
provide physical protection to some 118,000 internally displaced persons on its
bases, while elsewhere more than 1.5 million people are displaced internally and
more than 540,000 have fled to other countries. Concerns persist about camp

8/18

15-09182

S/2015/453

militarization and the infiltration of armed elements in refugee camp settings.
Violence against humanitarian workers and restrictions by both parties on road and
air movement continue to undermine humanitarian access. At least 13 humanitarian
workers have been killed since the conflict began.
Sudan
23. Continued fighting in the Darfur region has involved widespread violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights. Clashes in Darfur have seen
deliberate or indiscriminate attacks on civilians perceived to be aligned with armed
opposition groups and sporadic attacks on those perceived to be aligned with the
Government. There were continued reports of sexual violence in Darfur, alth ough
the United Nations has had difficulty in gaining access in order to investigate those
and other alleged human rights violations. Attacks on civilians, including the
intensification of aerial bombardment, were also reported in South Kordofan and
Blue Nile. In 2014, an estimated 430,000 people fled intercommunal conflict and
Operation Decisive Summer, launched by government forces. This brought the total
number of internally displaced persons to more than 2.5 million, the majority in
camp settings. At least 65,000 new internally displaced persons were verified in
Darfur in the first five months of 2015 alone. Elsewhere, military operations in
South Kordofan and Blue Nile reportedly displaced some 140,000 people in 2014.
Although most areas hosting people in need of assistance could be reached, in many
cases access was partial and involved delays and restrictions. Cross -line
humanitarian access to areas of active conflict and areas held by armed opposition
forces remained cut off.
Syrian Arab Republic
24. The Syrian Arab Republic has entered its fifth year of conflict, with violence
and brutality continuing unabated and with total impunity for all parties to the
conflict. An estimated 12.2 million people now require humanitarian assistance, an
increase of almost 3 million people in the past year. More than 220,000 people have
been killed and more than 1 million injured since March 2011. Civilians throughout
the country have been subjected to direct or indiscriminate attacks, including the
widespread use of barrel bombs and other explosive weapons in populated areas.
Chemical weapons attacks have also been reported. Hospitals, schools, places of
worship and other civilian objects have been damaged, destroyed or occupied by
combatants. Essential services have been cut off, depriving civilians of water and
electricity. Reports continue of summary and extrajudicial executions, enforced
disappearances, arbitrary detention, kidnappings, sexual violence and forced
recruitment by parties to the conflict. More than half of the Syrian population have
been forced from their homes, with 7.6 million internally displaced persons and
almost 4 million refugees in neighbouring countries. Humanitarian access continues
to be constrained by fighting and insecurity, as well as deliberate obstruction of lifesaving aid, despite three Security Council resolutions emphasizing the obligations
of the parties under international humanitarian law and demanding full humanitarian
access. Some 4.8 million people are living in hard-to-reach or besieged areas. Aid
workers are frequently harassed, kidnapped or killed, and health -care facilities and
personnel have also become targets.

15-09182

9/18

S/2015/453

Ukraine
25. The conflict in Ukraine has been marked by widespread disregard for the
protection of civilians. Five million people now require humanitarian assistance,
including shelter, food and health care. At least 6,344 people were killed between
mid-April and mid-May 2015. The fighting has been characterized by the
widespread use of explosive weapons, including cluster munitions, in populated
areas. There were 1.3 million internally displaced persons registered in Ukraine as
at 21 May 2015. In November 2014, the Government adopted a national law on
ensuring the rights and freedoms of internally displaced persons, bringing some
predictability to assistance efforts. Meanwhile, nearly 860,000 people have fled to
neighbouring countries, one third of them children. The volatile security situation in
eastern Ukraine, damaged infrastructure and bureaucratic impediments have
hampered humanitarian access to people in need. Civilians remaining in conflict affected areas have suffered extreme hardship and difficulty in gaining access to
basic services due to violence, insecurity and restrictions on movement.
Yemen
26. The dramatic escalation of the conflict in Yemen in 2015 has taken a heavy toll
on civilians. Prior to the latest escalation, it was estimated that 15.9 million people,
or 61 per cent of the population, would require humanitarian assistance in 20 15.
That figure is now likely to have increased significantly. Between mid -March and
mid-May 2015, about 2,000 people were killed and 8,000 people injured, roughly
half of them civilians. The impact on civilian infrastructure has been devastating,
with widespread air strikes and use of explosive weapons in populated areas, as well
as attacks on health-care facilities, schools and other essential infrastructure. Large scale displacement is occurring across the country owing to the intensity of the
fighting. As at late May 2015, there were more than 545,000 new internally
displaced persons, and more than 28,000 people have left the country over the past
two months. Access conditions are severely restricted owing to ongoing hostilities
and insecurity, and yet urgent humanitarian needs are increasing. Many Yemenis are
now deprived of access to basic services, including medical treatment, food, water
and other necessities. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
advocates safe, rapid and unhindered humanitarian access, including a further
humanitarian pause as observed from 12 to 17 May 2015, and is working on the
deconfliction arrangements necessary for a regular and predictable system under
which to deliver humanitarian supplies to people in need.

III. Monitoring the five core challenges
27. The past 18 months have seen the deterioration of several protracted conflicts
and the emergence of new ones, with devastating consequences for civilians.
Against that backdrop, the five core protection challenges remain highly relevant.
Compliance and accountability
Respect for international humanitarian law
28. One of the most critical challenges for the protection of civilians is the
prevailing disrespect for international humanitarian law on the part of States and
non-State armed groups. Many parties in today’s armed conflicts consistently show

10/18

15-09182

S/2015/453

complete disregard for their obligations under international humanitarian law and
contempt for human life. Deliberately targeting and brutalizing civilians and
attacking vital civilian infrastructure have become routine objectives of parties to
conflict. Violations of international humanitarian law are accompanied by
widespread impunity, which emboldens perpetrators and deprives victims of any
hope of justice or redress. I encourage Member States to come to gether to discuss
and identify ways to strengthen respect for and compliance with international
humanitarian law, as a matter of urgency and priority.
Attacks against humanitarian and health-care workers and facilities
29. I remain concerned by continuing attacks against humanitarian and health-care
workers and facilities. A study conducted by the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) in 2014 documented more than 1,800 incidents involving serious acts
or threats of violence affecting the delivery of health care in 2012 and 2013.
According to the Aid Worker Database, 270 aid workers were killed, kidnapped or
seriously wounded in 2014. Ninety per cent of the victims were national staff. Such
attacks have devastating consequences for civilians. I welcome the adoption by the
Security Council of resolution 2175 (2014) on the protection of humanitarian and
United Nations and associated personnel. In that resolution, the Council reaffirmed
the legal protection afforded to such personnel, called for their full and unimpeded
access to all people in need of assistance, and emphasized the responsibility of
States to ensure accountability for perpetrators of attacks.
Widespread use of explosive weapons in populated areas
30. Since 2009, I have consistently highlighted the devastating humanitarian
impact of the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. 1 I have called upon
parties to conflict to refrain from the use of explosive weapons with wide -area
effects in populated areas. I have recommended that the Security Council, whenever
relevant, expressly call upon parties to conflict to refrain from the use of such
weapons.
31. The reasons for doing so are abundantly clear. In Afghanistan, Libya, the
occupied Palestinian territory, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Ukraine, Yemen
and elsewhere, the use of explosive weapons in populated areas is a major cause of
civilian deaths, injury and displacement. According to the non -governmental
organization Action on Armed Violence, 41,847 people were killed or injured by
explosive weapons in 2014, of whom 78 per cent were civilians. When explosive
weapons were used in populated areas, 92 per cent of the casualties were civilians .2
While explosive weapons are not explicitly prohibited under international
humanitarian law, in many cases their use in populated areas constitutes unlawful
conduct because of their indiscriminate impact. Since the wide -area effects of many
explosive weapons are well known, their likely impact on civilians and civilian
infrastructure is foreseeable. This raises serious moral and, in some cases, legal
questions.
32. Many types of explosive weapons are currently in use. They include air dropped bombs, artillery shells, missiles and rockets, mortar bombs and improvised
explosive devices. While they differ in their design, composition and method of use,
__________________
1 S/2009/277, para. 36.
2 Action on Armed Violence, Explosive States: Monitoring Explosive Violence in 2014.

15-09182

11/18

S/2015/453

such weapons share certain basic features. They generally use explosive force to
create a zone of blast and fragmentation with the potential to kill or injure anyone or
damage anything within that zone. In other words, such weapons have
indiscriminate effects. This makes their use in populated areas, such as towns, cities,
markets and camps for internally displaced persons, particularly problematic, and
more so if the weapons’ effects extend across a wide area.
33. Given the indiscriminate impact of explosive weapons, their use in populated
areas exacts an unacceptable toll on civilians. Many civilians are killed or suffer
life-changing injuries. The use of explosive weapons in populated ar eas also has a
significant long-term humanitarian impact. Housing and essential infrastructure,
such as water and electricity supply systems, are damaged or destroyed. Livelihoods
are devastated as commercial property and means of production are damaged or
destroyed. Access to health care is often hampered because hospitals and clinics
have been damaged, destroyed or rendered inaccessible, or because health -care
personnel have been killed or supplies cut off. Children’s education is interrupted,
either as a result of damage to facilities or direct harm or fear of harm to teaching
personnel. The Syrian conflict has put 2.6 million children out of school, some for
three years or more. In Gaza, 66 per cent of schools were damaged or destroyed
during the hostilities in July and August 2014, including some that were sheltering
internally displaced persons, resulting in further loss of life.
34. The use of explosive weapons in populated areas is a major driver of
displacement as people are forced to flee owing to attacks that damage or destroy
their homes or livelihoods or fear of such attacks. It also has a tremendous impact
on post-conflict reconstruction requirements and costs. Explosive weapons leave
explosive remnants of war, which continue to pose a serious threat to civilians, in
particular children, often for decades after the conflict has ended.
35. The use of explosive weapons in populated areas, in particular those weapons
with wide-area effects, raises serious concerns about respect for the fundamental
principles of distinction, proportionality and precautions in international
humanitarian law. Full compliance with international humanitarian law by all parties
to conflict would significantly strengthen the protection of civilians from the effects
of explosive weapons. In addition, the development of policy standards to curb or
limit the use of explosive weapons in populated areas, in particular those weapons
with wide-area effects, could significantly strengthen the protection of civilians.
36. Important precedents exist in this regard. Of particular note, the International
Security Assistance Force, in Afghanistan, and the African Union Mission in
Somalia instituted policy and practice that place limits on the use of certain
explosive weapons in certain locations where civilians tend to be present, in order to
minimize the impact of military operations on civilians. The Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is compiling examples of such practice and
will make them available to Member States and partners with a view to promoting a
change in practice by parties to conflict. In October 2014, I sent a note verbale to all
Member States requesting that they provide examples of relevant policy and
practice. Some have responded to my request, and I encourage others to do so
without delay. I also welcome the decision of Austria to convene an expert meeting
later in 2015, in cooperation with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, to begin discussing the possible scope and content of a declaration on the

12/18

15-09182

S/2015/453

humanitarian impact of explosive weapons in populated areas. I strongly encourage
Member States to engage constructively in that initiative.
Humanitarian access
37. Regular and sustained humanitarian access remains a key challenge in many
armed conflicts. Access is a prerequisite for effective humanitarian action.
Accordingly, I have repeatedly emphasized the need to ensure systematic
engagement by humanitarian organizations with non -State armed groups on access,
protection and other humanitarian issues.
38. During the past 18 months, multiple constraints continued to have an impact
on the ability of affected people to gain access to assistance and services, as well as
humanitarian organizations’ ability to reach affected people. These include active
hostilities, attacks against humanitarian workers and facilities, bureaucratic
restrictions and interference in the delivery of assistance. In some conflicts, the
parties have deliberately obstructed the delivery of assistance in order to h arm
civilians. Access for humanitarian organizations is not simply a technical
requirement or bureaucratic decision for Governments; the denial of access prolongs
suffering and kills people.
39. I therefore reiterate that, in situations where the party to the conflict with
control over a civilian population is unable or unwilling to meet the needs of that
population, humanitarian organizations must be allowed to carry out impartial relief
operations. The consent of affected States for relief operations may not be
arbitrarily withheld. Once relief operations have been agreed to, parties must allow
and facilitate rapid and unimpeded passage of relief consignments, equipment and
personnel. The arbitrary denial of humanitarian access and depriving civilians of
objects indispensable to their survival, including wilfully impeding relief supply and
access, constitute violations of international humanitarian law, and this has
increasingly been acknowledged in Security Council resolutions. There must be
accountability for such acts.
Peacekeeping
40. I note the ongoing challenges that peacekeepers face in their efforts to protect
civilians in armed conflict. While the situation in many conflicts remains grim, it
would be far worse without the important protection that peacekeepers can provide.
During the reporting period, attacks on peacekeeping personnel resulted in the death
of 55 personnel. In Mali and Darfur alone, attacks on peacekeepers during that
period resulted in 42 personnel killed and 99 wounded. Peacekeepers are also
increasingly faced with movement restrictions in violation of status-of-forces
agreements with national authorities, which can hamper their ability to perform their
mandated tasks. The important and impartial role of peacekeepers in protecting
civilians must be respected by all parties. I have recently received the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and will make
recommendations to the General Assembly in due course.
Long-term internal displacement in protracted crises
41. Internal displacement has reached record levels. At the end of 2014, more than
38 million people were internally displaced as a result of conflict and violence,
while an additional 13 million had sought refuge abroad. Those figures are higher

15-09182

13/18

S/2015/453

than at any time since the Second World War. An estimated 11 million people
became internally displaced in 2014 alone, or 30,000 every day. The average length
of conflict-induced internal displacement is about 17 years.
42. Internally displaced persons are particularly vulnerable. They often have
limited access to basic services, and many lack legal documentation and struggle to
find employment or reclaim property. They are at increased risk of discrimination
and exploitation, in particular women and girls. Many internally displaced persons
are accommodated in camps with only the most basic facilities, but the vast majority
live in host communities. The generosity of communities that support internally
displaced persons for weeks, months or even years should be acknowled ged.
43. National Governments have the primary responsibility to protect and assist
internally displaced persons on their territory. Governments should invest in
preparedness measures and develop the legal frameworks and policies necessary to
address internal displacement, based on the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement. At present, less than 40 per cent of countries have such frameworks
in place. Governments should promote durable solutions, including return, local
integration and settlement elsewhere in the country, from the onset of displacement
crises. Instructive provisions are contained in the African Union Convention for the
Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa (Kampala
Convention); other regions could benefit from the development of similar
frameworks. At the national level, I welcome the adoption of legislation on
displacement in Somalia and Ukraine.
44. The international community has a responsibility not only to provide
assistance to internally displaced persons but also to help to address their specific
protection needs and the causes of their displacement. We need to strengthen the
coordination and operational capacity of humanitarian organizations to support
Governments and development partners in addressin g the short- and long-term
needs of internally displaced persons. The Security Council, at its Arria Formula
meeting on the protection of internally displaced persons, held in May 2014,
emphasized the importance of restoring national authority and protecti on, the key
role of the international community and the Security Council when national
protection fails, and the need for greater focus on and investment in long -term and
durable solutions for internally displaced persons. I encourage Council members to
consider these recommendations in relation to country-specific situations.
45. The sustainable development goals offer a unique opportunity to address
protracted displacement in a systematic and effective manner. While displacement
was not included in the sustainable development goals and targets, it should be
reflected in the sustainable development goal indicators, disaggregated data sets and
the definition of vulnerable groups. This is essential, to ensure that no one is “left
behind” and to create an environment conducive to the protection of 51 million
displaced people around the world. Upholding the right of those particularly
vulnerable people to live in safety and dignity and offering them durable solutions
are an essential part of ending poverty in all its forms everywhere and must
therefore be part of the sustainable development goals framework.
46. Beyond the sustainable development goals process, we need to set ourselves
an ambitious but credible target, for example collectively committing oursel ves to
halving the number of internally displaced persons by 2030. Rallying Member
States, concerned Governments, donors, humanitarian and development actors and

14/18

15-09182

S/2015/453

international financial institutions around a common and concrete objective is a
prerequisite to making progress on internal displacement. It will compel us to
develop better-coordinated and more holistic approaches.

IV. Normative progress and ongoing efforts to strengthen the
protection of civilians
47. Since my previous report, there have been a number of important advances
that support the protection of civilians.
Compliance and accountability
48. The entry into force of the Arms Trade Treaty in 2014 is a significant step
towards preventing the flow of weapons and ammunition to areas a ffected by
conflict and violence. I call upon all States that have not yet done so to accede to
and implement the Treaty without delay.
49. Since 2012, Switzerland and ICRC have conducted consultations with States
parties to the 1949 Geneva Conventions to identify ways to strengthen compliance
with international humanitarian law. The 32nd International Conference of the Red
Cross and Red Crescent, to be held in December 2015, presents an important
opportunity for States to act on the recommendations emanati ng from that process.
50. In the fight against conflict-related sexual violence, my Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict signed joint communiqués with the Governments of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan, as well as a fr amework of
cooperation with the African Union, to address conflict-related sexual violence.
51. Progress was seen in some countries, including Afghanistan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Myanmar, in the implementation of action plans to end
and prevent the recruitment and use of children. The new Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict, along with early
guidance produced by my Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
are also important contributions to the protection of children.
52. Various steps have been taken under the Human Rights Up Front initiative,
which I launched in 2013, to strengthen the ability of the United Nations to prevent
and respond to serious violations of international humanitarian and human rights
law. Mechanisms for early warning and the coordination of United Nations response
have been strengthened, as have efforts to improve collective information sharing
and analysis within and across the United Nations with regard to such violations.
The statement by the principals of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee on the
centrality of protection in humanitarian action, issued in December 2013, outlined
measures to strengthen the protection of all persons affected and at risk within a
humanitarian response.
53. The successful implementation over the past two years of the human rights due
diligence policy on United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces by
peace operations constitutes another effective way to reduce the risk of national
security forces committing violations of international human rights or humanitarian
law.

15-09182

15/18

S/2015/453

54. The utility of casualty recording was again highlighted in a study by the
Oxford Research Group in 2014, which found that casualty re cording by UNAMA
in Afghanistan had made possible advocacy to engage parties to the conflict on their
behaviour and led to a decrease in civilian casualties resulting from their operations.
55. The International Criminal Court secured its second conviction on 7 March
2014, finding Germain Katanga guilty of five counts of war crimes and crimes
against humanity. In addition, in December 2014, the Court ’s Appeals Chamber
upheld the conviction and sentence of Thomas Lubanga Dyilo. These are important
verdicts for the victims of those horrific crimes against civilians, international
justice and the fight against impunity.
Humanitarian access
56. Further to a request contained in my previous report, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and Oxford University have led a series of
consultations with a range of experts and organizations to develop detailed guidance
on the legal framework regulating humanitarian assistance, with particular focus on
the arbitrary withholding of consent to relief o perations. The guidance will be
released in July 2015 and will address such issues as whose consent is required for
cross-border relief operations; what amounts to arbitrary withholding of consent;
and how the obligation to allow and facilitate relief operations can be implemented.
It is hoped that the guidance will inform policies and advocacy strategies for
improving humanitarian access to conflict-affected populations.
Peacekeeping
57. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of F ield
Support have published the first United Nations policy on the protection of civilians
in United Nations peacekeeping, along with associated guidelines for military
components. This constitutes an important development in our efforts to
institutionalize how civilian, police and military peacekeepers implement protection
of civilians mandates in coordination with humanitarian and human rights actors
and in support of national authorities.

V. Recommendations
58. Recalling the numerous recommendations in my previous reports aimed at
strengthening the protection of civilians, I emphasize the importance of the
following measures.
Strengthening respect for international law
59. To strengthen compliance with international law and ensure accountability for
violations, the Security Council should:
(a) Systematically remind parties to conflict of their obligations under
international law, in particular in the conduct of hostilities, and call upon the parties
to fully comply with their obligations;
(b) Systematically condemn violations of international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law, including attacks against humanitarian and health -care

16/18

15-09182

S/2015/453

personnel and facilities, and consider referring such instances to the International
Criminal Court;
(c) Systematically request reports on violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law and, where concerns exist regarding serious violations,
consider mandating commissions of inquiry or referring situations to the
International Criminal Court;
(d) Consider applying targeted measures against parties and individuals who
routinely violate their obligations to protect civilians;
(e) Encourage Member States to develop concrete mechanisms to improve
respect for international law, such as regular meetings on compliance and a central
register for monitoring and recording violations of international law.
60.

Member States should:

(a) Adopt national legislation for the prosecution of persons suspected of
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and other serious violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law;
(b) Search for and prosecute or extradite persons suspected of grave
breaches of international humanitarian law or serious violations of human rights
law;
(c)
delay;

Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court without

(d) Cooperate fully with the International Criminal Court and similar
mechanisms.
Humanitarian access
61. The Security Council should systematically remind parties to conflict of their
obligation to allow and facilitate rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access. In
addition, the Council should condemn the arbitrary denial of humanitarian access
and depriving civilians of objects indispensable to their survival, including wilfully
impeding relief supply and access, and should emphasize that such acts constitute
violations of international humanitarian law.
62. The Emergency Relief Coordinator and humanitarian organizations should
systematically engage with relevant non-State parties to conflict on humanitarian
issues with the objective of improving humanitarian access, ensuring the delivery of
emergency assistance and strengthening the protection of civilians in conflict areas.
Such engagement, for exclusively humanitarian purposes, does not entail t he
recognition of the political or military aspirations of non -State armed groups.
Use of explosive weapons in populated areas
63. Parties to conflict should refrain from the use of explosive weapons with wide area effects in populated areas. In addition, Member States should consider making
a commitment to this effect.
64. Member States should improve the exchange of information and lessons
learned on the use and impact of explosive weapons with wide -area effects in
populated areas. In particular, as called for in my note verbale of October 2014,
Member States should support the ongoing efforts of the Office for the Coordination

15-09182

17/18

S/2015/453

of Humanitarian Affairs to collect examples of good practice and develop guidance
to enhance the protection of civilians and reduce the humanitarian impact of
explosive weapons in populated areas.
65. Member States, with the support of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and relevant organizations, should develop targets and
indicators to monitor progress in reducing the humanitarian impact of explosive
weapons in populated areas.
Civilian casualty tracking and recording
66. In recognition of the proven utility of civilian casualty tracking as a means of
informing military strategy to reduce harm to civilians, parties to conflict, including
in the context of multinational operations and United Nations peacekeeping
missions involved in offensive operations, should establish and implement such
mechanisms.
67. United Nations actors should work together to establish a common United
Nations system to systematically record civilian casualties as part of broader efforts
to monitor and report on violations of international humanitarian and human rights
law, drawing on good practice and expertise from within the Un ited Nations,
Member States and civil society.
Displacement
68. Member States should ensure that the sustainable development goals
framework adequately addresses the long-term needs of the forcibly displaced,
including in relevant definitions, indicators and disaggregated data sets. Beyond that
framework, I encourage the development of ambitious but credible targets and
national monitoring mechanisms aimed at significantly reducing (e.g. by half) the
number of forcibly displaced persons by 2030.
69. States members of the African Union should ratify and implement the
Kampala Convention without delay. In addition, Member States should promote the
development of similar instruments in other regions to protect and address the
specific needs of internally displaced persons. The objective should be to ensure
that by 2030 at least 50 per cent of States have adopted and implemented regional
and national legal and policy frameworks on internal displacement.
Protection of civilians before the Security Council
70. Given the extreme challenges and levels of violence that civilia ns are facing in
conflict settings around the world, I recommend that:
(a) My report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict be submitted
on an annual basis (rather than every 18 months);
(b) The Council resume its practice of holding biannual o pen debates on the
protection of civilians, in June and December;
(c) The Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians be used systematically
to monitor protection trends in a greater number of situations of concern, including
in the absence of peace operations, and to bring to the attention of Council members
the most pressing protection challenges facing civilians and possible opportunities
to address those challenges.

18/18

15-09182
