UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

NEW

YEAR

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. ..*.,,..

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/24 15) . . . ..I.....................
Expression of welcome .to the representative of Jordan
Adoption of the agenda . * , , . . . . . . . . ..*.**.......

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .. .

1
1
1

,...,......,,,I.,.....

Letter dated 19 February 1983 from the Permanent Representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Secu.,,,.....,...*,.*..o,.*
rity Council (S/15615) . . . . . . . . . ..I...........

1

WPV.2415

I

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures, Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ , . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

Held in New York on Tuesday,
President: Mr. Oleg Aleksandrovich TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics),

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): The
Council is meeting today in response to the request made
by the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in
his letter dated 19 February.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2415)

2,

of the agenda

4. Members of the Council also have before them document S/15614, which contains the text of a letter dated
18 February from the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to the President of the Council. I should like
to inform members that I have received a letter dated 22
February from the representative of the United States,
which will be circulated during the course of this meeting
as document S/15617.

Letter dated 19 February 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/15615)
The meeting was called to order at 12.35 p.m.

Expression

1983, at noon

At the invitation of the President, Mr. l?eiki (Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya) took a place at the Council table; Mr.
Soglo (Benin), Mr. Al-Ashtal (Democratic Yemen), Mr.
Khalil (Egypt), Mr. Hayford (Ghana), Mr. RajaieKhorassani
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Abdalla
(Sudan) and Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

1. Adoption

22 February

of welcome to the representative of Jordan

5. The first speaker is the representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, upon whom I now call.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): I
should like at the outset of this meeting to extend a warm
welcome to Mr. Abdullah Salah, the new representative
of Jordan. We wish him every possible success and look
forward to the same close co-operation with him that we
enjoyed with his predecessor, Mr. Nuseibeh.

6. Mr. TREIKI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation from Arabic): Allow me at the outset, Sir, on behalf of
the delegation of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to extend
to you warm congratulations on your presidency for this
month. We are pleased to see you presiding over the
Council, since you represent a friendly country with
which we are bound by strong ties: a responsible superPower known for its support for the struggle of peoples
against colonialism and for the causes of liberation and
independence. We are pleased also because of your wide
politica experience, your wisdom and your effectiveness,
which eminently qualify you for this responsibility.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted
Letter dated 19 February 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15615)

7. I wish also to extend to my colleague and friend, Mr.
Amega of Togo, our appreciation for the diplomatic
expertise with which he conducted the work of the Council last month.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): 1
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Benin, Democratic Yemen, Egypt, Ghana, The Islamic Republic of
Iran, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, the Sudan and the
Syrian Arab Republic in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

8. Through you, Mr, President, I should like to extend
my thanks and gratitude to the members of the Council
for giving me this opportunity to speak before this body.
As this is my first statement before the Council this year I
express my country’s appreciation for the adoption of the
resolution introducing Arabic as an official working language of the Council [resolution 528 (1982)]. It is an
acknowledgement
of the importance and role of Arabic
1

here at the United Nations and is also a taken ofappreciation for the Arab people.

reconnaissance and spying. In the letter it is stated that on
30 April an American aircraft carrier of the Sixth Fleet
which was based near the Libyan coast had spied on the
Libyan Air Force and jammed Libyan communications.
Moreover, a wave of United States military aircraft had
been launched from the carrier to interfere with Libyan
training flights in the area.

9. I welcome my colleague the representative of Jordan
and wish him every success.I also welcome the States that
have acceded to membership of the Council this year:
Malta, the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan and
Zimbabwe.

14. Secondly, the annex to a letter dated 1 August 1980,
addressed to the President of the Security Council
[S/.24094], contained the following list of violations of
Libyan airspace by United States aircraft:

10. The American threats and provocations against the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya that we are witnessing today are
neither a matter of coincidence nor transient in nature,
but represent an established and deliberate aggressive
policy that has been pursued since 1969, following the
Great 1 September Revolution. Until then, as everyone
knows, Libya in its entirety had been an aggressive military base of the United States, there being five American
bases spread over the country, the most important of
which was Willis-the largest American base outside the
United States at the time. Moreover, American monopolies used to control the Libyan economy-especially
the
oil sector-and used it in their own interest. With the
Revolution and an end to the puppet regime of the American Administration
a new phase in the history of the
Libyan people and of the Arab nation began: the aggressive American bases were evacuated, an end was put to
the oil monopolies in the area, and Libya pursued a
policy of economic emancipation and the nationalization
of the oil resources in the interest of the people of the
region, in particular, and of oil-producing nations, in
general.
11. Neither the Revolution’s support for our African
brothers, for the liberation movements in southern
Africa and for the struggle of the Palestinian people, nor
Libya’s pursuit of a non-aligned, anti-racist, anti-Zionist
and anti-colonialist policy is acceptable to the United
States, the leader of international terrorism; hence the
process of threats, provocation and direct and indirect
aggression against Libya, from the aggressive act by the
Sadat rbgime, incited by the United States, and his waging of war against Libya in 1977, to the act of direct
aggression in the Gulf of Sidra in August 1981, in addition to the economic boycott designed to starve the
Libyan people, not to mention the prejudiced media
campaign,..economic pressures and the inciting of other
States to be hostile to the Jamahiriya. The United States
Administration’s
aggressive policy against the Libyan
people and its palicy of terrorism are assuming daily
ever-wider forms and manifestations.

One violation

on 18 October.

1977 -

Eight violations, seven over the north of
Tripoli: one on 28 January, two on 11 April
and four on 18 April; one violation over the
north of Benghazi.

1978 -

Seven violations, five north of Tripoli: one
on 12 February, three on 11 March and one
on 12 March; two violations north of T*
bruk on 7 December.

1979 -

Six violations north of Tripoli: 3 February,
15 March, 12 June and 6, 19 and 30 July.

1980 -

Up until June of that year, 135 violations:
103 north of Tripoli, 6 north of Sidra and
26 north of Benghazi.

-

Violations north of Tripoli: one .on 19
February, one on 22 February, two on 24
February, one on 25 February, one on 26
February and two on 2 March.

15. Thirdly, in a letter dated 20 August 1981, addressed
to the President of the Council [S/146.36l, it was stated
that on 19 August at 0512 (GMT) eight American aircraft
of the United States Sixth Fleet which werepart of American forces conducting manoeuvres near Libyan shores
had intercepted two Libyan Arab Air Force aircraft while
they were conducting reconnaissance duties in Libyan
,airspace. Those Libyan aircraft were attacked by American aircraft. That act of aggression wascondemned by the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the Organization
of the Islamic Conference and the Group of Arab States.
16. Fourthly, in a letter dated 3 February 1982,
addressed to the Secretary-General [S/14860], in which it
was stated that on 3 1 January at 1422 (GMT) two American F-14 jet fighters from the United States Sixth FIeet
had intercepted a Libyan airliner, a Boeing 727 belonging
to the Libyan Arab Airlines, on its regular flight from
Tripoli to Athens. The two American fighters had carried
on acrobatic provocative manoeuvres against the Libyan
commercial plane, following it over a distance of 1 I
kilometres. That incident had occurred in international
airspace within the Greek Aviation Information Area,
about 48 kilometres south-west of the Greek island of
Paleo flora, penetrating the international air route known
as “B-l”, above the Libyan Arab Airlines aircraft.

12. In the past Libya has repeatedly notified the Council and the Secretary-General of such acts of aggression
and terrorism pursued by the United States authorities
against our country. The United States Sixth Fleet in the
Mediterranean has been violating Libyan territorial
waters and airspace. By way of example we refer to the
following correspondence with the United Nations,

-

I975 -

13. First, in a letter dated 30May 1973, addressed to the
President of the Council [S/10939], it was specifically
reported that on 21 March an American C-130 military
aircraft had violated Libyan airspace for the purpose of
2

17. On 5 February 1982 The New York Times stated
that Greece had lodged a complaint with the United
States for the above-mentioned violation of Greek airspace, which constituted an act of aggression against and
a detriment to Libyan economic interests.

25. It is clear from this that the United States wants to
fabricate pretexts to interfere in the affairs of the States
of the area and incite them against each other under the
policy of divide and rule so as to impose its hegemony
and control on the peoples of the area and compel them
to acquiesce in United States policy. It is also trying to
subjugate the peoples of the area to the desires of the
racists in occupied Palestine and southern Africa,

18. There have been many recent violations of Libyan
territorial waters. On 31 December 1982 three violations
occurred in the Sidra region, On 19 January 1983 two
violations occurred in the Benghazi region.

26. The aim of the United States is clear. As stated in
The New York Timesof 22 February, “The plan, according to American officials, was to lure Libya into striking
and then to destroy as much of its air force as possible.“* That was the United States plan.

19. The latest event in the series of United States provocations and threats against the Libyan Jamahiriya have
been actions of the American AWACS, which have been
constantly spying along the eastern region of Libya. Those
actions have resulted in the obstruction and jamming of
civil communication. On 13 February the United States
aircraft-carrier Nimitz and some vessels accompanying it
approached the Libyan coast near the Gulf of Sidra. On
16 February, 13 violations of the airspace occurred in the
Sidra area.

27, United States acts of aggression have not been
limited to acts of military provocation but include prejudiced media campaigns against the Jamahiriya. The
United States Administration
is feeding this campaign
with false information by American officials and deliberate distortions, such as describing Libyan assistance to
internationally
recognized liberation movements as
assistance to international terrorism. We refer also to the
so-called assassination squad which was fabricated by
the IJnited States Administration and for which it could
find no proof. That squad existed only in the imagination
of some United States officials.

20. On 17 February some naval vessels of the United
States Sixth Fleet approached the limit of the territorial
waters 22 kilometres from latitude 32. In addition to the
dispatch of AWACS to a neighbouring country for the
purpose of using them for espionage and obstruction of
our civil communication.

28. Former Secretary of State Haig accused the Jamahiriya of being responsible for the Sadat assassination.
But the Egyptian Government itself has stated that the
assassination of Sadat was strictly internal and had no
connection with any other country. That accusation was
an attempt by the United States Administration to incite
Libya’s neighbours against it.

21. Last week United States Defense Department officials stated that the movements of the American Sixth
Fleet and AWACS were related to the so-called Libyan
mobilization on the borders of the Sudan with a view to
interfering in that country’s affairs and that those movements, especially those of the AWACS, were for the purpose of joint manoeuvres with Egyptian forces.

29. The aim of the United States Administration was to
prepare American and world public opinion for its acts
of aggression against the Jamahiriya. Actually, the current United States Administration closed the people’s
office in Washington in May 1981; that was followed by
punitive economic measures. On 11 March 1982 the
United States Administration
imposed an embargo on
the import of Libyan oil and the export of tractors, aircraft, aircraft equipment and technical information, It
also requested United States citizens working in the oil
sector or with American firms in the Jamahiriya to leave
that country. It requested United States citizens not to
travel to the Jamahiriya, under the pretext of concern for
their safety, in spite of the fact that there had been no
incidents and that a pledge had been made to respect
them, like any other foreigner working in Libya.

22, Following
those developments the Egyptian
Government denied the presence of any joint manoeuvres. The Christian Science Monitor of 18 February
stated that Egyptian officials had claimed to have no
knowledge of a recent Libyan military build-up against
the Sudan. They also denied reports by the United States
Defense Department that Egyptian troops were in a state
of alert. That shows the falsehood of the American
allegations.
23. In addition, there are the discrepancies between
statements on the subject by the United States Departments of State and Defense and by the White House and
even the President of the United States. Those discrepancies add to the ambiguities concerning the presence of
AWACS in Egypt, as stated in The Washington Post of 18
February.

30. Provocations, threats and acts of aggression against
Libya are nothing new; they fall within the United States
strategy of intervention in the affairs of States which
refuse to acquiesce in its policies and colonialist interests,

24, In this regard I should like to refer to the fact that
the leader of the September Revolution has affirmed that
no forces were mobilized on the borders with Sudan and
Egypt; that the Jamahiriya has no desire to interfere in
the affairs of Egypt, the Sudan or any other State; and
that the Jamahiriya is a small country which desires to
live in peace.

31. It is an open secret that the United States intervenes
in the internal affairs of States all over the world. In Asia,
* Quoted

3

in English

by the speaker.

Reconstruction declared in a recent statement before the
Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the
Non-Aligned Countries held at Managua from 10 to 14
January that the CIA was behind all the military operations waged against his country and that it was using the
neighbouring countries as springboards in implementing
its plans for further intervention in the internal affairs of
Nicaragua [see S/15628, annex, appendix IJ.

the United States waged a war of aggression against the
Vietnamese people that ended in the defeat of the United
States.
32, We all know of its continued intervention
in
Korea’s affairs, the latest being those aggressive
manoeuvres a few weeks ago in which more than 70,000
American soldiers participated, designed to threaten
North Korea and destabilize the area.

40. The United States Administration tries persistently
to stop the winds of change in Latin America through the
destruction of progressive regimes; it uses all means to
achieve its ends and to support those regimes loyal to it,
as in the case of El Salvador and other countries.

33, The United States also intervened in the affairs of
the Iranian people, overthrew the patriotic Government
of Mossadegh and imposed a puppet rigime in 1953,
supported the dictatorship of the Shah and provided it
with all means of torture through its intelligence. HOWever, the struggling Iranian people triumphed and the
American influence ended. The United States did not
despair; it went on working, through its lackeys, against
the Iranian Revolution, to undermine the regime, and it
launched an act of direct aggression against Iran’s sovereignty. It is now trying to prolong the war between Iran
and Iraq in order to smash the Iranian Revolution and
debilitate and distract Iraq from its national goal of
confronting the Zionist enemy, the ally of America.

41. In Africa the United States Administration
supports and is allied with the racist regime in South Africa.
It supports that regime militarily, economically and
politically. It obstructs the achievement by Namibia of
its independence and tries to implant its military bases
there. It combats progressive regimes and hatches plots
to assassinate African leaders; this happened in the
Congo, where President Lumumba was assassinated by
the CIA.

34, In Latin America, acting from the viewpoint that
that region falls within the American sphere of influence, the United States undermined unity there when it
partitioned Greater Colombia.

42. The United States has shirked all its responsibilities
as a major Power that is a permanent member of the
Security Council. It has pursued international terrorism
and is indeed at the vanguard of that terrorism, which is
part of the daily conduct of its policy. The purpose of the
widespread American military bases and the presence of
American naval fleets all over the world is only to terrorize peoples and protect colonial monopolies and the
racist and Zionist regimes as everyone well knows. The
CIA has waged organized terrorism through assassinating national leaders, as happened to Allende in Chile and
Lumumba in the Congo, in addition to the attempts to
assassinate President Castro and Colonel Qaddafi, as
well as the assassination of American black leaders like
Martin Luther King and Malcolm X. And all of this is in
addition to the organized sabotage conducted by the
CIA in many countries throughout the world. The present Administration
has supported this terrorist agency,
increased appropriations for it and given it new powers
to undertake widespread sabotage in different regions of
the world and inside the United States.

35. In 1963 the United States dispatched 23,000 soldiers to the Dominican Republic and imposed a proAmerican Government.
36. The United States became hostile to Cuba once its
lackey, the dictator Bat&a, was overthrown and once
there was a revolution which rebuffed American domination. The United States tried to invade Cuba several
times, the most important attempt being the so-called
Bay of Pigs invasion, and when it failed the United
States made several attempts to assassinate President
Castro through the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
and laid political and economic siege to Cuba.
37. In 1954 it intervened in Guatemala and imposed a
Government to its own liking,
38. In Chile it overthrew the legally elected Government in 1973 and assassinated President Salvador
Allende. As the facts have shown, Kissinger personally
planned this operation, which was implemented by the
CIA.

43. The New York Times of 16 January published an
article in its magazine section in which it stated that at a
moment when the Reagan Administration
is forcing
most Government agencies to retrench, the CIA and its
fellow intelligence organizations are enjoying boom
times, With a budget increase of 25 per cent for 1983 as
compared with the previous year, this is the fastest growing major agency in the Federal Government. The article
goes on to say that the Agency has invested vast sums of
money in the technology of intelligence, including
communications-intercept
stations and computers. There
were also revelations about dirty tricks, drug experimentation, surveillance of American citizens and a long
string of other abuses.

39, In Nicaragua the United States Administration supported the feudal, oppressive r6gime of the dictator Samoza, which conformed to American interests. The United
States Administration tried to prolong the life of that
regime although it was aware of its violations of human
rights. Since that regime was overthrown, this Administration has financed and plotted terrorism against the
People of Nicaragua. Here I would recall that the Coordinator of the Council of the Government of National
4

44. The CIA conducted extensive domestic spying during the 1960s and early 1970s under the pretext of gathering foreign intelligence information,

48. History repeats itself. In 1805 the United States
invaded Libya. We repulsed the aggression and captured
the cruiser Philadephia, under the command of Captain
Bainbridge. The same year we repulsed a land invasion,
.in which the United States had enlisted mercenaries from
Western Sahara, under General Eaton, the then Consul
General of the United States in Tunis.

45. 2Xe New York Times goes on to describe the Agency’s actions, saying that the record of its covert actions is
replete with daring actions, among which have been
attempts at assassination, participation in coups d&at in a
number of countries and the training of specialized security forces to protect a select group of foreign leaders, as
well as the provision of funds and equipment to rebels
against the nationalist Governments, as was the case in
Nicaragua and Iran.

49. Our people will fight regardless of the circumstances and regardless of the sacrifices, if war and aggression
are imposed upon it.
50. The Security Council, which has the responsibility
for maintaining security in the world, must shoulder that
responsibility,
especially when one of its permanent
members violates the Charter of the United Nations and
jeopardizes international peace and security. Although
we are convinced of the good will of most of its members,
we know that the Council will be unable to adopt any
effective measure, in view of its structure. However, the
Council must face its responsibility and condemn the
aggression, What happened to Libya may happen to
other States-indeed
it has already happened to others in
the past-unless
an end is put to the arrogance of cynicism of the United States Administration, its intervention
in the internal affairs of States and its threat to international peace and security.

46. The recent actions of the United States confirm the
grave danger posed by the American terrorist policy to
international peace and security and to the freedom and
independence of peoples. The United States claim that
there is a Libyan threat against Libya’s neighbours cannot but be the object of ridicule and contempt by the
international community. The States concerned themselves confirm the falsity of the American allegations,
and even if we assumed that differences actually existed
between Libya and its neighbours, what business can it
be of the United States? The United States is not the
Security Council, nor is it the policeman of the world.
Instead of working for pacification and calling upon
neighbours to come to agreement, it has resorted to the
policy of creating discord and provocation. The allegation of the United States Administration that some Arab
States are friendly to the United States is without basis.
America’s only friend in the region is Israel. The United
States Administration,
which established a strategic
alliance with the Zionist entity, realizes that all Arab
peoples are against it. Regardless of differences of opinion among the Arab Governments, the United States
Administration
will always be the chief enemy of the
Arab nation and the ally of the Zionist entity. Libya is a
part of the Arab nation and shares the hopes and aspirations of the Arab nation. If there are any temporary
differences among some Arab States, these will disappear. The only danger to the Arab nation is that posed by
the Zionist entity, supported by the United States, and
the aggressive policy of the United States in the region.
The occupation of Palestine and other Arab territories,
the raid against the Iraqi nuclear reactor and the occupation of Lebanon could not have happened without the
support of the United States Administration for aggression and its pursuit of a policy of terrorism.

51. We are a small, non-aligned people. We want to
have relations with everybody based on mutual respect
and non-intervention,
including the United States of
America. We have tried in the past, and we are prepared
at present, to hold a dialogue and discuss any problems
with the United States Administration, if such problems
exist. But that Administration
consistently rejects the
policy of dialogue and opts for that of domination,
which we reject regardless of the sacrifices.
52. Finally, I wish to tell the United States Administration that the policy of intervention and aggression
will only militate against the interests of peace and security and those of the United States itself. Peoples, no
matter how small and weak, cannot accept humiliation
and colonialism, and if they are doomed to die they will
die on their feet.
53. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America):
I should like to begin, Sir, by taking advantage of this
first opportunity offered me at a formal meeting to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency.
Also, I should like to welcome personally-since
I am
not certain whether it has already been done by my delegation during my absence-the
representatives of the
new members of the Council, Malta, the Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan and Zimbabwe, and express our
firm and clear desire to work with them on the Council in
the search for international peace and security. Similarly,
I wish to welcome our new colleague from Jordan, Mr.
Salah, whose contributions will, I hope, be as substantial
as those of his distinguished predecessor, our good friend
Mr, Nuseibeh.

47. We are a small, peace-loving people. We want to
build up our country and to contribute to the unity of
our nation. We want peace and security. We are eminently qualified to understand the meaning of peace and
security. We lost more than half our people in a war
against the Italian Fascist invasion, a bitter war that
lasted more than 20 years. Our people, which liberated
the country from the colonialist American bases and liberated its economy and made great strides in development, will protect its development and achievements
regardless of the price, even if it means sacrificing half its
population as it did in the past; we will not be intimidated by the forces of aggression or by aircraft carriers.
5

never engaged,and do not now engage,in acts of provocation, But we are deeply sensitiveto threats to international peace,to our own security and to the security and
national independenceof Libya’s neighbours. And let
there be no doubt: we will respond, as appropriate, to
Libyan threats.

54. or. President, on behalf of my Government I have
today addressed the following letter to YOU for circ”lation as an official document of the Security Council:
“The Government of the United States rejects the
false and malicious charges of the Government of
Libya
and calls the attention of the Security Council
to yet another example of a threat to international
peace and security posed by the policies of the Libyan
Government.

58. Briefly, I wish to recall the salient events that led to
this situation,Last Friday, 18 February, official Sudanese
Radio announcedthe discovery of a Libyan-backed coup
plot againstthe Government of PresidentGaafar Nimeiri.
It announcedthe arrest of Libyan-sponsored dissidents
and infiltrators, It alsoreported that the Government of
Sudan had been closely watching concentrations of
Libyan bombersand fighter aircraft in south-eastLibya,
closeto the SudaneseandEgyptian borders. This concentration of Libyan aircraft had been of particular concern
to the Sudanese.

“Furious that its plans for illegal, violent action
were frustrated, the Government of Libya comes now
to the Council with lying complaints against the
United States. In fact, the United States committed
none of the acts charged by the Government of Libya.
“The United States dispatched no offensive aircraft
into the region, violated no Libyan airspace. As a matter of fact, neither the United States carrier Nimitz nor
its aircraft entered water or airspace claimed by Libya
on the days in question, although we have every right
to enter these international waters, recognized as such
under international law. We also have every right to
conduct, under appropriate circumstances, training
exercises with friendly Governments.

69. In view of the successfulstepswhich the Sudan has
now taken to deal with this latest Libyan effort to destabilize one of its neighbours,we are now able to put the
spotlight of world attention on events in the region. We
follow Qaddafi’sirresponsibleintrusions into the affairs
of his neighbourscloselyand with deepconcern. We had
beenawarefor sometime of his efforts directed against
PresidentNimeiri. We were also aware of the concentrations of Libyan aircraft which were of concern to the
Sudanese
and the Egyptians. Becauseof the situation, we
moved up the date of an already-scheduledAWACS
training exercise-scheduledfor about a month henceand sentour AWACS and tanker aircraft into Egypt. We
have alsohad United Statesnaval forces deployed in the
easternMediterranean, Their presencein international
waters sometimesseemsto have a deterring effect on
Libyan adventurism in the region.

“The United States affirms its rights under international law and the Charter of the United Nations and
intends to exercise them.
“Naturally, the Government of Libya would prefer
that no obstacles-however
legal-be interposed to its
plots and expansionist projects. But peace-loving
nations cannot accommodate Libya’s designs on its
neighbours.
“In calling attention to Libya’s false charges, the
United States notes that such lies mock the serious
work of building international peace, just as Libya’s
repeated efforts to interfere in the affairs of its neighbours destroy security in the region.” [S/1561%]

60. The desireresult seemsto have been achieved-at
leastfor the present.The statement on SudaneseRadio
and yesterday’s statement by the SudaneseAssembly
speakfor themselves.We can be reassuredby the bold
and decisivemannerin which the Sudanesedealt with the
threat of Libyan expansionism.

55. The United States did not seek this confrontation in
the Security Council with the Government of Libya. But
we welcome the opportunity thus presented to put facts
on the record-not
fabrications of Colonel Qaddafi’s
spokesman-and
to assign responsibility for this grave
threat to international peace and security where that
responsibility belongs.

61. Fortunately, the most recent threat has receded.
But the pattern of Libyan misconduct is long-standing.
ColonelQaddafl conductsa virulent, hostile foreign policy which respectsthe territorial integrity, national independence,right to peaceand security and self-determination of no one. Becauseof a relative lack of conventional
military power, Colonel Qaddafi has tried to accomplish
his goalsthrough a combination of economic and military aid to radical Governments, bribery of officials,
help to international terrorists by providing sanctuary,
funds, weaponsand planning, assassinationof exiled
opponentsand planned assassinationof target Governmentofficials, and assistanceto guerrilla groups working
to overthrow establishedGovernments,

56. I speak, of course, of the Government of Qaddafi’s
Libya and I wish to put this threat, which seems for the
moment to have receded, in the context of the pattern of
Libyan-sponsored world-wide terrorism and adventurism directed against its neighbours-indeed, throughout
northern, eastern and central Africa. This pattern oflawless expansionism constitutes a continuing threat to
Peace and SeCUrity in the region and beyond,

62 The Qaddafi regime has been engaged in these
activities almost since it took power. For example, in
1% Libya Provided sanctuaryto the perpetrators of the
Munich Olympics murders. Qaddafl also gave refuge to

57. MY Government and the American people have
never sought, and do not now seek,any confrontation
with the Government or the peopleof Libya, We have
6

the )
Vien
Expr
in W
mitt1
10s1
weal
Kop
relea

63.
The
corn
Lib)
beer
wide
ter (
amb
least
attel
Clul
stert
ing
kille

64.
rem,
pent
whe
63
tow;
brow
trail
nort
strei
the
gI-01

ern
to P
tratl
helc

the terrorists who had taken 60 hostages at the 1975
Vienna meeting of the Organization of Petroleum
Exporting Countries. Libya has been used as a safe area
in which terrorist groups have planned acts to be committed in many of Europe’s capitals. The infamous Car10s has operated out of Libya over several years. The
weapons found on the French terrorists Breguet and
Kopp had been sold to the Libyan army. It was their
release that Carlos had demanded.
63. Assassination has been an important Libyan tool.
The proof of Libya’s utilization of this tool is not hard to
come by. The 1980-1981 murders of a dozen exiled
Libyans, primarily in Western Europe’s capitals, has
been reported by the international press in detail. Less
widely known are a 1975 plot to murder the Prime Minister of a neighbouring country, plans to kill American
ambassadors in several Middle Eastern countries and at
least one European capital, and a November 1981
attempt to plant explosives in the American Embassy
Club in Khartoum-explosives
which were concealed in
stereo speakers designed to detonate on a Saturday evening when scores of people would have been present and
killed,
64. A major fact of Libyan foreign policy has been and
remains subversion and destabilization of moderate independent Government in the Middle East, Africa and elsewhere. Chad has been a recent principal victim of the
aggressive policies of Libya. Currently, Libyan intentions
towards Chad are a major concern. Colonel Qaddafi has
brought large numbers of Chadian followers to Libya,
trained and equipped them, and is moving them into the
northern parts of Chad. Other efforts to increase his own
strength in that area are under way. Most disturbing was
the mid-January deployment of a dozen Libyan SU-22
ground attack fighters to the Aouzou air base in northern Chad, apparently in preparation for a Libyan option
to provide air cover for an assault by dissidents and infiltrators against the Chadian Government and Chadianheld population centres.

Litho in United Nations, New York

65. A Libyan team of approximately 80 advisers in
another African republic may be assisting antiGovernment Chadians there.
66. Libya has a long record of training guerrillas, supplying weapons, and plotting the subversion and destabilization of its north African neighbours. In the Horn of
Africa, Libya continues to try to overthrow the Governments of the Sudan and Somalia. A number of Libyans
are in Ethiopia advising Somali and Sudanese guerrillas.
Libyan aircraft and ships continue to train guerrillas,
supply arms, ammunition, explosives and mat&iel to the
Somali Salvation Front and the Sudanese rebels. Also,
Libya’s deliveries of increasingly advanced weapons to
warring tribes in the Sudan have contributed to death
and violence in that region.
67. Elsewhere, Libya delivers military equipment and is
involving itself increasingly, for example, in this hemisphere, always on behalf of military dictatorships, always
opposed to democratic regimes and movements.
68. There is the pattern of Libyan misconduct worldwide. It constitutes, as I have said, a grave threat to
international peace and security. The culprit in this proceeding is indentified beyond any reasonable doubt or
question.
67. What has happened to Libya may happen to other
States, the representative of Libya has suggested. I
should like to say that we hope so. We hope that what
happened to Libya will happen to other States. We hope
that all States with aggressive designs on their neighbours
will be discouraged by the lawful response of others to
desist from their unlawful plans. My Government rests
its case on the factual record and its adherence to the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations in the
cause of international peace and security.

00300

The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

6020%August

1990-2,050
