S/PV.8629

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8629th meeting

Wednesday, 2 October 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Matjila. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Ugarelli
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Mobilizing youth towards silencing the guns by 2020
Letter dated 30 September 2019 from the Permanent Representative of South
Africa to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/779)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-29868 (E)
*1929868*

S/PV.8629

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: As this is the first public meeting
of the Security Council for the month of October, I
should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Vassily
Nebenzia, Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation, for his service in the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of September. I am sure
I speak for all members of the Council in expressing
our deep appreciation to Ambassador Nebenzia and
his team for the great diplomatic skill with which they
conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Mobilizing youth towards silencing the guns by
2020
Letter dated 30 September 2019 from the
Permanent Representative of South Africa
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2019/779)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Bience Gawanas, Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on Africa; Ms. Aya Chebbi, African Union
Special Envoy on Youth; Ms. Hafsa Ahmed, Co-founder
and Chairperson of Naweza; and Mr. Victor Ochen,
youth activist.
Ms. Ahmed and Mr. Ochen are joining the meeting
via video-teleconference from Nairobi and Kampala,
respectively.

02/10/2019

30 September 2019 from the Permanent Representative
of South Africa to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. Gawanas.
Ms. Gawanas: Allow me to congratulate South
Africa on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I am grateful for
the opportunity to brief the Council on the important
agenda item of peace and security in Africa on the
theme of mobilizing youth towards silencing the guns
in 2020.
At the outset, I would like to emphasize that the core
aspects of that theme, “Mobilizing youth and silencing
the guns in 2020”, are not a choice but an absolute
necessity. As a matter of fact, they constitute a crucial
pathway towards the realization of our shared goal of
leaving no one behind and achieving the conflict-free
Africa that we want.
Africa is one of the world’s youngest continents.
As is well noted in the concept note for this debate
(S/2019/779, annex), nearly 20 per cent of Africa’s
population of 1.2 billion people — approximately
220 million people — are between the ages of 15 and
24. That number is projected to rise to about 350 million
people in the next decade. It is therefore imperative that
Africa harness that demographic divided in silencing
the guns; combatting threats to peace and security,
including radicalization, violent extremism, terrorism,
sexual violence, xenophobia, cyberinsecurity, organized
crime, forced migration, the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons and politically aligned militias; and
addressing the root causes of those problems, including
exclusion, inequality, high unemployment, poverty and
climate change.

its

As the main findings of the 2018 study The Missing
Peace: Independent Progress Study on Youth, Peace
and Security highlighted, perspectives on youth are too
often distorted by rampant stereotypes that associate
young people with violence and conflict. That myth
has triggered a policy panic, producing unnuanced
policy responses and involving hard-fisted security
approaches that are counterproductive and not costeffective.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/779, which contains a letter dated

However, it must always be recognized that, in
reality, the large majority of young people in Africa are
peaceful and enterprising. They are agents and partners

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite Her
Excellency Mrs. Jeanne d’Arc Byaje, Permanent
Observer of the Economic Community of Central
African States to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

2/30

begin

19-29868

02/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8629

of peace. They are the connective tissue of Africa,
and they have a critical contribution to make at the
national, regional and global levels, bridging the silos
of development, human rights, humanitarian issues and
peace and security.

Charter and a few African countries have established
laws and initiated campaigns to promote youth
political participation. Additionally, in several African
countries, peace education is being incorporated into
school curriculums.

If the right investments in young people are made
and if their social, political and economic engagements
are recognized and nurtured, societies may reap a
peace dividend. For that reason, the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and resolution 2250 (2015)
collectively recognize the important and positive role
that young people play in maintaining and promoting
international peace and security and in advancing
sustainable development.

At the regional and subregional levels, the African
Union, the regional economic communities and several
regional bodies and non-governmental organizations
are engaging youth in initiatives to silence the guns.
For instance, in the context of the implementation of
the African Union Master Roadmap of Practical Steps
to Silence the Guns in Africa by 2020, the African
Union has taken steps to address the bulging youth
unemployment crisis through the launch of its 1 Million
By 2021 initiative. This is consistent with the African
Plan of Action for Youth Empowerment. The African
Union is also encouraging the creation of platforms
for youth engagement in silencing the guns, including
through social media.

Similarly, at the continental level, the African
Union Agenda 2063 and the African Youth Charter
recognize the creativity, energy and innovation of
youth as a driving force for the continent’s political,
social, cultural and economic transformation. The
onus rests on Governments and their development
partners — including the private sector, civil society
and the United Nations — to work together with youth
to implement those normative instruments in a manner
that is truly meaningful and inclusive of Africa’s young
women and men at all stages of conflict prevention and
resolution, peacebuilding, post-conflict recovery and
sustainable development.
For Africa’s youth, the time for effective and
meaningful implementation of these instruments is
now. As we have seen across Africa, young people
are demanding urgent action and are making their
voices heard. In Algeria, Burkina Faso, the Sudan,
Tunisia and Zimbabwe, young people are at the centre
of pro-democracy movements, effectively mobilizing,
organizing, leading and clamouring for inclusive
and accountable governance, youth participation and
economic opportunities for all. For instance, in South
Sudan, youth representatives at the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development High-Level Revitalization
Forum secured a place for young people in the country’s
broader governance structures through affirmative
quota systems.
On their part, African countries have taken
important steps aimed at removing structural barriers
that prevent or limit the inclusion and active engagement
of young people in peace and security, political
governance and socioeconomic development. Several
African countries have implemented the African Youth

The United Nations system is working in strong
partnership with African Member States, the African
Union, the regional economic communities and other
regional and subregional bodies, as well as with the
African private sector and civil society, to support
meaningful youth inclusion and participation in
conflict prevention and peacebuilding processes. At
the subregional level, the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel supported the Economic
Community of West African States in organizing the
first annual regional youth forum on peace and security
in December 2018, in Ouagadougou.
However, more still needs to be done to bridge the
gap between policies and plans and implementation
to create impact. At the national level, Member States
must invest in protecting and promoting the rights of
children and youth. The commemoration of both the
thirtieth anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and Africa Youth Day in November provides
Member States with an opportunity to recommit to
upholding the right of youth to meaningful participation
in peace and security processes.
Youth ministries and national councils should also
be leveraged to promote peace education and culture of
peace programmes in schools This can also be done at
the community level by encouraging youth, as well as
parents, teachers, non-profit organizations and religious
and community leaders, to support the establishment of
youth groups that facilitate dialogue and offer young

19-298683/30

S/PV.8629

Peace and security in Africa

02/10/2019

people a chance to formulate and voice their opinions.
Similarly, the private sector — especially information
and communication technology companies operating at
the country level — could be engaged to provide free
SMS-based platforms through which young people can
express their views on events in their localities and
contribute to conflict prevention and peacebuilding.

socioeconomic nexus between peace and development
and security, humanitarian governance, awareness
and communication should devise specific modalities
to include and engage African youth. African youth
are telling us that it is good that we are fighting for
stability, but what they want to see and what we need to
give them are hope and prosperity.

At the regional and subregional levels, the African
Union and regional economic communities should
meaningfully promote the inclusion and participation
of youth in their peace and security programmes and
processes. Building on this, the African Union Special
Envoy on Youth, who is currently sitting right across
from me, should proactively engage Member States
and the regional economic communities to better
understand what is being done, especially in conflictaffected areas, to advance the youth and peace and
security agenda. I was truly privileged, not long ago,
to engage in an international dialogue with youth, and
I think that is what we should continue to promote.
We need to listen and to hear what the young people
are saying.

The President:
her briefing.

The United Nations system, through the country
teams, should ensure and promote synergies between
national plans on the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals and resolutions 2250 (2015) and
1325 (2000). To consolidate the advancement of the
youth, peace and security agenda, the Security Council
might consider creating an informal group of experts
on youth, peace and security that is comprised of a
diverse group of young people and youth organizations.
This aligns with a recommendation contained in the
report “The missing peace: independent progress study
on youth and peace and security” (see S/2018/86).
On the side of the Office of the Special Adviser on
Africa, every May we organize the Africa Dialogue
Series and, next year, we will be organizing the Africa
Dialogue Series on the Silencing the Guns in Africa
by 2020 initiative. We hope that many Member States
will participate.
Lastly, as we fast approach the next African Union
Summit and the launch of the continental campaign on
silencing the guns in February 2020, the United Nations
and the international community should consistently
and systematically engage African youth in all efforts
that contribute to the Silencing the Guns initiative. In
this respect, the three clusters of the Interdepartmental
Task Force on African Affairs on support for the
Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative and the
4/30

I

thank

Ms.

Gawanas

for

I wish to acknowledge that we have some colleagues
from the African Union Peace and Security Council
here with us today, and to welcome them to the Security
Council. I hope that they find our deliberations useful.
I now give the floor to Ms. Chebbi.
Ms. Chebbi: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
important theme of peace and security in Africa,
particularly in order to inform the Council on the
contribution of African youth and strategies to mobilize
the United Nations family towards silencing the guns
in Africa.
I wish to express my gratitude to the Republic of
South Africa for this invitation and for its leadership on
the youth agenda. I would also like to thank the African
Union (AU) Silencing the Guns Unit and the Youth for
Peace Africa Programme of the Peace and Security
Department, with which I work closely in mobilizing
for and promoting sustainable peace in Africa, as well
as the Office of the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on Africa and the Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations for their continuous
support and advocacy for all youth agendas.
Please allow me to also congratulate all new
members of the Council, in particular the AU member
States, the Republic of Niger and the Republic of Tunisia,
for being elected as non-permanent members. I also
congratulate Tunisia on organizing early presidential
elections following the death of President Béji Caïd
Essebsi. Young Tunisians had their say at the ballot
box, using their power of voting. They campaigned
with zero budget and chose two candidates outside of
the norms. The process, however, remains fragile and
very challenging. We need to equip these young people
and support innovation in our political processes.
In my presentation, I am going to address four
main questions: What are the core issues we need to
reflect on? What is the reality on the ground in Africa?
19-29868

02/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

What are we doing about it at the AU? What can we
do together?
In 2013, my cousin was recruited by Da’esh at
the age of 22. At the time, he had just graduated from
university with an engineering degree. It was a tough
experience for the family to go through. It made me
think about why young people like my cousin choose
this path while I have chosen non-violent activism,
even though we both come from similar educational
and social backgrounds. That led me to do my thesis on
youth recruitment in violent extremism in a comparison
between Kenya and Tunisia and, together with my eight
years of pan-African activism and my work as the AU
Youth Envoy since November 2018, I want to offer the
Council four main reflections on this topic today.
First and foremost, this is a question of narrative.
Unfortunately, when African youth get the worst
sort of attention from leaders, they are portrayed as
perpetrators of violence, carrying guns, a dangerous
class, members of the unemployed, migrants dying
in the Mediterranean and as a youth bulge. But they
are not spoken about as a generation of peacebuilders
who are changing the course of history, revolutionizing
technology and inspiring new ways of citizen
engagement. African young people do not resign
themselves to the hardships of their situation; they are
using their agency and creativity to build the Africa
we want.
There is a danger of a victimization narrative
taking hold. It is disempowering and overlooks youth
agency. Many young people have internalized the
idea that they are marginalized and now see violent
groups as legitimate fighters, not perpetrators of
violence. We must therefore value our youth and their
contribution to society. If we do not, they will look for
recognition elsewhere.
Our definition of demographic dividends should
therefore involve peace dividends and youth as the
human capital, talent and the driving force of our
continent. We must transform the narrative surrounding
African youth into one of collective, positive
actors — among the most informed and most resilient
generations in Africa, and, if you do not disagree, Sir,
the coolest generation.
The narrative question is also gendered because
gender stereotypes are reinforced and young women’s
voices and unique experiences often go unrecognized.
In this regard, we must also recognize that since 2010

S/PV. 8629

waves of youth-led peaceful change have swept our
continent, demanding legitimate rights peacefully and
creatively. We must see this movement of uprisings and
activism in Tunisia, Senegal, Zimbabwe, The Gambia,
Burkina Faso, South Africa, Algeria, Kenya, the Sudan,
Nigeria and many other countries as an opportunity
to channel that energy into positive social change
and peacebuilding.
I am of the generation that started the first
revolutions of the twenty-first century. We stood up
for our rights and not only demanded but led change.
We moved from being perceived as subjects to active
citizens and change-makers, and I am here today as
testimony to a generation deserving a place at the table.
The second question is about hustling. We have a
generation trapped in a state of waiting for adulthood
because it is in a constant negotiation to find its political
and financial freedom. It is about the livelihoods of
our young people, who are barely surviving and do
not understand the contradiction of our times — to
be the youngest population in the world, 65 per cent
aged under 30, and yet the most marginalized and
most insecure. Young people are hustling, ticking a
young-women empowerment box here and a youthparticipation box there, with a lack of resources and
support and facing the huge challenges of bureaucracy
and limited documentation of their work. They hustle to
sustain the impact of paying annual membership dues,
training costs and in-kind contributions. They hustle
for funding as civil society. They hustle to collaborate
with institutions and Governments. They hustle to
participate in peace processes, and they hustle for
representation. But the real hustle should be to make
sure that we silence the guns by 2020.
The third question is about identity and belonging.
We want young people to give up the guns, but can we
answer the big question in the mind of a 19- or 20-yearold: “Who am I?” What are we offering them? Can we
give direction and assurance that we will provide the
enabling environment needed for our young people
to thrive? The big question of identity, which we do
not often talked about, focusing only on temporary
responsive measures to fix conflict, is crucial. Our
efforts are informed by our multilayered sense of
identity: young, female, indigenous, refugee, migrant,
with disability, living in post-colonial Africa and so
on and so forth. We need to promote pan-African,
transnational identity and global citizenship. When
young people think pan-African and global, it offers

19-298685/30

S/PV.8629

Peace and security in Africa

a place of belonging and frees the imagination of
individuals, communities and of the Africa we want,
which is a borderless, transnational, multilingual and
multicultural community.
Our pan-African policies at the African Union are
creating dynamism through the African Continental
Free Trade Area, intra-African trade, open borders,
the African passport and pan-African universities. The
only way to end violence in our continent is to unite
our young people around a pan-African vision and
space for exchange, knowledge and solidarity. Even our
education should instil pride and empower the African
child, in its African identity, to combat xenophobia,
hate and exclusion. And we must not forget that there is
no pan-Africanism without feminism.
The fourth and last reflection is that we must
reflect on the nexus with the peace and security agenda.
“Intersectionality” is a trendy word in the youth space.
For us, everything is intersectional. Our analyses,
our challenges, our fluid identities and, therefore, our
solution must be intersectional.
There is a nexus with development; it is not only
smart to increase investment in youth development; it
is strategic.
There is a nexus with governance. We should
deliver the health care, education and services that our
citizens and young people deserve because where such
services are absent, violent groups become economic,
political and social actors.
There is a nexus with inequality because jobs
alone do not address deep-seated awareness and lived
experiences of injustice for young people, who then look
upon violent groups as legitimate fighters. The future of
work needs to be about dignity, because young people
do not just want jobs; they want jobs with dignity.
There is a nexus with climate change. In the words
of African Union Commission Chairperson Moussa
Faki Mahamat, the effects of climate change in the
Sahel have become a threat to peace and security not
only in the region but also worldwide.
There is a nexus with health and disease. Africa’s
peace and security agenda faces yet another challenge
in the Ebola virus. As Council members are aware, a
new outbreak of that deadly virus was reported in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on 1 August 2018;
since then, over 3,000 people have been infected and
more than 2,000 have died. Women and young people
6/30

02/10/2019

have been hit hardest. African young people may
escape the bullets but end up dying anyway if we do not
act on Ebola. On this front, we need collective action
to fight Ebola and adopt a peace-focused approach to
help curtail the disease’s spread by mainstreaming
community and political reconciliation with local
cooperation and building trust and resilience as the
priorities of these processes and our response.
Since my appointment by the African Union
Commission Chairperson, with the support of the AU
Youth Advisory Council, I have been humbled by what
my brothers and sisters are delivering as we speak
with little to no resources, but only courage resilience
and determination, to make Africa a safe and secure
environment for all. Young people did not wait for the
declaration of the year for silencing the guns to act,
and they did not wait for a resolution of the United
Nations or a decision of the African Union Assembly to
make peace possible. I would like to share just a few of
these initiatives.
I undertook a solidarity mission to South Sudan,
where young people like Jok are replacing bullets
with books at the Promised Land Secondary School.
People like him are on the front line of building the
world’s youngest State, disseminating the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan of September 2018, which we
need to continue supporting. I met with young people
in Eritrea and Liberia, who are using innovation to
nurture a culture of peace. Youth groups in Kenya work
in informal settlements empowering young women
using art.
The African Youth Action Network in Uganda
trains young refugees in emotional intelligence and
advocacy against hate speech, using social media.
Local Youth Corner in Cameroon is working in eight
prisons to provide repeat offenders with an alternative
to reoffending, positively impacting 5,000 young people
to become “prisonpreneurs”.
African young people have demonstrated effective
and impactful change when given opportunities, tools,
knowledge and capacity. African youth also welcomed
the decision of AU Member States to declare the theme
for 2020 as the year for silencing the guns, creating a
conducive environment for development.
The AU Youth for Peace Africa Programme arises
from the relevant decision of the Assembly of the
African Union, especially article 17 of the African Youth
19-29868

02/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

Charter, which was adopted in 2006 and recognizes the
contribution of and role of youth in peacebuilding in
Africa. The peace and security, especially on youth,
has always been an African agenda, and it has actually
inspired many of the resolutions adopted in the AU
Peace and Security Council.
On 8 November 2018, we had the first open session
on youth, peace and security in Africa, at which the
Peace and Security Council called on AU member States
to urgently implement Security Council resolution 2250
(2015), with a particular emphasis on the development
of national action plans. The Council also requested the
Commission to conduct a study on youth, peace and
security, which will be presented next month.
The AU also works to end harmful practices, such
as female genital mutilation and child marriage, which
we believe are part of a broader conversation on genderbased violence and, therefore, an integral part of the
peace and security agenda. That is why the AU Saleema
Initiative and the United Nations-backed Spotlight
Initiative could not have come at a better time. Five
years ago, 278 girls were abducted in Nigeria and youthled campaigns like #BringBackOurGirls made concrete
action possible. Nevertheless, 112 girls are still missing
and it is important that the United Nations continue to
prioritize the rescue of these girls, especially because
they come from a region where two of three girls are
married before their eighteenth birthday.
On 16 August, I joined forces with the African
Women Leaders Network (AWLN). With the support of
UN-Women and the Office of the AU Special Envoy on
Women, Peace and Security, the AWLN Young Women
Leaders Caucus organized the first intergenerational
retreat on women’s leadership in Africa, hosted by
the Government of Kenya. In addition, the African
Union Commission offers robust support to young
women through the AWLN, in close partnership with
the United Nations and civil society organizations. We
will also come back to Nairobi to collaborate with the
President of Kenya, in another milestone, to convene
the first AU youth summit and festival as a pre-African
Union Summit meeting for youth voices to be included
in decision-making processes at the African Union
and to declare their position on the role of youth in the
Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative.
Many of these engagements will continue to
take place, but together we can have a greater impact
by moving from policies to their implementation,

S/PV. 8629

because young people want action and progress, not
empty promises. We may not need more and more
recommendations; we may just need to deliver what we
already have. Allow me to offer a few concrete actions
we can take.
First, we should promote and convene
intergenerational
dialogues,
collaboration
and
sustainable partnerships with young people, which will
build trust in Government institutions and mechanisms
and address youth exclusion. It is time to have young
peacebuilders making the headlines.
Secondly, we should enhance the capacities and
leadership of youth through platforms of mentorship,
internship and leadership to facilitate their professional
career development, particularly of those from rural
areas. If there is one thing the United Nations can
change, it is to create more opportunities for young
people in Africa by putting an end to unpaid internships
in the United Nations.
Thirdly, we should use sports, arts, music, dance,
storytelling and film to mobilize the largest continental
campaign on silencing the guns. Those tools have
proven to be effective for advocacy as alternative
peacebuilding approaches. The 600 million young
people on the continent is a huge network of diverse and
innovative minds that are interconnected on the web. In
an instant, young people can spread information, alert
and raise awareness, and their outreach and advocacy
potential is unprecedented with new technologies.
Fourthly, we should invest in civil society and
civic space, provide direct financial and technical
support for youth intervention and provide funds for
youth-led peacebuilding efforts through truly effective
mechanisms that benefit and sustain their work and
social impact, rather than harm them.
Fifthly, we should translate commitments into
action. We trust that resolution 2457 (2019), on silencing
the guns in Africa, and the subsequent mobilization of
the United Nations system by the Secretary-General
through the United Nations task force on silencing the
guns will generate the required support for Member
States, the AU and regional economic communities and
young people to successfully implement the silencing
the guns agenda.
Lastly, if there is one policy framework that we
still need to think through, it would be the intersection
between the women and peace and security and the

19-298687/30

S/PV.8629

Peace and security in Africa

youth, peace and security agendas, as highlighted by The
Missing Peace: Independent Progress Study on Youth,
Peace and Security. The inclusion of young women
and girls as partners in the Council’s work on conflict
prevention and sustaining peace is crucial. Young
women are consistently subsumed into these different
categories, which renders them vulnerable to being left
out. Young women and girls face double discrimination
due to their sex and age, falling between youth-focused
peacebuilding and prevention programmes and womentargeted peacebuilding interventions. Ensuring the
inclusion, empowerment and systematic engagement
of young women is crucial to the implementation of
resolutions 2250 (2015) and 1325 (2000).
We should not let fear drive our decisions but, more
than ever, we need courageous leadership that is not
just responsive but empowering and preventive. My
generation craves greater political space to operate and
drive the desired change. My generation is ready to make
an impact that may not be comprehended but cannot be
denied. My generation is ready to set aside unhealthy
competition and foster collaborative partnerships
within innovative and sustainable resourcing.
Young Africa cannot continue to be ignored as the
most youthful population in the world. Young Africa
deserves a seat at the table and in decision-making
positions to make peace possible. There is no better
time to act than now and there is no better time to
promote genuine youth engagement on this agenda.
In 2013, my cousin, through our family community
and local Government support, started a gym project in
our village because he wanted to make a difference and
inspire the unemployed young people of our community
to believe in themselves and to serve. He realized his
power to bring healing and mend the broken spaces of
our world instead of destroying it. Despite anger and
frustration, the majority of young people are choosing
not to fight back, but to create alternative spaces
for themselves.
That is what young people are asking the Council
to do. We must focus on building — building
communities, building partnerships, building trust,
building dialogues and building resilience. And to build
young people’s trust in institutions, we need to reframe
the debate so that they can be as part of the solution,
not the problem. We need to articulate the story of hope
and Africa’s leadership for youth. I can find no better
8/30

02/10/2019

way to end my briefing than citing the words of South
Africa’s icon, Steve Biko, who wrote:
“The great powers of the world may have done
wonders in giving the world an industrial and
military look, but the great gift still has to come
from Africa — giving the world a more human face.”
That face is young. African young people are
already doing their part in peace and development
because when young people promise, young people
deliver. Now we need the Council to also contribute and
do its part, and to let us co-lead.
The President: I thank Ms. Chebbi for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ahmed.
Ms. Ahmed: I send greetings to all, or mambo, as
we say in Nairobi.
My name is Hafsa Ahmed. I am a 27-year-old young
peacebuilder from the neighbourhood of Eastleigh.
Allow me to introduce Eastleigh — the place where I
was born and bred; the place that made me who I am
today. Often referred to as little Mogadishu, the streets
are adorned with skyscrapers and in front of the malls
one can find colourful umbrellas with street vendors
selling their wares. It is also an area with high levels of
poverty and crime.
The community of Eastleigh lived largely in
harmony until late 2013, when the peace of this urban
centre was disrupted by frequent grenade attacks by
alleged extremists. During that period, many residents
were injured and others lost their lives. In response
to those attacks, the Government of Kenya launched
Operation Usalama Watch in the hopes of securing
the area. Around 6,000 police officers were tasked to
do the job. The officers started a vigorous operation,
going door to door to screen individuals. Bribes were
demanded, people were arrested indiscriminately
and many were rounded up for further screening or
deportation to Somalia.
As a community, we lived in fear and I was pushed
to the limit. I felt that we were forgotten, so I decided to
do something about it. Armed only with a smart phone
and a strong urge to tell the world of the abuses in my
community, I started to share the stories of victims
and pictures of uniformed police officers breaking the
law. Some of my friends gathered the courage to do the
same, and it became a movement. All of this was done
at great risk to our own safety. When the Government
19-29868

02/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

halted the operation some months later, we felt that we
had made a contribution.
From then on I started actively engaging in our
area. I decided to train fellow youth on life skills and
I hosted talent shows to promote youth talents and
peace by bringing together the community. I wanted
to show that there was an urgent need to unite the
community because the operation caused divisions and
a lot of suspicion. I got fired up, recognizing the fact
that as young people in Eastleigh we had to do much
of the work ourselves. I decided to run for member of
the county assembly in 2017, but, unfortunately, I was
unsuccessful. Still, I was not deterred.
Last year I became a youth moderator for an
initiative pioneered by the Life and Peace Institute in
Kenya that focuses on sustained dialogue. It is called
Tubonge Mtaani, which in our local slang, Sheng,
means “Let’s talk in our neighbourhoods”. Sustained
dialogue aims to build relationships among divided
communities. Through these youth-led efforts, we
share our stories and become empowered to actively
address issues together in our neighbourhoods. There
is little trust between communities and the police in my
area, so spaces are also offered to bring community and
police together in order to begin to better understand
one another and to discuss challenges in our areas and
what we need to do to address them. The work is both
simple and complex, but very effective in building
bridges. Through dialogue we are able to overcome
our stereotypes of one another and use non-violent
approaches to reduce and prevent urban violence.
During my time engaging in that process I have
seen a lot of changes in my community. I will share
some examples.
First, young men, and especially young women,
who previously lacked confidence to speak in public
found a safe space to speak up, articulate issues and
lead community dialogues.
Secondly, stereotypes and perceptions among
youth are changing. Before the dialogues, we did not
know each other and had all kinds of negative ideas
and perceptions. Now we have become friends and
recognize that stereotypes unnecessarily disconnect
human beings and put up huge walls between us.
Thirdly, many youth have discovered an alternative
to crime and been inspired to see their potential, start
businesses, go back to school and initiate community
projects. Others, like me and my friend Ken, have

S/PV. 8629

launched a community initiative called Naweza, which
means “I can”. The relationship between the police
and the community has tremendously improved. For
instance, I can now freely call the head of police in my
area and share critical information on matters related
to community safety. In the past the police were always
seen as enemies.
Let me now share two major challenges for us
young peacebuilders seeking to advance peace in
places like Eastleigh. One major challenge that I see
is how the world understands what constitutes a peace
and security challenge. Urban violence is often not
prioritized as a peacebuilding challenge; where I come
from, it is seen more as an issue of crime and gangs that
can be tackled only through a hard security approach.
If we are to truly silence the guns in Africa by 2020, we
need to really catch up with the reality that 82 per cent
of lethal violence actually occurs outside of conflict
zones, with much of it concentrated in urban settings,
including the area where I am from. As more than half
of the global population now lives in urban areas and
the African continent is regarded as the world’s fastest
urbanizing region, we will need to better understand
the changing face of conflict and the interlinked forms
and expressions of violence. We need to invest in more
youth-led urban peacebuilding going forward.
A second challenge we need to address is the fact
that engagement in peace processes and peace work
have largely been the exclusive domain of older, male
generations. When young people are involved and
brought to the table, it is often tokenistic, and our needs
and interests are often reduced to issues of education
and employment, when, actually, we have diverse needs
as young people, as well as the capacity to contribute to
the biggest challenges facing our community and world,
not just to so-called youth issues. While we face these
deep-rooted obstacles to our meaningful inclusion,
many of us persist and continue to make the most of the
resources we possess to make positive contributions.
As I conclude my remarks, let me share three
recommendations that I believe would help me and
fellow young peacebuilders to better advance the
objectives of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018),
as well as the vision outlined in the African Union
Master Roadmap of Practical Steps for Silencing the
Guns in Africa by 2020.
First, the United Nations should create further
opportunities for additional and more diverse young

19-298689/30

S/PV.8629

Peace and security in Africa

people to engage in higher-level United Nations
processes involving key decision-makers, including
the Security Council. Having youth briefers here
today is a testament to how the Council is living up to
the intention in resolution 2419 (2018) to have youth
representatives brief the Council. Having said that, I
would like to urge the Council, and the United Nations
system in general, to explore more innovative ways
of engaging with young people. I would, for instance,
welcome a visit from the Council to Eastleigh for it to
see first-hand the work of the many young people who
are not a threat or a problem but part of the solutions
that the Council is seeking.
Secondly, given that African Union flagship
projects are also at the centre of today’s debate, I would
like to urge the African Union to continue to strengthen
its recent efforts on the Youth4Peace programme. We
are encouraged by the continental leadership on that
agenda, but the outreach must be intensified so that
more young people across Africa can be engaged,
including youth who are most marginalized from policy
conversations yet most need to know about and employ
that agenda. I also see a critical role for the African
Union in supporting member States to integrate the
youth, peace and security agenda in national youth
policies and development plans and to create spaces for
member States and a range of young people to exchange
on best practices on how to best operationalize
resolution 2250 (2015) in a way that genuinely has the
potential to reach places like Eastleigh.
Thirdly, I would like to urge United Nations States
Members to develop proactive, forward-looking youth
policies that catalyse young people’s positive leadership
for peace rather than seek to contain them. We, as
young people, can contribute to positive change in our
communities, and many of us already are. Recognize
that and provide us with the space to define and shape
the agenda, and then work with us to implement policies
in ways that build trust among Governments, security
actors and young people, which the Council is meant to
serve and protect.
In conclusion, I would like to underline that we
young people are not just the leaders of tomorrow,
we are already leaders now. We are ready and able to
shoulder our responsibilities for a more prosperous,
peaceful and just world.
The President: I thank Ms. Ahmed for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ochen.
10/30

02/10/2019

Mr. Ochen: Congratulations to you, Mr. President,
and South Africa on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for October. I would like to thank
everyone in the Chamber, together with my fellow
briefers. It is a great honour. I send my warmest regards
from Kampala to all present, as I feel delighted to be
invited to contribute to the discussion.
On a day like this, we are also observing the
International Day of Non-Violence, and a subject of
that nature is quite befitting. In myriad ways, my story,
like many others of young people around the continent,
begins with a story of pain, unfortunately. When I was
growing up as a child, like any other child in the world,
I wanted to study and become a doctor or a pilot. My
dream was to become a teacher. Mostly, I anxiously
awaited when my parents would be able to build at
least a semi-permanent home. But, when war came,
everything, including all those dreams, was turned
upside down. My dreams were cut short; my vision for
the future was amputated. That is what I witnessed as
a child.
Since I was a child, after spending my life in
the camp for internally displaced persons (IDPs) in
Uganda, with millions of fellow Ugandan children
sharing my painful journey, we felt that the world had
forgotten us, and we asked ourselves who we could fight
against. Should we pick up a gun and fight somebody?
Ultimately, we wondered how we could work together
to fight against the disgraceful fate that we were living.
Every day, as a child, I had to struggle to survive
abductions and being killed. I had to struggle to not
get blown up by landmines. Every day, I painfully
struggled to find something to eat and somewhere to
sleep and worried that if I slept at all that I might not
wake up alive, or that I might wake up in the hands of
armed men. Worst of all was when my own brother was
abducted on 10 December 2003 — apparently, Human
Rights Day — which was the day that right for me was
violated, at best. Unfortunately, to date, my brother, as
well as my cousins and fellow community members
have never been seen again.
It has been quite an exhausting journey. I always
wondered whether it was enough to cry and criticize
war mongers or fighters, or was it too late when I
criticized or complained about them. But something in
me told me that my situation was an opportunity for
me to take responsibility, and instead of criticizing the
19-29868

02/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

war mongers, I should create peacebuilders and achieve
what the continent was thirsty for, in that case, peace.
At the peak of the conflict, I was at a crossroads,
pondering whether picking up a gun to fight was the
way to go. But something in me kept on telling me that
war was not an option, that suffering needed to end and
that picking up a gun would escalate the suffering. I
chose peace. At the age of 13, I started a peace club in
the IDP camp where I was living in northern Uganda.
The objective was primarily to discourage and
challenge the child soldier recruitment that was
happening in my region. We went on to build up our
momentum, while we struggled with meeting our own
education and health needs and worrying about the
future. In 2005, I formed the African Youth Initiative
Network, aimed at mobilizing young people — fellow
youth suffering like I was — to transform our trauma
and pain into an opportunity for leadership and
peacebuilding. That has been key in developing our
leadership in the direction of peacebuilding.
I can say that it is very difficult for something good
to come out of a life of conflict. I admire the momentum
and commitment by the African Union to saying that
we have to silence the guns in Africa by 2020. The year
2020 is not so far away, and there are gun shops all over
the continent. That is a vision that we must embrace and
ensure that we commit and deliver on.
I have met with young people in South Sudan,
Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
One young man, from a country I will not name, asked
me how it was that I could tell him to put down his
gun, because his gun was his life, security, livelihood,
father, mother and Government — how could he lay
down his gun? That was his question to me, and I did
not have an answer.
But our background and our work over the years,
which has helped us move forward, have been guided
by the following four questions, which I humbly ask the
members of the Security Council to help me answer.
First, how can we make peacebuilding rewarding, and
peacebuilders rewarded, so that peace is chosen by
the young people in Africa? Secondly, how can we
build trust among Africans, and towards the African
people? Thirdly, how do we reduce the flow of guns to
Africa? The continent is littered with them. Fourthly,
how do we deal with the systemic marginalization of
Africans by fellow Africans, as well as international
norms? Allow me to present the key challenges from

S/PV. 8629

my recent trips across the continent, made with the
support of the African Union, in an effort to mobilize
youth momentum towards peace in Africa.
One thing that is common is the lack of critical
positive momentum across the continent. We found
an absence of a transformative leadership agenda
aimed at empowering young people as leaders in
peacebuilding. The streets throughout the continent are
full of young people chanting that someone must fall
and that someone must go. Everyone who chants those
sentiments is conveying so much pain and anger, and
one can feel that, from their hearts, they are ready to
strike back. They are feeling the urge to take revenge.
That is a challenge.
The next challenge is migration. There is growing
uncertainty among youth on the continent, with
thousands seeking jobs abroad. We are seeing them die
in the Mediterranean Sea on a daily basis, as well as
the suffering of Africans around the world. But also,
for those who decide to stay home, they are sometimes
forced to settle for low quality livelihoods, which tends
to increase the range of risks and vulnerabilities.
The third challenge is hierarchies and the state of
mind. Over our time together, we have talked about
youth inclusion and participation. It is true that the
language has changed, but the power has not. Power
remains the same. We are stuck in a non-progressive
mindset of power, which says that we are including
youth, but that is a mere sentiment; it is not really meant.
The question we have to answer is how to include in the
discussion every young person and key player for the
right mind-change.
The fourth challenge is that there are too many war
profiteers, both at home and abroad. Think about what
would happen if Africa were to close its borders for
one day or one year — how many industries would fail
around the world? We have so many resources at home,
but they are taken at the expense of the African people.
How do we address that challenge of there being too
many war profiteers? The question is, who really
wants the wars to end? Is it African leaders and the
African people or the international community? Those
are concerns that the Security Council could help us
to address.
The fifth challenge, shared among many young
people whom I have met in different parts of the
continent, is a concern that, while there is increased
engagement from influential figures — what we

19-2986811/30

S/PV.8629

Peace and security in Africa

consider to be the “celebritization” of the peace
agenda — and while that is good in terms of raising
awareness, it does not do much justice to people who
are suffering and going hungry. Young people are
carrying guns on their necks every day, looking to
secure livelihoods. Young people are saying that most
initiatives do not align with their needs. They are not
living the lives they studied for, they are not living
the lives they researched, but they are living the lives
into which they were born, in which they survive and
continue to live. Therefore, identity matters, and whom
they identify with is important. Allow me to make the
following recommendations to the Council.
First, in order for us to tackle the big question of
what we can do to achieve our dream of silencing the
guns in Africa by 2020, I think the bedrock will be
the political will generated by both the weak and the
powerful people across the continent. That would mean
that their joint decisions to negotiate a collective future
supplied by the leadership will be necessary to create a
climate in which everybody can thrive. That is key. We
need that.
Secondly, I would like to make a recommendation
on gun violence. It is my hope that, given the increased
gun flows to Africa, the Security Council will
understand that youth are genuinely lost. They are
wondering: who really wants the wars to end in Africa
if nations around the world are competing to militarize
the continent? Who really means well? What do they
mean when they say they are working for peace and
stability in Africa, with all these guns arriving on the
continent? If the rest of the world genuinely means well
to Africa, it should scale down its military cooperation in
Africa and scale up the partnership for peace. Let us
plant the seeds of peace.
Thirdly, most international interventions — whether
led by the African Union, the United Nations or other
platforms — have had a post-mortem approach to
peace. That has been viewed in many different ways.
We are grateful for the support that comes in the form
of humanitarian assistance, peacekeeping missions
and peace operations. I think the time has come for a
pre-mortem approach whereby we mediate in conflict
situations from the outset to prevent suffering and
death. That is key.
The fourth recommendation I would make is on
mediation as a tool for conflict prevention. We must
seek to address the various grievances of ethnic groups
12/30

02/10/2019

before we allow them to escalate into violent conflict.
That can be done only if we domesticate and bring about
solutions at the local level. Another recommendation
I would make based on my experience of travelling
to different countries around the continent — some
of which have endured sanctions for years — is that
States’ development capacity should be prioritized
instead of imposing sanctions or cutting aid, because
it is the people who are suffering, and it is not just top
politicians being affected but the innocent, the poor,
children and women. Sanctions are not punishing the
State as intended, but rather they are punishing the
people. In as much as we are committed to putting
an end to guns in Africa, let us make sure that the
commitment to youth and peace and security is
matched by meaningful financing. Donors should give
money and provide the technical skills that are needed.
Youth have increased in numbers across the continent,
but we must move away from the numbers and towards
generating a positive impact.
My penultimate point is that we must focus on
addressing the root causes of violent conflict, such as
conflicts over land and mineral resources. Imagine if we
had shared African resources with the rest of the world
in a way that benefited Africans — where would Africa
be by now? And of course, questions have been arising
on issues of growing concern among young Africans.
The United Nations is key, and we need to promote the
United Nations and bring it closer to the people. Let
them understand the values and principles as well as the
declarations and treaties signed, which will mean they
will be able to respect the rules of engagement. The big
question that everyone is asking is: when will we have
a permanent African member on the Security Council?
It is a question that the Council must look at now in
order to maintain the legitimacy of such an important
institution in the minds of young Africans.
Finally, based on our 15 years of active
peacebuilding work across the continent and also from
our childhood, we have moved on to build an African
peace academy. That is a locally led vision for the region
that will have an impact on world peace. Through that
facility, we will opt to put in place home-grown efforts
for peacebuilders, conflict preventers and conflict
mediators. Through the web network of peacebuilders,
we hope we will have a continent-wide peace movement.
That is a commitment that could help us to make
collective achievements together.
19-29868

02/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

Another goal we intend to achieve through the
peace academy is to support the principles of adherence
to and tolerance of different opinions among young
people, without being compromised. We will also
support the partnership between youth and donors with
the intention of harmonizing strategies to look at the
long-term aspects of peacebuilding, which will be key
to strong institution-building.
With all of that said, I wish to say that we must be
aware that the African youth has grown up, and now they
are many in number. They are becoming a force. It will
either be a positive or a negative force on the world. But
it will be a force. We must do the right thing, right now.
It would be in our best interests to step up now to help
redirect the pace of change towards a positive change.
We want to have a model African-led peacebuilding
missions and operations to complement the existing
United Nations and African Union peace operations.
By implementing all of the above, we will accelerate
innovation for a lasting peace in Africa. I pray that
peace may prevail in Africa and the world.
The President: I thank Mr. Ochen for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
today’s briefers for their very informative interventions.
I would also like to commend the South African
presidency for having organized this timely debate
aimed at addressing the role of youth in peace
processes. Since this is the first official meeting under
your presidency, Sir, I would like to congratulate
South Africa on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for October and wish you success in
carrying out your work. I would also like to commend
the Russian delegation for its excellent management of
the work of the Council during September.
Building a conflict-free Africa is an ambitious
yet essential goal to ensure the security, integrity
and prosperity of the African continent and to lay a
solid foundation for inclusive growth and sustainable
development, as outlined in Agenda 2063 of the
African Union. We heartily support the Silencing the
Guns by 2020 initiative and welcome today’s debate
as clear evidence of the African Union’s consistent
determination to rid Africa of conflicts. Let me
now focus on some crucial elements that we find
particularly important.

S/PV. 8629

First and foremost, we recognize the importance
and vital role of young women and men in efforts to
maintain and promote peace and security, as well as
to prevent conflicts and resolve them. We believe
that durable peace is not possible if inclusiveness and
women’s and youth participation in peace processes
and political life are not ensured.
The ground-breaking resolution on youth and
peace and security (resolution 2250 (2015)) was an
important step in recognizing the needs and potential
of the youth in preventing and resolving conflicts. It
affirmed the important role the youth can play as a key
aspect of the sustainability, inclusiveness and success
of peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts.
Secondly, we should encourage youth leadership
in peacebuilding and support young people’s quest
to become active agents of positive change, peace
and reconciliation. We support the Gender and Youth
Promotion Initiative of the Peacebuilding Fund, as
an expression of the Fund’s commitment to inclusive
peacebuilding by strengthening the participation of
young women and young men within existing prevention
and peacebuilding initiatives.
Thirdly, the empowerment and participation of
young women and men are indispensable for enhancing
inclusivity and equality in our societies. Young
people are the cornerstone of sustainable development
and lasting peace. They do not need merely quality
education, vocational training, skills development and
access to digital technologies and services, but also
decent employment and entrepreneurship opportunities.
The most constructive way to empower young
people and ensure that they do not become radicalized
is to offer them credible and constructive ways to
contribute to the development of their communities.
If young people remain excluded from national and
international efforts aimed at building peace, then
instability and extremism will continue to pose serious
threats to our societies.
Conflicts in Africa are complex, and so too are their
root causes, ranging from social, political and economic
inequality to unemployment, lack of education, in
particular among young women and girls, as well as
historical patterns of conflict over the control of natural
resources. All of the them must be addressed in order
to secure durable peace on the continent. Tackling the
root causes of conflict requires ownership by African

19-2986813/30

S/PV.8629

Peace and security in Africa

Governments and local communities and support from
the international community.
In conclusion, let me stress that, if we are serious
about ensuring long-lasting peace on the African
continent, there is simply no alternative for investing
in young people, while giving them a voice in all
relevant decision-making processes and building solid
partnerships, with the youth as a bridge to a more
peaceful, sustainable and prosperous world.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): The turmoil
in Africa is, or should be, the distress of the world. It
is therefore very right that the Chamber consider and
seek to act on the most heartbreaking elements of that
turmoil — the conspicuous entrapment, for it is nothing
less than that, of its young people into the conflicts and
violence of that continent.
Here at the United Nations our countries are
separated by geography and distinguished by our
various cultures, but we share a fundamental and
inescapable commonality — we love our children, with
the greatest love. And so it hits home for me. When
the Council considers the plight of so many children
in Africa and, through the campaign of Silencing the
Guns, seeks a much hoped for harvest of a better future
for them, I think, on a personal level, of my own grandchildren. My mind right now is filled with thoughts of
them. They may be at home, at soccer practice or in
their classrooms, both of them dreaming and working
towards their futures. Those thoughts brighten me. At
the same time, I am saddened by that fact that it is not
the same for every child in every country of the world. I
am saddened by the fact that conflict and poverty leave
so many children open to spectacles of violence and,
worse, that they are drawn into violence or conflict
and, even, in some cases, forcibly conscripted.
While reflecting on the universal emotions that
all parents share, I bring to this particular campaign a
real sense of urgency. The discussions about youth and
violence are not abstract. They are not some airy policy.
They strike at the very root of our humanity. The United
States lauds African efforts to reduce conflict through
Agenda 2063 of the African Union and the Silencing
the Guns initiative for the betterment of Africa’s youth.
Far too often, we discuss peace and security in Africa
as a set of challenges, when what we really need to do is
to view those issues as an opportunity. Why is that? It is
because 60 per cent of Africa’s population — 750 million
people — are under the age of 25, with a median age
14/30

02/10/2019

of just 20. Africa is brimming with potential — future
leaders, artists, engineers and entrepreneurs. We, all of
us, just need to find ways to unlock that potential.
Of course, African Governments and regional
bodies play a key role in achieving that goal. Nations
can improve security by adhering to sanctions regimes
that support peace and stability in the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
South Sudan. We urge all States Members of the United
Nations and, in particular, the countries of the region,
to uphold resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2471 (2019).
Preventing the illicit flow of weapons and restricting
the travel of sanctioned individuals will promote longterm security. African nations should always look for
ways to include the voices of young people as they
build their futures. Unfortunately, some leaders have
demonstrated little willingness to do so. In recent
years, South Sudan’s leaders have pursued policies that
benefit a political elite rather than create the conditions
in which young people can flourish. The United
States hopes a fragile peace agreement might improve
conditions for South Sudan’s youth, while encouraging
them to exchange weapons for the tools that will help
them build a safer and more prosperous country.
Regional and subregional organizations can act
on their responsibility to aid young people by urging
Africa’s leaders to consider their legacies. In turn, longserving political leaders must respect constitutional
limits on power, especially those that limit their
terms in office. In addition, the African Union and
the Economic Community of Central African States
should play a larger role in addressing the crisis in the
Anglophone region of Cameroon. For years, the crisis
has kept thousands of children out of school — and it
threatens to spread across a region already beset by
conflict. All parties ought to pay greater attention to
that matter.
But the actions of Governments and regional bodies
are not enough. We must also develop the abilities
that elevate the voices of Africa’s youth, which starts
with moving beyond the flawed narrative that young
people are only passive victims or active perpetrators
in conflict areas. In reality, young Africans like Aya
Chebbi, Hafsa Ahmed and Victor Ochen already play
prominent roles, standing up for their political rights
and those of their fellow citizens.
I began my remarks with a reminder of our greatest
commonality — one as old as time and as deep as the
19-29868

02/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

human heart: the love for our children, which feeds
the hope for our children. I will return to that point.
It is immoral to offer and a blot on humankind not
to intercept an inheritance of violence. What each
person in the Chamber feels for his or her own children
should be a guide for what we attempt for the children
of Africa. To protect and nurture a child is the most
noble of all endeavours. It bypasses all our rivalries
and differences.
It is my country’s belief that, when young people
see a path to achieving personal dignity and when they
sense or know that they are needed, they find purpose.
Purpose aligned with a sense of dignity leads to both
the abandonment of violence and a chance for success.
Dignity banishes despair. Despair drives, or seduces,
them to violence and its instruments — all before their
lives have really begun.
I believe that every single child rescued from this
hard world is a great achievement. To rescue many, if
we work honestly and vigorously towards achieving
the goal of silencing the guns, will bring moral honour
to the Council. The United States already invests in
the infrastructure of Africa and offers aid. However,
there is the ultimate and primary infrastructure — the
children of Africa. If we reach out and speak to them
and point them towards a star of hope and dignity, it
will surpass any other contribution we may make.
In truth, that is what the Council is really here to
do — invest in futures. Not to help a child is a matter
of tears and shame.
Africa’s youth has a leading role play in achieving
the goals of Agenda 2063. Let all of us invest in the
coolest generation so that it might one day see a world
in which the last gun has been silenced.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation joins those who spoke before me in
addressing to you, Sir, its heartfelt congratulations and
wishing you every success on the occasion of this first
debate in October, devoted to the role of young people
in the promotion of peace and security in Africa, which
marks the beginning of the South African presidency of
the Security Council. My delegation also commends the
Russian Federation on the excellent work accomplished
over the past month, and all the briefers for their excellent
briefings and the relevance of their recommendations.
Data relating to the ongoing conflicts on the
African continent, as well as the numerous studies on
new forms of crime in our States, teach us that, despite

S/PV. 8629

the enormous potential that young people represent,
they continue to be unsuccessful in making a significant
contribution to peacebuilding, owing to many political
and social obstacles. In view of these considerations,
the African Union has expressed its determination
through the road map of the African Peace and Security
Architecture for the period 2016 to 2020 to promote
youth-empowerment policies in order to increase
their contributions to peace processes, national
reconstruction and post-conflict development. In other
words, it is all about harnessing the potential of young
people and encouraging them to invest their energy
and creativity in conflict prevention and peacebuilding
activities by ramping up their involvement in efforts
to combat the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons (SALW), as well as in the political processes
involving solutions to crises and peacebuilding.
As part of its strategy for resolving crises,
Côte d’Ivoire has placed particular emphasis
on associative-sector tools to better channel the
contribution of young people into social cohesion and
peacebuilding activities. The establishment of the
Youth Parliament represents one such case, which not
only provides a framework for democratic expression
and active participation in governmental policy to
promote national reconciliation and social cohesion,
but also promotes the formation of a civic conscience
committed to achieving peace and lasting stability.
Represented throughout the country by a network of
partner associations, the Parliament is a genuine bridge
connecting young people and the different strata of
Ivorian society.
Furthermore, my delegation believes that our
shared ambition to silence the arms must be based on an
unwavering fight against insecurity and unemployment.
These two scourges are the primary causes of violent
extremism and radicalization of young people, which
is the segment of the population most vulnerable to
the entreaties of transnational criminal networks and
armed groups. It is therefore necessary to invest more
in the education and training sectors and to provide the
necessary conditions for private entrepreneurship to
thrive and the creation of decent jobs.
While it is undeniable that the joint efforts of the
international community are crucial to silencing the
arms in Africa, it should also be recognized that States
have the primary responsibility for implementing
national arms control strategies. Accordingly, the Côte
d’Ivoire has established a national legal framework

19-2986815/30

S/PV.8629

Peace and security in Africa

linked to the Convention on Small Arms and Light
Weapons, Their Ammunition and Other Related
Materials of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the Arms Trade Treaty. At the
operational level, combating the proliferation and illicit
trafficking of SALW has been carried out in parallel
with the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process, which, it should be stressed, has focused on
the reintegration of former combatants.
With regard to the implementation of the Convention
on SALW and the Arms Trade Treaty, I am pleased to
welcome and cite as an example the cooperation among
the National Commissions to Combat the Proliferation
and Illegal Movement of Small Arms and Light Weapons
of the ECOWAS member States. This outstanding
cooperation is contributing to strengthening national
capacities in combating arms trafficking and promoting
the regular exchange of experiences and good practices.
In this regard, it has enabled member States to make
significant progress in the area of controlling, marking
and securing stockpiles of weapons and ammunition.
Côte d’Ivoire takes this opportunity to advocate
pursuing the multifaceted support of the African
Union and international partners for strengthening the
capacities of regional organizations so as to increase
their effectiveness in combating arms proliferation,
awareness-raising and community disarmament,
together with civil society organizations.
In conclusion, my delegation urgently calls on the
international community, in particular the Security
Council, to support the African Union Silencing the
Guns by 2020 initiative, which is a manifestation of the
will of its States members to work to achieve peace,
security and development in Africa.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): First of all, we
congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council, and Germany
greatly appreciates the fact that you will leave us free at
least a few weekends during the month. In this regard,
I appreciate what Mr. Vassily Nebenzia, Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation, did in the
presidency last month.
With regard to the topic at hand, it is greatly
appreciated that South Africa put it at the top of its
agenda. I do not know if it was done intentionally just
one week after we witnessed several hundred thousand
young people on the streets of New York City, when
Greta Thunberg and many other young people were at
16/30

02/10/2019

the United Nations to express their will, enthusiasm
and initiatives for combating the huge problem of
climate change.
I therefore very much appreciate the fact, Sir, that
you are now once again putting the emphasis on youth,
particularly on young people as drivers of change.
In the briefings of the four youth briefers, we heard
numerous examples in which young people are already
engaged. I listened carefully to what Ms. Aya Chebbi,
African Union Special Envoy on Youth, had to say with
regard to concrete examples in which young people are
already drivers of change.
We have to make it a general practice that,
whenever we have negotiations, women and youth are
included. As we were preparing our statement today,
we took on board what the German youth delegates to
the United Nations had prepared. We are very happy to
have not only African Union youth representatives here
in the Chamber, but also German youth delegates. We
are including in this statement what these young people
have to say.
First, I want to start where my colleague from Côte
d’Ivoire left off, namely, with regard to the African
Union. Germany fully supports the African Union
Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative. It is very positive
that the Council endorsed it, but 2020 is just around the
corner and a lot of work remains to be done in the fight
against the proliferation of weapons and ammunition,
which, after all, is the hard fuel of conflicts.
The fight against the proliferation of weapons
and disarmament is also a priority for members of the
Security Council.
We partner in concrete terms with the African
Union to cut the flows of arms and ammunition to
fragile States, and we are training a new generation of
experts to take the lead in arms control. We have also
presented to Member States what we do in the western
Balkans on small-arms control so as to transfer our
experience in that area to African countries.
Germany also provides protection and basic
services to those particularly threatened and who have
been victims of conflict in the Lake Chad region,
with support projects by Plan International aimed at
providing psychosocial support to young survivors of
sexual and gender-based violence. We support Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Gamba and
her efforts to reintegrate child soldiers into society.
19-29868

02/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

This is for us a very important precondition for
sustainable peacebuilding.
I would like to go back to Ms. Aya Chebbi. She
listed a number of nexuses, and I would like to start
with her first one, the nexus with governance. I have
mentioned here several times already the 2017 United
Nations Development Programme study “Journey to
extremism in Africa”, in which it is very clearly spelled
out that bad governance, the absence of the rule of law
and a lack of education and economic opportunities
lead young people into extremism, so good governance
is key.
Concerning the nexus with inequality, the German
youth delegates put inequality at the top of their list. As
to the nexus with climate change, we are very happy
that she picked this up, because we, too, believe that this
is very important, and we heard a lot about it last week.
The last point I wanted to pick up from her statement
was the need to replace bullets with books. That is one
of the key points in the demands of the German youth
delegates; this is about weapons. We listened to Victor
Ochen when in his statement he mentioned a youth who
said that his gun was his life. This is a huge problem,
and we have to do to change this.
How can this be done? It can be done by trying
to stop the production of weapons and the prohibition
of firearms. Short of this, forbid the export of arms
and in particular stop arms deliveries to crisis and
conflict regions. Instead of financing arms, one should
finance books, education or other projects. I just want
to highlight one project that Germany is supporting
in Bamako, in which young people are encouraged
and supported to engage in cultural activities such as
hip-hop, rap and modern dance; Jerry is invited there.
This strengthens their role in society and provides
alternatives to what extremists and violent groups offer.
Let me conclude by saying that there were a few
operational proposals; one of them was to have more
youth briefers, not only today but also on other subjects.
When Germany held the presidency in April, we had a
few young briefers, and I want to remind the Council
about the young Syrian girl with disabilities who had
fled in her wheelchair from Syria to Germany (see
S/PV.8515). She was a very impressive young woman.
I heard, and I want to stop at this, a proposal put
forward by Ms. Gawanas with regard to an expert group
or informal working group on youth. Maybe this is not

S/PV. 8629

the right time or place, but perhaps she could explain at
some stage how such a group would make a difference.
Would this be a group where young people are actually
sitting around the table, or would it once again be us
old men sitting around the table discussing it? We must
bring young people to the table so that they can they
discuss the issues.
The President: I will discuss with the representative
of Germany his recommendation outside the Chamber.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): My
delegation congratulates South Africa on having
assumed the rotating presidency of the Security Council
for this month. China affirms our full support to you,
Mr. President. We also wish to congratulate Russia on
the successful completion of its Council presidency
in September.
China thanks South Africa for the initiative to
hold today’s open meeting. We listened carefully to the
briefings by Special Adviser Gawanas, Special Envoy
Chebbi and the civil-society representatives.
As the hope of a nation and the future of the
world, young people represent a valuable factor in
promoting social and economic development and an
important force in safeguarding world peace. Chairman
Mao Zedong, founder of the new China, once said to
young people:
“You young people, full of vigour and vitality …
are like the sun at 8 or 9 in the morning. Our hope
is placed on you”.
The late South African President Nelson Mandela
also said that youth was the greatest asset of a nation.
Africa is the continent with the youngest population.
Young people are actively involved in nation-building
and playing an important role in the revitalization
of Africa. They work hard for peace, making their
contribution to delivering on the Silencing the Guns by
2020 initiative and implementing the African Union’s
Agenda 2063 through concrete action.
Young people affected by armed conflicts and
lack of development also face the predicament of being
marginalized. They are confronted with challenges
such as poverty and unemployment. To promote peace,
security and development in Africa, we need to support
and nurture young people as they grow up.
On addressing differences through consultation,
Africa has a good tradition of using negotiations and

19-2986817/30

S/PV.8629

Peace and security in Africa

consultations. Regional and subregional organizations
on the continent also have successful experience in
the area of good offices. China has always supported
African countries in finding African solutions to
African problems.
To advance the political settlement of hotspot
issues, it is necessary to give adequate consideration
to factors relevant to young people, ensure their
constructive participation in the process, listen to
the views expressed by a wide spectrum of young
population, fully leverage the youth advantage and
force a strongest synergy for peace.
It is important to promote peace through culture.
Peace embodies a common aspiration across the
different cultures. It is important to mobilize peoples
around the world, youth in particular, to impress upon
them the idea of peace being of supreme value and
the notion of harmony in diversity. On the basis of
mutual respect among different cultures, we advocate
strengthening mutual exchanges, fostering mutual trust,
expanding cooperation and seeking a win-win outcome
so as to gradually blaze a new trail to promoting peace
through culture.
Concerning pursuing peace through development,
development is the foundation for building peace and
maintaining sustainable peace. It is imperative to put
economic and social development at the forefront and
support countries in choosing independently their
development path.
China stands ready to closely coordinate the joint
implementation of the Belt and Road Initiative with
the African Union’s Agenda 2063 and the development
strategies of African countries to help African countries
increase interconnectivity, build their development
capacities and eliminate the root causes of conflict.
It is vital to be action-driven. Empty rhetoric is
no solution to any problem. We must provide tangible
assistance to young people in Africa. At the 2018 Beijing
Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation,
China decided to work with Africa to set up 10 Luban
workshops on the continent to provide vocational
training for young Africans, the first of which has
already been established and opened in Djibouti.
We are in the process of setting up the ChinaAfrica Innovation Cooperation Centre to promote
youth innovation and entrepreneurship. A tailor-made
programme is being implemented to train 1,000 high18/30

02/10/2019

calibre African professionals. We will provide Africa
with 50,000 Government-sponsored scholarships
and 50,000 training opportunities for seminars and
workshops, and we will invite 2,000 young Africans to
visit China in exchanges. We will train young researchers
in agriscience and entrepreneurs in agribusiness. Such
projects will support youth development in Africa and
contribute towards silencing the guns.
China and Africa are good brothers, good friends
and good partners. The principle of sincerity will
result in amity, good faith efforts and the pursuit of the
greater good and shared interests outlined by President
Xi Jinping as the fundamental guide to China’s Africa
policy. China supports the Silencing the Guns by 2020
initiative. In the context of the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation, China and Africa stand together to build
a community with a shared future that features joint
responsibility, win-win cooperation and happiness for
all. We will continue to work together with our African
brothers to promote comprehensive youth development
and to make a significant contribution to the promotion
of peace and development in Africa.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium)
(spoke in French): I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I wish you every
success. I would also like to congratulate the delegation
of the Russian Federation on its successful presidency
last month.
Belgium supports the Silencing the Guns in Africa
by 2020 initiative. We welcome the African Union’s
commitment to putting young people at the centre of
that initiative.
The African continent is the only one where the
youth population continues to grow from year to
year. By 2050, the continent is expected to double its
population, from 1 billion today to nearly 2.4 billion.
At that time, half of its inhabitants will be under 25
years of age. That prospect provides tremendous
opportunities for innovation and creativity. But such
a demographic shift, if not supported, also carries the
risk of new difficulties for the continent.
Political, social and economic exclusion is a risk
factor. It can fuel joint mistrust of the national and
international political institutions that are meant to
serve and protect young people. It is therefore vital to
invest in education and in creating a climate conducive
to the participation and inclusion of young adults in
19-29868

02/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8629

peace processes, including mediation processes. Equal
access to inclusive and quality education and the
opportunity for decent work are crucial elements in
achieving that climate.

to overcome the current crises and challenges together.
Interaction and unity among generations are vital. In that
regard, I would like to thank our young briefers today
for sharing their experiences and recommendations.

For those reasons, one of the priorities of Belgium’s
cooperation with Africa is the socioeconomic
integration of young people, as for example in
Uganda, where we support the implementation of the
Skilling Uganda plan; in Morocco, where we promote
youth entrepreneurship; and in Burkina Faso, where
Belgium supports the development of young people’s
digital skills.

France’s commitment to peace and development in
Africa is known. In Ouagadougou in November 2017,
President Macron outlined the basis of our partnership
with Africa, which is founded not only on achieving
peace and security and promoting development and
innovation, but also above all on the African youth, who
are central to our common future and whose fulfilment
is a vital component. There can be no stability or lasting
peace if the needs and expectations of young people
are ignored.

Resolution 2419 (2018) calls for greater inclusion
of youth in peace processes. That text is particularly
relevant in the African context today. We must recognize
young people as actors in their own right. To do that, we
must change our norms, practices and attitudes.
As Ms. Hafsa Ahmed said, young people are not
just the leaders of tomorrow, they are often already
leaders today. I would like to thank our briefers this
morning for their interventions and their testimonies.
In addition, young people are often the majority
in armed groups in Africa. The consideration of
those young people should be central to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and security sector
reform processes, as well as community violence
reduction programmes and actions to prevent
violent extremism.
I would like to conclude by welcoming the
initiatives undertaken by the African Union (AU)
for the greater involvement of young people and by
commending the work of its Special Envoy on Youth,
Ms. Aya Chebbi. Partnerships are also a vehicle for
new ideas and innovative initiatives. Belgium supports
civil society initiatives and cooperation platforms, such
as the AU-European Union Youth Cooperation Hub,
which implements pilot projects, particularly in the
area of peace and security, between young people of
the African and the European continents.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): As the
Permanent Representative of Germany just recalled,
the convening of this debate a few days after the
remarkable mobilization that we witnessed during
the Climate Action Summit highlights very aptly the
crucial importance of listening to what young people
have to say to us and of including future generations
in the discussions and decisions that should enable us

The path to lasting peace in Africa cannot be
limited to a military response to crises and threats.
A broader approach is needed, as Ms. Aya Chebbi,
Ms. Hafsa Ahmed and Mr. Victor Ochen very eloquently
described. Moreover, that is the main goal of the
Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative, which
France supports. That goal cannot be achieved without
the full and active participation of young people and
without them having the means to meet their needs for
social recognition, professional and personal success
and, more broadly, political direction and hope.
They are optimistic and mobilized and we should
both acknowledge and encourage them through words
and, above all, deeds. There are many specific and very
enlightening examples of initiatives led by committed
young women and men across the continent. I believe
that we were all impressed by the determination of
Burkina Faso’s youth to defend on two occasions,
sometimes at the cost of their lives, the benefits of
democracy and the rule of law in Burkina Faso. I
personally admire young people’s ability to act and to
unite by using social networking and by developing new
and often more creative and participatory techniques.
The commitment to democracy of young people
in Tunisia during and following the revolution was
striking. I witnessed their drive during my previous
post in Tunisia, in particular at the Youth Forum,
organized with the support of France.
We also support the work of the United Nations
Development Programme in cooperation with the
African Union to strengthen the capacities of young
women and men through an approach that links the
Silencing the Guns initiative and the youth and peace
and security agenda.

19-2986819/30

S/PV.8629

Peace and security in Africa

Unfortunately, contrary to what should happen,
young people continue to be victim to stereotyping
and discrimination. They remain largely excluded from
decision-making processes, political institutions and
the labour market. They are sometimes seen only, or
primarily, as troublemakers or a breeding ground for
violent extremism. Those stereotypes are too often used
as pretexts to disregard their demands, to violate their
rights or even to use violence against them. Among
youth, young women are the hardest hit by injustices,
exclusion and discriminatory social norms, particularly
during conflicts. In that regard, France supports the
women and peace and security agenda, which aims in
particular to promote the voice of women and young
women in order to build lasting peace.
We must guarantee respect for the most fundamental
rights of all young people, including the freedom of
expression and the right to peaceful demonstration.
Youth must be able to participate in decision-making
processes and be fully taken into account in peace
settlements. As it has been suggested, it would be very
useful to have young people brief the Council on a
regular basis, including on country-specific situations.
To enable young people to live up to their full
potential, education is the number-one priority for
France. It is the best way to prevent opposition to the
spread of knowledge and shifts towards violence. France
has made education its priority at the international
and national levels, with more than €300 million
contributed for basic education in Africa through the
Global Partnership for Education and through bilateral
aid. That commitment was reiterated at the Group of
Seven Summit presided over by France, specifically
during the meeting of the Development and Education
Ministers, to which youth representatives from the
Sahel countries were been invited.

02/10/2019

Organization of la Francophonie aimed at civil society
youth organizations. We also look forward to the
recommendations to be made by the Secretary-General
in his report on the implementation of resolutions 2250
(2015) and 2419 (2018), which established the youth,
peace and security agenda. It is indeed high time to
fully seize the immense potential of young people to
achieve and maintain international peace and security
in order to build just, peaceful and inclusive societies,
while also respecting nature, as we have all collectively
endorsed within the framework of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
I would like to conclude on a literary note by
paraphrasing Amadou Hampâté Bâ, who once said that
human life is like a big tree and that each generation is
like a gardener. We therefore have a great deal to do in
order to tend to our shared garden.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to sincerely congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We wish you every
success in your work. I would also like to thank the
Russian Federation, Ambassador Vassily Nebenzia and
the members of his team for their excellent presidency
of the Council last month.
A prosperous and integrated Africa without wars is
a noble goal that we hope will turn into reality on the
ground as soon as possible. The Silencing the Guns by
2020 initiative is a road map for achieving that goal, in
line with the African Union Agenda 2063. The initiative
was endorsed by Security Council in resolution 2457
(2019), adopted in February. In that regard, I would
like to express the readiness of the State of Kuwait to
assume partnership and cooperation in support of the
efforts of all States of the African continent to overcome
obstacles and challenges.

France has also decided to revise its development
policy in order to adopt a partnership-based approach
aimed at better involving civil society, young people,
businesses and diasporas. France will also ensure
that youth is at the centre of the Generation Equality
Forum 2020, which is being jointly organized by UNWomen, France and Mexico, to be held in Paris in July
of next year.

What is needed is concerted, multilateral
international efforts. We need to cooperate with
regional and subregional organizations to develop
solutions, approaches and strategies that address
economic, security, social and development challenges
with a view to achieving sustainable peace and security
in Africa. In that context, I would like to highlight the
following elements.

France calls on all actors to commit to enabling
the active participation of young people in building
international peace and security. We therefore welcome
the call for initiatives launched by the International

First, ignoring the needs and ambitions of young
people, who constitute 20 per cent of the population in
Africa, and repeatedly shutting the door in their faces
while they are continuously marginalized explains

20/30

19-29868

02/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

their adoption of radical extremist ideologies; it is what
drives them to join terrorist groups and criminal gangs,
especially since, according to United Nations statistics,
600 million of those young people live in conflict
zones. The way to counter this phenomenon, therefore,
is to give young people our attention. We can do that by
listening to them directly through dialogue and youth
forums, such as the Youth Climate Summit, convened
by the Secretary-General this past week.
Secondly, protracted conflicts and wars in Africa,
some of which have their roots in ethnic, sectarian or
religious tensions, have significantly contributed to
the recruitment of children, who have been compelled
to arm themselves and participate in the fighting, and
whose innocence and dreams have been hijacked.
Light should be shed on that phenomenon so it can
be effectively addressed. Moreover, we need to move
children away from war zones, rehabilitate them,
provide them with the help they need and reintegrate
them into society.
Thirdly, the African Union’s declaration of 2019
as The Year of Refugees, Returnees and Internally
Displaced Persons: Towards Durable Solutions to
Forced Displacement in Africa signals that decadeslong wars and insecurity have led to great suffering
on the African continent, which in turn has triggered
the phenomena of increased migration and internal
displacement specifically away from conflict zones,
but to areas that are also insecure and vulnerable.
With more than 24 million displaced people in Africa,
economic, security and environmental burdens are felt
in many areas, giving rise to waves of illegal migration.
We must resolve the root conflicts and establish
stability, peace and security in order to eliminate these
displacement phenomena, which constitute a regional
and international threat.
Fourthly, terrorism is one of the greatest
challenges for Africa. Reports and statistics show that
substantial numbers of young men and women from
Africa are joining terrorist groups, and that those
number cannot be underestimated. That is why, in
order to eliminate terrorism, we must address its root
causes by raising awareness, promoting the culture of
peace and encouraging tolerance and respect among
African peoples.
Moreover, the effects of poverty and unemployment
cannot be overlooked. They constitute fertile ground
for the spread of terrorism and violent extremism in

S/PV. 8629

Africa. Poverty, marginalization and other factors
push individuals to join — and local communities
to harbour — terrorist groups, either for ideological
reasons or because of the lure of material gains. That is
why we need a specific and comprehensive approach to
preventing and countering terrorism.
In conclusion, it is essential that we include the
youth, peace and security agenda in all conferences and
meetings at all levels. Regional organizations should
give greater attention to this topic, as the League of
Arab States did recently with its Young Model award.
The African Union has also launched a number of
youth initiatives, including, in 2006, the African Youth
Charter, and today we are looking forward to the
implementation of the African Union Youth Envoy 20192020 Action Plan. We must also stress the importance of
giving young people an opportunity to hold leadership
positions and participate in decision-making processes,
in line with resolution 2250 (2015).
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to add
my own congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency. I also thank the Russian
delegation for its habitually professional Security
Council presidency last month.
I also thank you, Mr. President, for convening
a debate on this important issue. I thank the briefers
for their statements. Like others, I found them to be
thought-provoking. They serve as a reminder to us that
we should strive to incorporate different perspectives
when we select briefers for our meetings.
Silencing the guns in Africa is our shared ambition.
It will be impossible to achieve without the involvement
and empowerment of Africa’s youth. I thought
Ms. Chebbi made powerful points about the use of
narrative and the way in which there can be a problem
narrative around youth, and I agree with her on that.
As this is the Security Council, however, let me
start, at least, on international peace and security
issues, before addressing some wider points. Every
young person deserves to grow up free of the fear
of violence. Sadly, that is still not the case for many
children and young people in parts of Africa. In South
Sudan, for example, while it is very positive to note
that 955 children were released by armed groups in
2018, it is a matter of some sadness and concern that
a further 453 children were reportedly recruited and
used by armed actors. The United Kingdom calls on all
parties in South Sudan to redouble their efforts to end

19-2986821/30

S/PV.8629

Peace and security in Africa

grave violations against children and tackle impunity.
We should ensure that we discuss that issue during our
forthcoming visit and that we are united in our demand
for action.
Wherever children and young people are affected
by conflict, they deserve support and services to help
them enjoy a brighter future. That must include access
to education. Last week, we were able to announce a
$630 million package to support education, particularly
for women and girls, and the United Kingdom recently
committed a further $110 million in funding to the
Education Cannot Wait initiative — the UNICEF fund
delivering education in emergencies. Those funds will
support 600,000 children in conflict-affected countries
in receiving an education.
Our task is huge, however, and I would remind
the Council that UNICEF estimates that at least that
many children — 600,000 — are out of school because
of political violence in Cameroon alone. We hope that
the recently announced national dialogue in Cameroon
will tackle the underlying causes of the crisis in that
country so that children and young people can receive
the education they need to thrive.
When children and young people are empowered
and involved in the decisions that affect their futures,
they can act as powerful agents for change, as the
Council recognized in resolutions 2250 (2015) and
2419 (2018). Africa’s young people not only deserve
the opportunity to have a say in how societies are
run but also have a right to it; they not only deserve a
meaningful role in conflict prevention, resolution and
peacebuilding efforts but are also fundamental to the
success of those efforts. We know from our evidence
and research that peace and reconciliation efforts that
involve women and young people and are therefore,
by definition, inclusive, have a 35 per cent greater
likelihood of lasting for 15 years or longer.
We have seen the power of movements for change
led by young people in Africa in recent months, as they
spearheaded the Sudan’s peaceful movement for an
accountable, civilian-led Government. I heard Prime
Minister Hamdok at the General Assembly last week
(see A/74/PV.10) and was inspired by what he had to
say, in particular his commitment to put women and
young people front and centre in building a better
Sudan. Worldwide, young people are still too often
marginalized in political and civic life — people under
22/30

02/10/2019

the age of 30 make up more than half the world’s
population but less than 2 per cent of elected legislators.
Again, young Africans are in the vanguard of
efforts to change that situation. In Nigeria, youth
advocates campaigned to tackle a barrier to young
people’s participation in politics. The “Not too young
to run” bill, which was adopted in 2018, lowered the
minimum age requirements for elected officials and
has since inspired a global campaign, supported by
the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth. The United
Kingdom stands firmly behind the “Not too young to
run” initiative.
Young Africans who are too young to vote or run for
office are still mobilizing action on global challenges,
and I want to pay tribute to the leadership of teenage
activists like Leah Namugerwa, who campaigns for
action on climate change in Uganda, and Peace Ayo
Adegbola, who advocates for girls’ education in Nigeria.
My apologies to both of them if I have mispronounced
their names.
If all of Africa’s young people had the opportunity
to realize their leadership potential and achieve their
aspirations, the effect on the continent and the world
would be transformative. But for that to happen, all
of Africa’s young people need what so many of the
world’s young people take for granted — peace and
security, human rights and good governance, quality
education, health care and access to productive
employment opportunities. I agree with Ms. Chebbi on
the importance of the particular effort to tackle genderbased violence, and I would add that the provision of
health care must include sexual and reproductive health.
The United Kingdom will continue working with
our African partners on initiatives to meet all those
challenges, including through the United KingdomAfrica Investment Summit to be held in London in 2020,
which is an indispensable element of our comprehensive
support for Africa’s long-term peace and stability. I do
not need to say that the United Kingdom’s relationship
with Africa and its peoples is enduring.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation wishes to
congratulate the Republic of South Africa on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council during the
month of October. We wish them every success, while
assuring them of Equatorial Guinea’s full support. We
would also like to congratulate the Russian Federation
on its impeccable presidency throughout the month
19-29868

02/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

of September. We also extend our thanks to all our
speakers today — the Special Adviser, Youth Envoy
Chebbi, Ms. Ahmed and Mr. Ochen — for their
excellent briefings.
The issue at hand today — Peace and security in
Africa: Mobilizing youth towards silencing the guns by
2020 — is of great concern and a priority for Equatorial
Guinea. On behalf of the African Union and under our
presidency of the Council in February, we presented
resolution 2457 (2019), on silencing the guns in Africa
by 2020 (see S/PV.8473) and, in November, we will be
hosting a conference in Malabo on the same theme, to
which everyone present is invited. Those demonstrate
Equatorial Guinea’s readiness to contribute to achieving
that goal.
We are concerned about the proliferation of armed
conflicts in Africa, as well as the instability and the
advance of terrorism in our region. Armed conflicts
pose a serious obstacle to African development because
they condition all aspects of life of our continent — as
long as they are active, sustainable development will
remain a fantasy. Armed conflicts have a negative
impact on the trajectory of sociopolitical and economic
development in Africa, weakening the capacities of
affected Governments to function effectively and
preventing their populations from realizing their
potential. Young people and women are the worstaffected victims in those situations.
Africa must therefore address both the symptoms
and the root causes of conflict. When focusing on the
current peace and security problems, we must also work
to eliminate the source of those problems and bolster
efforts to accelerate development, reduce poverty and
fight youth unemployment, thereby eliminating the
breeding grounds for conflict and violent extremism.
The critical points here involve complex national,
ethnic, religious and social tensions. Fundamentalist,
criminal, terrorist and mercenary organizations take
advantage of those problems in order to sow terror
throughout our lands. Moreover, they often prey on our
young people. The monitoring of small arms and light
weapons is an equally important element of the effort
to eradicate armed conflicts in Africa. We encourage
continued advocacy for the inclusion of African young
people in all spheres of society, as established in article
11 of the African Youth Charter.
Africa’s biggest resource is its young people.
Their participation represents a powerful opportunity

S/PV. 8629

to accelerate the implementation of this project.
Resolution 2457 (2019) reaffirms the important and
positive contribution of young people to the efforts for
the maintenance and promotion of peace and security
and the role young people play in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts. In the same way, Sustainable
Development Goal 16 aims to ensure inclusive,
participatory and representative decision-making at all
levels. Ensuring the inclusion of young people will help
maintain a range of perspectives that may prove useful
for understanding the distinctive experience of young
as peacebuilders and could significantly improve the
effectiveness of peace processes.
As a key factor in the sustainability, inclusiveness
and success of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts, as well as in post-conflict situations, young
people are encouraged to be involved in the planning
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
which should take into account their particular needs,
especially the needs of those affected by armed conflicts,
including the problem of youth unemployment, thereby
investing in developing the skills and abilities of
young people to meet labour needs through relevant
educational opportunities that are designed to promote
a culture of peace.
It is important to create local incentives and
opportunities to ensure that our strongest, smartest
and most capable young people, who would normally
take the path of no return, remain in their countries
and contribute to their societies instead of applying
themselves in societies that are already developed.
Instead of there, it is better that they do so in their own
countries, where they are most needed. To compete in an
ever more competitive global market, silencing the guns
also means creating the necessary structure to allow our
young people to realize professional accomplishments,
pursuing lives as dignified and valuable as those of any
other young people in the world.
I would like to reiterate in conclusion that silencing
the guns means the complete, effective, controlled,
verifiable and transparent elimination of weapons
through international and regional legal instruments.
That goal is of vital importance to Africa, and Africa
must be able to count on the support of the international
community in that regard.
Silencing the guns in Africa should not be just a
wish or a desire but must become a reality because
our lives depend on it. The Republic of Equatorial

19-2986823/30

S/PV.8629

Peace and security in Africa

Guinea therefore calls on the international community,
in particular on Africans themselves, to join forces to
help Africa implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, together with the 2063 Agenda of
the African Union, as avenues towards sustainable
economic development, an important aspect of which is
to tackle decisively the problems affecting young people
and women. To leave those pending issues unresolved
would expose us to the risk of interminable conflict.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to welcome South Africa’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to wish you every success, Sir, in your duties
conducting the important work on our agenda over the
month of October. Similarly, we once again commend
the Russian Federation’s conduct of the Council’s work
over the preceding month.
Peru welcomes the convening of this important
meeting on the consideration of young people as
promoters of peace and development in Africa, in
particular in the context of the Silencing the Guns by
2020 initiative, endorsed by the Council. We welcome
the informative presentations and stirring personal
accounts shared by the guest speakers.
First, we highlight the noble and ambitious goal,
set by the African Union in 2013, aimed at achieving
a conflict-free continent, which is consistent with the
efforts of the international community to promote
sustainable peace. Its success is closely linked to the
active participation of younger generations. That was
recognized in resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018),
which recognize the substantive contribution that
young people can make to peace in all its phases, from
conflict prevention to peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
as emphasized in the 2018 Independent Progress Study
on Youth, Peace and Security.
That enormous potential is also applicable within
the context of the Sustainable Development Goals.
The proper implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development will also help tackle the
root causes — such as poverty, lack of employment,
access to drinking water, and natural disasters, among
others — whose effects may in many cases lead young
people to radical responses.
Those objectives commit us to, among other
things, creating decent employment for young
people, guaranteeing equal opportunities, promoting
peaceful societies and promoting human rights while
24/30

02/10/2019

safeguarding diversity and combating discrimination.
There are 1.2 billion young people around the world,
half of whom live in violent and conflict zones. In
Africa, young people account for a large percentage
of the population. The World Youth Report: Youth and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development notes
that for some young people armed conflicts represent
the main source of employment; in many cases, social
status and capital are closely linked to possession of
a weapon.
We therefore welcome the efforts of the African
Union to establish the Youth for Peace initiative,
under the African Governance Architecture, aimed at
establishing guidelines for the participation of young
people between the ages of 15 and 35 at the local,
national and continental levels, and at removing barriers
limiting their opportunities to take on leadership roles.
That approach seeks to redefine the mistaken traditional
perception of young people as perpetrators or mere
victims of violence, refocusing it instead on their status
as agents of peace who represent a valuable resource
to be leveraged to achieve and consolidate sustainable
peace on the continent.
To that end, we would like to underline the
importance of revising regional policies to highlight
the visibility and rights of young people and promote
their active participation towards the goal of silencing
the guns. In particular, we believe that the participation
of women must be encourage more vigorously in
that context.
It is also important to reflect on young people who
find themselves in situations of vulnerability owing
to their status as refugees or internally displaced
persons, frequently living below the poverty line and
exposed to situations of xenophobia, discrimination
and exploitation. There could be no more important
contribution to rectifying that situation than to find a
lasting solution to the armed conflict that generated
that situation and thereby facilitate their return home.
From another point of view, having lived first-hand
the consequences of conflict, those people are well
placed to contribute to efforts to solve conflicts, which
is something we should take advantage of. Another
element we wish to highlight is the need to establish
synergies between African Union initiatives and those
developed at the global level. We believe that the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and Agenda 2063
of the African Union should reinforce each other’s
19-29868

02/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

work towards the ultimate goal of addressing the root
causes of conflict, while establishing inclusive and
accountable institutions.
We emphasize in conclusion the importance that the
Security Council remain firmly seized of this matter,
which is central for the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, for justice, for reconciliation and for building
a lasting peace. We therefore look forward to the
forthcoming report of the Secretary-General that is
expected by May 2020.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We congratulate the Mission of
South Africa on its assumption of the presidency for the
month of October. You can count on our support, Sir.
We welcome the progress made in putting an end
to armed conflict on the continent, including the peace
agreements reached in the Central African Republic
and in South Sudan, as well as the democratic processes
that have been conducted in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Madagascar. We also recognize the
efforts made by the African Union in working with
the United Nations and the international community
to achieve those goals. Yet despite that significant
progress, we are still a long way from ridding the
continent of armed conflict.
The African continent has the youngest population
in the world. Properly harnessed, it could represent a
key demographic dividend for promoting peace and
security in the region. The reality is that the majority
of young people in Africa reject violence and seek
spaces to contribute to the construction of peace and
development in their countries. As is articulated in the
Master Roadmap of Practical Steps to Silence the Guns
in Africa by the Year 2020, if we want to achieve a
sustainable transition from war to peace and prevent
relapses into conflict in Africa, it is essential that
young people identify with the decisions made and the
results achieved. Their meaningful participation in the
processes of prevention, conflict resolution and the
maintenance of peace and security, as well as in political
processes and positions of power, is crucial. We must
therefore provide young people, youth organizations
and young peacebuilders and human rights defenders
with adequate support, both financially and politically,
and protect their lives and human rights.
The Dominican Republic worked closely with
Equatorial Guinea, as facilitator of resolution 2457
(2019), to ensure that the text recognized young people’s

S/PV. 8629

key positive contribution to conflict prevention and
resolution in Africa. We therefore hope — in line with
resolutions 2457 (2019), 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) on
youth, peace and security — that young people in the
region will actively participate in the implementation
of all the Roadmap’s objectives, as well as in the
conference on silencing the guns in Africa to be held
next month.
Regional and international institutions must bolster
collective efforts to ensure that the processes aimed at
achieving peace are inclusive. In that regard, we propose
creating a network of young Africans for conflict
prevention and mediation, with a view to enhancing
their role in the efforts to advance the African Peace
and Security Architecture and African Governance
Architecture. We would like to take this opportunity to
urge African Union member States to fully comply with
their domestic and international legal commitments,
including the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and
the International Tracing Instrument. We note that
the effectiveness of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes depends on the ability of
State institutions to foster an inclusive environment,
among other things.
We hope that the Secretary-General’s reports to
the Security Council and the mandate renewals for
peacekeeping operations and political missions will
include specific references to the implementation of
resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018). We also hope
that more young people will be able to participate
in Council meetings to share their perspectives and
visions. Since it became a member of the Security
Council, the Dominican Republic has made a point of
inviting young people to speak in meetings and debates.
Finally, I would like to highlight a few other
recommendations that emerged from regional
consultations with young people in Africa in relation
to the preparation for publication of The Missing
Peace: Independent Progress Study on Youth, Peace
and Security. The first is that we must increase the
transparency and accountability of Governments.
Next, we should develop strategic alliances between
Governments, youth organizations, young people
and communities, with a view to building peace;
thirdly, build trust between security forces and young
people; and lastly, implement mechanisms that ensure
young people’s participation in the preparation,

19-2986825/30

S/PV.8629

Peace and security in Africa

implementation, evaluation and monitoring of social,
economic, environmental and political policies and
initiatives, and continue working to consolidate peace
in Africa.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I would like to welcome our
colleagues and friends from South Africa as they
assume the presidency of the Security Council and to
wish them every success in their work during the month
of October.
We support the choice of topic for today’s meeting.
When we speak of the need to ensure peace and security
in Africa, it is almost impossible to avoid discussing
issues related to the participation of African youth in
these processes. Today we heard interesting and at times
very moving briefings by representatives of African
youth themselves. There is a reason Africa is called a
young continent. The current generation of Africans
aged between 15 and 24 makes up more than 30 per
cent of Africa’s entire population. According to United
Nations data, by 2055 the percentage of young Africans
will more than double. We welcome the fact that
African States devote significant attention to working
with youth. The significance of this category of the
continent’s population and the importance of ensuring its
constructive participation in Africa’s governance, peace
support and development processes is acknowledged in
Agenda 2063, the core plan of the African Union (AU)
for social and economic development.
We also welcome the continued efforts of the AU
Peace and Security Council to increase the profile
of young people in the maintenance of peace and
security. The AU Commission has created the Office
of the Special Envoy on Youth, who briefed us today,
and has also launched a continent-wide programme,
Youth for Peace Africa, aimed among other things at
implementing the African Youth Charter, adopted in
2006. Young people occupy a significant position in the
efforts to implement the initiative that is the subject of
today’s meeting, that of silencing the guns in Africa by
2020. It is referred to in resolution 2457 (2019), which
the Council adopted in support of that initiative. The
road map for an African security architecture for the
period from 2016 to 2020 also addresses the importance
of involving young Africans in the AU’s work.
We feel compelled to point out, however, that many
obstacles to youth involvement in the peace process in
Africa remain. In our view, the most significant one
26/30

02/10/2019

is the problem of the radicalization of the younger
generation. Unformed world views and a lack of life
experience and frequently of a basic education make
young Africans easy prey to radical ideologies.
Extremist groups skilfully exploit this in countries with
unfavourable socioeconomic environments in order
to attract young people to unlawful activity. In their
attempts to get young people on their side, terrorists
commonly and increasingly exploit information and
communications technology, which demands that
we strengthen our collective efforts in the area of
international information security.
We should pay particular attention to the
phenomenon of the use of radically minded young people
to achieve domestic political goals, as this category
sometimes works to overthrow legitimate authorities
under the cover of slogans about democracy and
human rights. We believe firmly that the international
community should pay greater attention to these
problems. It is important to promote the development of
a culture of peace and tolerance among young people.
That is the only way to prevent them from taking part
in acts of violence, terrorism, xenophobia, racial and
gender discrimination, and arms and drug trafficking.
We should take steps to ensure the social integration of
young people who have been victims of armed conflict
by providing them with access to education and skills
development. We should expand mentoring initiatives,
encourage peaceful youth organizations and foster
intercultural and interreligious dialogue among young
people. Much of that is already being done through
the African Union and regional organizations, but we
should scale up those efforts.
Russia is ready to share its experience of working
with young people and countering the spread of
extremist ideologies among them, including the
experience gained by regional organizations such as the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. In support of
young people, every year our Government offers
scholarships and study grants at Russian higher
education institutions to African States. We are open
to seeking new opportunities and promising forms
of cooperation in this area. We intend to continue
substantive discussion of these issues in the framework
of the forthcoming Russia-Africa Summit, to be held in
Sochi from 22 to 24 October.
19-29868

02/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, I would like
to join others in congratulating you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of October. I also want to thank and commend the
delegation of the Russian Federation for its professional
and successful presidency in September. And I thank
today’s briefers for their comprehensive briefings.
Earlier this year, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2457 (2019), which welcomed the African
Union’s initiative of Silencing the Guns by 2020. It
is a crucial effort, as peace and security are critical
enablers in achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). Young people are central to the
initiative, which aims to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war. Yet there are many challenges
confronting those generations. Today more than
600 million young people in the world live in fragile
and conflict-challenged areas, many of them in Africa.
They also suffer from a lack of basic services in areas
such as health and education, as well as from a lack of
economic opportunities.
Against that backdrop, I would like to highlight
three points regarding mobilizing young people
towards silencing the guns. We must first address their
vulnerabilities. We should create an environment that
enables them to access opportunities and participate in
a functioning society, thereby dissuading them from
committing acts of violence. That can be achieved by
combating poverty, investing in inclusive education
and training, ensuring gainful employment and
promoting a culture of peace, among other things. Such
efforts should be focused on those who need them the
most, including former members of armed groups and
young refugees.
Secondly,
we
should
mainstream
youth
participation in the initiative. There are several areas
that can benefit from the involvement of young people.
Their participation can increase the legitimacy, vitality
and sustainability of a peace process. It is also crucial
to engage them in efforts to prevent the spread of
terrorism and involvement in organized crime. In
addition, young people often make up the largest share
of armed groups, and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration processes should therefore take their
needs into account. We must also ensure meaningful
youth participation in transitional justice initiatives in
order to promote reconciliation and social cohesion.
We could take advantage of their familiarity with

S/PV. 8629

technology to raise awareness of such initiatives and
advocate concrete actions in support of that cause.
Thirdly, we should ensure the coherence of
efforts at the international, regional and national
levels. Resolution 2457 (2019) recognizes the need
for partnerships to help accelerate progress towards
realizing the initiative to silence the guns by 2020.
It is important that national Governments, regional
actors and the whole United Nations system work in
harmony, with clearly defined areas of focus. As an
example, in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), we are focusing on developing digital skills
and institutionalizing young people’s engagement in
the region’s policy discourse by operationalizing the
ASEAN Youth Volunteer Programme and ASEAN
youth dialogues. Our objective is to foster ASEAN youth
who are ready for the future, to the benefit of ASEAN’s
socioeconomic development, peace and security.
Lastly, mobilizing youth towards silencing the guns
requires that we change our mindset. We must view
young people not merely as victims or perpetrators
of violence, but as powerful agents of change who
can contribute positively to the maintenance and
promotion of durable peace and stability. In turn,
youth empowerment will contribute to creating the
just and peaceful societies envisioned in Sustainable
Development Goal 16, and to the overall achievement
of the SDGs.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of South Africa.
I would like to thank the briefers for their insightful
information and recommendations for the Council’s
consideration. It is always beneficial and valuable for
the Council to be briefed by young people who are
passionate and determined about the future of their
countries, societies and neighbourhoods.
It is an honour for South Africa to preside over
the Security Council under the theme “Continuing
the legacy: working for a just and peaceful world”,
which embodies the legacy of Nelson Mandela. The
principles he stood and fought for remain relevant to
ongoing conflict situations and further the objective of
silencing the guns on the African continent by 2020.
Conflict affects young people negatively in many
ways. It violates their basic human rights — the right
to life, liberty and security. They are at increased risk
of being killed, injured, internally displaced, abducted
or raped in conflict. They are sometimes forced into

19-2986827/30

S/PV.8629

Peace and security in Africa

activities that make them more vulnerable, such as
sexual exploitation, combat as child soldiers, violent
extremism, arms smuggling and the illicit trade in
mineral resources, to name a few.
Our remarks will focus on the following key
points. First, young people have an important role to
play as agents of peace. The African continent has the
fastest-growing population in the world, and it will be
important to ensure that the continent takes advantage
of the demographic dividend from its youth bulge.
South Africa believes that we should all double our
efforts at the global, regional and national levels to
harness the potential of youth. As the Security Council
has already recognized in resolutions 2250 (2015) and
2457 (2019), Member States have the responsibility to
create an enabling environment for young people to
participate fully and substantively in the development
of their respective countries and in peace processes.
At this juncture, I want to emphasize that issues of
inclusion remain critical. As important stakeholders in
peace processes, we cannot continue to talk about peace
without the full involvement of youth and women. Young
people should be represented in political negotiations,
peace processes, transitional justice and reconstruction
efforts because they have knowledge and ideas and
can harness intergenerational interaction on the entire
peace continuum. Including youth in peacebuilding
processes as stakeholders and decision-makers allows
them to gain ownership of the policies that affect them
as much as the rest of us. Political will and leadership
are therefore needed to enable young people to engage in
a meaningful way in conflict prevention, peacemaking
and peacebuilding.
My second point is on the implementation by
the African Union (AU) of the youth, peace and
security agenda. The African Youth Charter serves
as a strategic framework for youth empowerment and
development at the continental, regional and national
levels in addressing issues that affect young people.
The AU Commission is in the process of appointing
African ambassadors for peace, one from each of
the five regions in Africa. They will promote the
actualization of the five priorities of the Continental
Framework on Youth, Peace and Security. A stronger
AU-United Nations partnership for peace, security
and development remains critical to silencing the guns
on the African continent. South Africa is encouraged
by the resolve of the United Nations and the AU to
mainstream youth participation in peace and security,
28/30

02/10/2019

which places young people at the core of initiatives for
preventing or stopping activities that lead to war.
My third point is about recommendations on how we
should advance youth, peace and security. It is important
to provide young people with training opportunities so
that they can take an active part in peacebuilding. With
their youthful energy and capabilities, and their ability
to adapt to new technological trends such as the fourth
industrial revolution, young people should be seen as
equal partners in mediation, conflict prevention and
resolution. As we heard from the briefers earlier, youth
are mediators, community mobilizers, humanitarian
workers and peace brokers. Activating young African
peacebuilders cannot be the responsibility of any one
organization. African Governments, non-governmental
organizations and corporations all have a role to play.
In order to achieve sustainable conflict prevention
and resolution, the Security Council, regional and
subregional organizations and other relevant actors
should institute mechanisms to involve young people
in the promotion of a culture of peace, tolerance and
intercultural and interreligious dialogue and to develop,
as appropriate, an understanding of respect for human
dignity, pluralism and diversity.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore the
importance of bringing about a pragmatic shift in
the concept of the role of youth in conflict, which
transforms them from being victims or agents of
violence to being agents of change and peacebuilding.
They need to be seen as the valuable human capital
that they are, because that will help the continent to
collectively achieve sustainable peace and silence the
guns. As we implement many peace agreements on the
African continent, from the Central African Republic,
South Sudan, the Sudan and elsewhere, young people
should be given the space to participate.
As Ms. Aya Chebbi said, youth should be mobilized
to reimagine their environment without violence or
displacement, unravaged, without situations where
they are forced to flee their homes and driven into
desperation in faraway lands. And as all the briefers
said, young people should be mobilized to use their
abundant energy, talent, creativity and social media
to compose songs and write poetry and books about
embracing diversity, non-discrimination and religious
and ethnic tolerance in order to give birth to the future
with hope, peace and prosperity.
19-29868

02/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the observer of the Economic
Community of Central African States.
Mrs. Byaje (spoke in French): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like to congratulate your
brotherly country, the Republic of South Africa, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October. I want to commend
your choice of topics for the Council’s consideration this
month, which are of particular interest to our subregion.
I also thank all the members of the Security Council
and the briefers for their constructive contributions to
this debate.
While the world today is facing multiple
humanitarian crises arising from various natural and
environmental disasters, it is fair to say that those
in Central Africa are the result not only of such
disasters but also of armed conflicts fuelled by the
disproportionate proliferation of weapons throughout
the region. That is why the theme of this debate, which
is part of the Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020
initiative, is timely, because it is one of the top priorities
of the Heads of State and Government of our subregion.
The commitment to ending all conflict by 2020 is not
only emphasized in the African Union’s Agenda 2063
but, most importantly, is prioritized in its first TenYear Implementation Plan. On behalf of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), I would
therefore like to make a modest contribution to this
debate under the umbrella topic of peace and security
in Africa, specifically by focusing on mobilizing youth
towards the specific goal of silencing the guns by 2020.
Despite the efforts that have been made to prevent
conflicts, Central Africa is unfortunately seeing
the expansion of many armed groups committing
unspeakable crimes and continuing to make the
ECCAS region a theatre for destabilizing conflicts
that result from numerous underlying causes and
paralyse socioeconomic development. Their common
denominator takes many forms, such as marginalization
and exclusion on a basis of ethnicity, religion,
socioeconomic status or region.
When the African Union adopted the Silencing
the Guns initiative in 2013, it was in the wake of the
2010 adoption by the Heads of State of Central Africa
of the Central African Convention for the Control of
Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition

S/PV. 8629

and All Parts and Components That Can Be Used for
Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly, known as
the Kinshasa Convention. The Convention, which
entered into force on 8 March 2017, is aimed at helping
States to effectively combat flows of illicit, devastating
and destabilizing weapons, and contains provisions for
the tracing and marking, transfer, possession, recordkeeping and stockpile management of small arms.
Against that frame of reference, I want to explain
my proposal for including youth mobilization in the
implementation of the Kinshasa Convention, together
with the cooperation of our strategic partners,
particularly the United Nations and the African Union, in
the fight against arms proliferation. The joint framework
within which those two institutions work with regional
communities, including ECCAS, to consolidate peace
and security by promoting synergistic efforts as part of
the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative deserves to be
encouraged for many reasons.
In that context, the twelfth annual United NationsAfrican Union joint consultative meeting on the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts
took place on 11 and 12 March, with a special focus
on the Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative.
I cannot fail to mention the African Union high-level
meeting that took place on 11 and 12 October 2018,
bringing together regional economic communities
under the theme “Silencing the Guns in Africa by
2020: actions for an accelerated response”, with special
emphasis on the gradual march towards peace through
democratic transitions in certain countries.
In that context, the General Secretariat of ECCAS
has established very close collaboration with the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in
Africa (UNREC) in implementing a project to support
African States as part of the vision of “Silencing the
guns in Africa by 2020: capacity-building in Central
Africa”. However, achieving lasting peace first requires
the elimination of the root causes of the conflicts that
are plaguing the subregion, affecting first and foremost
the lives of members of the community, especially those
children and young people caught up in the vicious
circle of violence being perpetrated by armed groups.
Worse still, these destabilizing agents — driven by
the desire to control of natural resources — commit
unspeakable crimes, sow terror in their wake and strip
and rob innocent citizens of their property, their rights
and their dignity. Young people are paying a particularly
heavy price as a result of rising unemployment and

19-2986829/30

S/PV.8629

Peace and security in Africa

school drop-out rates, making them easy targets for the
instigators of terrorism.
ECCAS’ preferred solutions for promoting peace
from a regional perspective include, inter alia, conflict
prevention and crisis management by addressing
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
pursuant to the Kinshasa Convention. With regard to
today’s theme, young people should play a lead role in
peacebuilding by contributing more to activities planned
under the Kinshasa Convention and strengthening
prevention and early warning and response systems.
I would be remiss if I did not mention other possible
solutions to optimizing the important potential of our
youth in the structural transformation of Africa and the
subregion, especially those aimed at counteracting the
risks incurred by the marginalization of unemployed
young people, who are insufficiently equipped to enter
the labour market. That challenge requires ECCAS,
above all and especially in view of the increasingly
young population and the growing number of young
people in the labour market, to do the following.
We must develop the skills and competences
of young people by giving them access to quality
education and vocational training in order to prepare
them for the new demands of the employment sector.
We must invest in productive sectors with high growth
potential so as to generate decent jobs areas, such as
industrialization or agriculture. We should implement
the instruments adopted by the African Union for
young people as an effective and sustainable means
of economic transformation. We must seek financial
support for our efforts to implement projects for the
empowerment of and job creation for young people.
As part of its goal to establish a regional framework
for monitoring the implementation of regional plans,
ECCAS should, among other things, ensure that young
people participate as key partners in decision-making
in all matters that may affect them. We should assist
ECCAS in its efforts to create a framework for ongoing
dialogue among young people in the subregion,
particularly with regard to regional integration, aimed
at sharing experiences, good practices and lessons
learned in creating jobs through entrepreneurship.
We must support the countries of the subregion in
developing reliable statistics to ensure that all young
people are counted. We must seek support in organizing
training workshops and exchange programmes for
young champions and leaders in the field of peace and

30/30

02/10/2019

security, and sending them to train other young people
in their own countries. The private sector and civil
society must be engaged in the training and recruitment
of young people and go further by putting young people
first as private sector stakeholders able to create stable
jobs in the modernization of agriculture. We should
improve access to land for young people and modernize
the agricultural sector so that the work is less arduous
and more attractive. We should provide microcredit
financing to young people and support them in their
initial steps in becoming productive agents.
Finally, we must continue to urgently address the
scourges that are drawing in young people, such as
terrorism, the narcotics trade and the sale of illicit
weapons, in order to create a climate of security
and stability that is favourable to investment and
development. ECCAS will continue to involve all actors,
including civil society, women’s groups, young people
and other regional communities with a view to building
interregional security cooperation. Lastly, the building
and restoring of lasting peace would also benefit from
the solidarity and support of bilateral and multilateral
partners in capacity-building initiatives that are aimed
at conflict resolution and mediation.
We undoubtedly still face major challenges, but it is
important to recognize that with the continued support
of strong leadership and sustained political will on the
part of the Heads of State of the subregion, as well as
community ownership in confronting the challenges
and a better sharing and exchange of information
and best practices in the field of security, ECCAS is
confident that Central Africa will be able to tackle
its security challenges and guarantee a lasting peace
that favours sustainable development efforts in the
subregion. In that regard, ECCAS will continue to
encourage exchanges among its members at the highest
level and among young people in order to ensure the
regular monitoring and assessment of the progress
being made in joint projects and important issues on
peace and security.
Finally, ECCAS counts on the support of all
its partners in the implementation of the Kinshasa
Convention so that we may eradicate arms trafficking in
the subregion, devoting ourselves fully to development
efforts and giving a decent and promising future to our
young people.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

19-29868
