16

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

(XXIV) of 20 November 1969 on co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity,
Noting with satisfaction the increased co-operation
between the Organization of African Unity and the
United Nations, the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, especially
in their efforts to solve the grave situation in southern
Africa,
l. Takes note with satisfactíon of the report of
the Secretary-General on co-operation between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity;47
2. Invites the Security Council to consider the
request of the Organization of African Unity concerning the holding of meetings of the Council in an African
capital;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue bis
efforts to intensify co-operation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly;
4. Invites the specialized agencies and other organizations concemed within the United Nations system,
particularly the United Nations Development Programme, to continue their co-operation with the
Organization of African Unity;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-seventh session the question of co-operation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity.
2027th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.

2864 (XXVI). Report of the Security Council

The General Assembly
l. Takes note of the report of tbe Security Council
to the General Assembly covering the period from
16 June 1970 to 15 June 1971~8
2. Requests the Secretary-General to present in
bis report to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh
session, due consideration having been given to the
views of interested Governments, suggestions concerning
ways and means of enhancing the effectiveness of tbe
Security Council in accordance with the principies and
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
2027th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
2878 (XXVI). Implementatlon of the Declaration on the Grantlng of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples

The General Assembly,
Recalllng the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
and tbe programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, contained in its resolution
2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
. Recalling ali its previous resolutions concerning the
unplementation of the Declaration, in particular resolution 2708 (XXV) of 14 December 1970,
47 A/8386.
48 Offecial Records

of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 2 (A/8402).

Deeply concerned that eleven years after the adoption of the Declaration many Territories are still under
colonial domination and that millions of dependent
peoples live under conditions of ruthless and undisguised colonialist and racialist repression,
Deeply deploring the continued refusal of the
colonial Powers, especially Portugal and South Africa,
to implement the Declaration and other relevant resolutions on decolonization, particularly those relating to
the Territories under Portuguese domination, Namibia
and Southem Rhodesia,
Strongly deploring the policies of those States which,
in defiance of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, continue to
co-operate with the Governments of Portugal and
South Africa and with the illegal racist minority régime
in Southem Rhodesia,
Deeply disturbed at the intransigent attitude of
certain administering Powers which, despite the repeated appeals addressed to them by the General Assembly and the Special Committee, refuse to co-operate
with the Special Committee in the discbarge of the
mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly,
Reiterating its view that racial discrimination in
dependent Territories can be eradicated fully and with
the greatest speed by the faithful and complete implementation of the Declaration,
Noting with satisfaction that the Organization of
African Unity has decided to convene an intemational
conference against colonialism and apartheid, to be
held at Oslo in May and June 1972,
l. Reafjirms its resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2621
(XXV) and ali other resolutions on decolonization,
and calls upon the administering Powers, in accordance with those resolutions, to take ali the necessary
steps to enable the dependent peoples of the Territories
concemed to exercise fully and without further delay
their inalienable right to self-determination and independence;
2. Approves the report of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the lmplementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples covering its work
during 1971,49 including the programme of work
envisaged for 1972;
3. Urges all States, in particular the administering
~owers,_ ~d the spec~alized ª$encies and other organizattons w1thm the Umted Nattons system to give effect
to the relevant provisions of the programme of action
contained in General Assembly resolution 2621
(XXV) and to the recommendations contained in the
report of the Special Committee for the speedy implementation of the Declaration and the relevant United
Nations resolutions;
4. Reaffirms that the continuation of colonialism
in ali its forros and manifestations-including racism
apartheid and activities of foreign economic and othe;
inte~ests which ~xploit colonial peoples, as well as the
wagmg of colomal wars to suppress national liberation
movements in southem Africa-is incompatible with
the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and the Declaration on
49 !bid., Supplement No. 23 (A/8423/Rev.1) and Supplement No. 23A (A/8423/Rev.1/ Add.1 ).
