UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL

RECORDS

2241’

MEETING:

UpJlLBPARY

30 JUNE 1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Puge

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2241)

... .. ... .. .. .... .. .. .. .. ... ... .. .. ...

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 May 1980 from the Acting Permanent Representative of
Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Counqil (S/13966)
.

. . .

. .

. .

. .

. . .

. .

. . .

. .

. .

. .

. . .

. .

. .

. . .

. . .

.

. . .

. . .

. .

. .

. .

1
1. 1
.* i
‘1.
1T-;t1 ’
1.

SIPV.224 1

i

I'

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with.figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
:

.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly.Slrppl~~lnc~rtts of the Ojjkirrl Records of the Swrrrity Cmnd.
The date
of the document indicates the supplement in- which it appears or in which infor.
mation about it is given.
,.
.’
,..
.
The resolutions of the Security:‘Council,
numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rmdrrtions
md
Decisions. c$ the Security dormcil.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

‘.
‘.

‘.
.,,,1

‘_

‘.
(.‘.

.

.
,.
.’

.,,

j

:..,

..

:
,::.
a

‘.‘.

i

2241st MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 30 June 1980, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. Ole ALGARD (Norway).

raki (Morocco), Mr. Jamal (Qatar), Mr. Zowawi (Saudi
Arabia), Mr. Djigo (Senegal), Mr. A. M. Adan (Sotnalia). Mr. Abdalla (Sudan), Mr. Mansouri (Syrian Arab
Republic), Mr. Eralp (Turkey), Mr. Humaidan (United
Arab Emirates), Mr. Alaini (Yemen), and Mr. Mu&inovie (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for them at
the side qf the Council table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic; Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
.
Provisional

The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Algeria, Chad, Democratic
Yemen, Djibouti, Gabon, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Iran,
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Maldives, Mali, Oman,
Uganda, the United Republic’of Cameroon and the
Upper Volta, in tihich they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent,of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the -provisional rules of
procedure.

2,

agenda (S/Agenda/2241)

:

Ad.option of the agenda.
.:
.
2. ‘The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 May 1980 from the Acting Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13966)

,l.

The meeting

was called to order at 11.15 a.m.
‘.
,/ .Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bouzarbia
(Algeria),
Mr. Kesscly (Chad), Mr. AI-Hamzah
(Democratic
Yemen), Mr. Farah Dirir (Djibouti),
Mr. Nguema-Mba
(Gabon), Mr. KouyatP (Guinea),
Mr. Fernandes (Guinea-Bissau),
Mr. Shemirani (Iran),
Mr. Elgariani (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya).
Mr. Saleem
(Maldives),
Mr. Samake (Mali),
Mr. Aboul-Nasr
(Oman), Mr. Kilara (Ugnnda), Mr. Oyono (United
Republic of C ameroon) and Mr. Ouedraogo (Upper
Volta) took the places reservedfor them at the side qf
the Council chamber.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 May 1980 from the Acting Permanent
Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council

(S/13%6)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the previous decisions [2233rd to 2236th and 2238th meetings], I invite the representatives of Israel and Pakistan
to take a place at the Council table, I invite the representatives of Bahrain, Cuba, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritania,
Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia,
the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, the
United Arab Emirates, Yemen and Yugoslavia to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber and I invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization to take a place at the
Council table.

3. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council have
before them a draft resolution sponsored by Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab
Emirates and Yemen [S/1403/]. I have been informed
by the sponsors that the following countries have
joined them as co-sponsors of the draft resolution:
Algeria, Chad, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Egypt,
Gabon, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Iran, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Maldives, Mali, Oman, Uganda, United
Republic of Cameroon and Upper Volta.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Blum (Israel)
and Mr. Naik (Pakistan) took plac*es at the Council
table and Mr. AI-Saffar (Bahrain), Mr. Roa Kouri
(Cuba), Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. Suwondo (Indonesia), Mr. AI-Ali (Iraq), Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan),
Mr. Bishara (Kuwait), Mr. Tue’ni (Lebanon), Mr. Halim (Malaysia),
Mr. Kane (Mauritania),
Mr. La.

4. The first speaker is the representative of Egypt.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
1

5. Mr. ELARABY
(Egypt): The position of Egypt
with respect to the Holy City of Jerusalem has already
been stated and defined in this debate 12234th meeting]. It would be redundant to restate it. I have asked
to speak only to make a few additional points directly
related to the Council’s deliberations.

10. In conclusion, it should be emphasized again that
Egypt is firmly committed to the attainment of a just,
comprehensive
and durable peace. All unilateral
actions designed to perpetuate a stutrrs yrro brought
about by the use of force are illegal and harmful, and
they obstruct the quest for peace. Genuine peace
cannot be expected miraculously
to emerge from
short-sighted policies based on an ill-conceived concept to create so-calledfbits
crccomplis.
The spirit of
peace initiated by Egypt deserves a fair chance to seep
through an accumulation
of injustices and a heap of
distrust. As President Sadat has recently stated:

6. It is the well-established
policy of Egypt to reject
every attempt and oppose every measure which purports to alter the juridical and political status of Jerusalem. In that connection, Egypt deeply regrets and
objects to the timing and implications
of the recently
announced Israeli decision to transfer the Prime Minister’s office to Arab Jerusalem. It was, moreover,
reported this morning on certain radio stations that
the Israeli Parliament
has decided to begin the first
reading of the bill that would declare Jerusalem the
capital of Israel. I have no information
on that point
from my Government,
but to select the eve of the
scheduled Security, Council meetings to announce that
. provocative and illegal measure is ominous and cynical. If any. such measure is taken, it will definitely
have the most serious consequences.

“The effort which is wasted on futile exercises
should be directed towards imaginative
ways and
means for promoting peace. Reconciliation
cannot
be obtained through the expropriation
of land and
the implanting of hostile entities in the heart of other
people’s land.”
1 1 . The adoption of the draft resolution would, in the
view of my Government,
undoubtedly
be an added
confirmation
of the illegality of the Israeli policy and
the Israeli designs on the Holy City. Egypt once more
calls upon Israel to respect its international obligations
and to carry out the injunctions of the Council.

7. Over 30 States have submitted a draft resolution
[S/14031]. Egypt has carefully studied the draft. We
note with satisfaction and appreciation that its provisions emanate from two basic concepts to which we
are deeply committed.
First, the draft categorically
reaffirms previous General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions
which declare all the Israeli
measures invalid. Egypt has supported all these resolutions. Secondly, the draft reflects a fundamental
legal norm: namely, the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by force. The only logical corollary
of this illegal norm is that territories occupied have
to be vacated. Occupation and all its political and
military ramifications
have to be terminated.

12. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Algeria, whom I invite to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
13.

Mr. BOUZARBIA
(Algeria) (interpretution
jkyn
Mr. President, the Algerian delegation would
like to reiterate its satisfaction at seeing you conducting the proceedings of the Council, which is
meeting today to debate the situation prevailing in the
Middle East. As we have already said, the Algerian
delegation
remains confident
in your judgement,
because it is you who have the formidable responsibility and privilege of conducting our debates in the
course of this particularly busy month.

Frendr):

8. It also follows that an occupying Power has to
comply scrupulously with the relevant binding legal
instruments
that regulate and enumerate its obligations and responsibilities.
It will be recalled that common article I of the four 1949 Geneva Conventions’
has clearly entrusted all States party to the Conventions with a specific responsibility
“to respect and to
ensure respect for the present Convention[s]
in all
circumstances.”
As the organ vested with the primary
responsibility
for the maintenance
of international,
peace and security, the Security Council has to assume
this joint responsibility
on behalf of the international
community.

1

14. The fact that the Security Council has met several times this month to deal with upur!keid
and the
racist regime of South Africa, which for no reason at
all has been stepping up its acts of aggression against
sovereign States; and the fact that the Council has
again been meeting to seek a solution in response to a
measure contemplated
unilaterally in the Middle East
by the Zionist Government,
is symptomatic
of an
international
situation which is becoming ever more
alarming in the areas concerned, and ever more dangerous to international
peace and security.

9. Upon instructions
from my Government,
my
delegation
has co-sponsored
the draft resolution.
I should like, moreover, to inform the Council that a
few days ago, during the Organization
of African
Unity meeting in Freetown, Sierra Leone, Egypt
initiated and submitted a draft resolution calling for
the condemnation of Israel’s policy on Jerusalem. This
is yet another concrete expression of our rejection of
a policy that can only have detrimental effects.

15. It is significant that this situation should have
been created by two regimes similar in all respects.
The arrogant and aggressive attitude of both is the
result of an ideology they share, the many manifestations of which have so often been mentioned here and
so often condemned. Their shared doctrine is racism;
their common objective remains expansionism
and
annexation; their favourite instrument is the use of
2

has only been possible thanks to the impunity and
unconditional
support ensured by imperialism,
for
which the Zionist entity is a choice instrument for the
safeguarding of its interests in that area just as South
Africa is in southern Africa.

force. Furthermore,
so far thev have been assured of
absolute impunity, and consequently, they have both
chosen deliberately
to scorn international
public
opinion.
16. The current meetings of the Council are being
held at the request of the Islamic Conference, which
has already unanimously condemned most vigorously
the measure contemplated
by the Zionist entity: that
of annexing Jerusalem.

23. It is also within the framework of that imperialist
strategy and in accordance with the Zionist diversionary tactic that we should place the Camp David
accords, the purpose of which-now
clearly established-was
to eliminate the Palestinian problem in
its entirety and, by neutralizing one battlefield country, to weaken the ranks of the Arabs in order to
strengthen the military and economic potential of
Israel. Because it is going against the tide of history,
because it disregards the existence and the importance
of peoples and because it covers up the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, that strategy, which
belongs to another time, is doomed to failure however
elaborate it may be.

17. The many delegations we have listened to attentively here have broadly echoed this indignation and,
in so doing, have expressed the international
community’s refusal to endorse a further step in Israel’s
policy of escalation. This natural reaction of the community of nations is eloquent proof of the importance
of that thrice Holy City. Indeed, Jerusalem has been
the capital of Palestine, of which it has always constituted-historically
and geographically-an
essential
and indissoluble part. Moreover, by its very essence,
it has assumed a sacred character because of its role
as a city of peace, solidarity and tolerance.

24. The Algerian delegation has had occasion during
these debates on the problem of the Middle East to
express its position clearly. It remains convinced that
the only solution to this succession of crises must and
does require the restoration to the Palestinian people
of their full national rights. That people, whose dignity
has been trampled underfoot and which has been
denied its rights and physically abused, is entitled to
expect the international community today to condemn
unequivocally
the Israeli policy of occupation and
oppression.

18. The gravity of the problem of Jerusalem is sufficiently well known; the interest shown and the
solidarity expressed by the international
community
in the face of the Zionist manoeuvre is the best evidence of this. That is why we shall not tax the patience
of the Council by recalling well-known facts, which,
in any case, have been dwelt upon at considerable
length.
19: Actually, the subject of our meeting is one of the
facets of the basic problem: the Palestinian problem
in ‘its totality, which for 30 years has vainly been
exercising international
public opinion.

25. The situation thus created by the Zionist administration’s policy of escalation and of fld mconlpli
constitutes a constant threat to international
peace
and security. The responsibility
of the Council in that
respect makes it imperative that the Council should
take all the necessary measures.

20. Therefore, we should not dissociate the case
we are dealing with today from its natural framework,
because, as is well known, the diversionary
tactics
habitually practised by Israel consist in fragmenting
the problem in order to focus international
attention
on one or another specific effect of its annexationist
policy, thus removing from the centre of attention in
the debate the underlying reality of the Palestinian
question.

26. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Israel. I invite him to make his statement.
27. Mr. BLUM (Israel): It must have become obvious
by now that this debate is yet another link in the long
chain of initiatives-or,
more accurately, acts of political warfare--conducted
through the Council against
Israel, with increasing intensity since the beginning
of this year.

21. In this regard, the occupation of territory, the
institutionalized
repression of the civilian population,
the pursuit of a policy of settlement, the repeated acts
of aggression against Arab States, as well as the measure now contemplated-all
these are part of the same
tactics and constitute,
within the framework of a
deliberate and calculated policy, stages in Israel’s
determination
to achieve the final objective of Zionism
and its natural ally, imperialism.

28. I have already had the opportunity
to comment
on certain aspects of this debate and to respond to
some of the speakers who have preceded me.
29. It would take a long time to respond to each and
every allegation and distortion that has been advanced
in the course of this debate. Whole structures of
ostensibly legal arguments. based on dubious assertions were offered here, some of them the products of
sheer fantasy. Let me give just one simple but typical
illustration. One of the speakers stated that since 1967
approximately
30 per cent of Judea and Samaria had

22. In spite of the almost unanimous reprobation of
the international
community and in spite of the many
condemnations,
Israel continues to display the same
arrogant attitude. That attitude of scorn and defiance
3

been absorbed within the city limits of Jerusalem. This
completely untrue assertion had already been made
before by the representative of Jordan last year and
had been duly refuted. For another representative to
repeat it again now, is thus more than astonishing.

uncomfortable topics as Afghanistan. Thus, both the
initiators of this debate and their assorted supporters
do not come before the Council in the spirit worthy
of Jerusalem’s special character.- While they ostensibly talk about Jerusalem, it is Kabul that is apparently much more on their minds.

30. The fact is that the area of Jerusalem within its
present city limits is not even 2 per cent of the territory
of Judea and Samaria. It is about 108square kilometres
and therefore of almost exactly the same size as the
combined areas of the Israeli and Jordanian municipal
areas of Jerusalem until 1%7.

36. The unique association of the Jewish people with
the City of Jerusalem for over three millennia is an
integral part of world history, inextricably entwined
into the fabric of the cultural and spiritual heritage
of mankind. Jerusalem has always been, as it is today,
the capita! of the Jewish people. .And it has been the
capital of the State of Israel since the restoration of
our national independence more than three decades
:
‘(
ago.

31. I already had occasion to caution the Council
against permitting the injection into this debate of
incitement and prejudice. Regrettably, precisely this
has dominated our discussions. The Council has been
subjected to a series of repetitive statements by
speakers representing a certain group of States bent
on advancing their own sectarian interests, with little
or no regard for the rights and concerns of others,. or
for the truth, or for the people of Jerusalem. Yet distortions and falsehoods, however often repeated here,
remain distortions and falsehoods. An untruth remains
an untruth, even if repeated ad infinitum.

37. Also, Jerusalem has always been a united city,
except for the period between 1948 and 1967, when it
was temporarily and artificially divided. While persecution and insecurity reduced the number of its
Jewish residents periodically, Jews throughout the
world have always clung to Jerusalem and have longed
to return to :it. Since modem population statistics
first became available in the early nineteenth century,
those statistics have consistently shown the existence
of an uninterrupted Jewish majority among the City’s
residents.

32. Jerusalem contains Holy Places and shrines held
sacred by three great religions. It is also a vibrant,
living, growing city-the home of some 420,000 people
whose well-being depends on the City’s -peace and
progress. It is the heart and centre of a country, and
the capita! of a nation. Jerusalem is a city which should
be approached with veneration and respect,- with
reverence and serenity. It should not be an object for
political expediency or a pretext for incitement or
agitation of any kind.

38. Throughout the ages and up to the ,end of the
British Mandate in 1948, Jerusalem had always been
one united city. Until 1948, about two thirds of its
population were Jews. The rest included Arabs as well
as other non-Arab communities. Thus, in addition to
its Jewish and Muslim quarters, the Walled City of
Jerusalem-commonly known as the Old City-also.
contained a Christian and an Armenian’ quarter, with
their residents belonging to a great variety ‘of nation,’
alities.
_ I
. . . :
‘_
39. As a result, of Arab aggression in 1948, launched
with the declared aim,of destroying the fledgling State of Israel, the eastern part of Jerusalem was invaded ’
and occupied by Jord’arr and ‘Jerusalem became a
divided city. From then on until 1967, Jordan persistently strove to change the physica! ‘character and
demographic composition of that part, of the City.
More particularly, every effort was made by Jordan
to eliminate every trace of Jewish presence, as we!!
as of the Jewish past of the City. That situation lasted,
as I have just mentioned, for 19 years, until the City
was united once again in 1967.

33. *The problems of the ‘Arab-Israel conflict are
complex enough. For their solution they require a
spirit of’ reconciliation and a willingness to reach
mutual. accommodation. They require honest dialogue
and genuine negotiation. This is particularly true with
regard to.Jerusa!em. Jerusalem, with its Holy Places
venerated by Judaism, Christianity and Islam, is an
especially emotive subject.,Consequent!y, it calls for
particular care and sensitivity in keeping with the
dignity and singular character of Jerusalem.
34. The initiators of this debate view it as another
round: in their campaign against Israel. This is not
the first ,time that the Arab-Israel conflict has been
exploited here for a variety of dubious objectives
totally extraneous to that conflict. Frequently debates
of this kind are intended primarily to create for their
sponsors a semblance of unity, a unity which is otherwise lacking. Exercises of this kind are thus calculated
to cover up internal dissensions and rivalries within
certain groupings of States.

40. All those who are sincerely concerned for the
well-being of Jerusalem cannot possibly wish to see
a return to the situation which prevailed from 1948
to 1%7.
41. Our position on Jerusalem is a matter of public
record. It has been stated in numerous debates held in
this and other organs of the United .Nations since
1948. We have repeatedly stated that no discussion

35. While these are obviously the prime objectives
of the sponsors of this debate, others have joined them
in an attempt to divert attention away from such
4

on Jerusalem can ignore the role of Jerusalem in
Jewish history and the role of the Jewish people in the
history of the City. Nor can it ignore the fact that the
Jewish people-and only the Jewish people-has
always regarded Jerusalem as the centre and sole
focus of its national and spiritual life.
42. After the six-day war of 1967, our. position was
presented by the then Foreign Minister of Israel,
Mr. Abba Eban, at the 1529th and 1541st meetings of
the General Assembly.* A detailed account of the
administrative and municipal measures taken, on
27 June 1967by the Government of Israel with regard
to the reunified City of Jerusalem was set out- in
Mr, Eban’s letterof 10July, appended to the SecretaryGeneral’s report of the same date [S/80523.
43. Israel’s position was reaffirmed in a letter of
17 September t978 from the Prime Minister of Israel
to the President of the United States. That letter was
annexed to the Camp David Accords of the same
date, and it reads as follows:
“I have the honour to inform you that on 27 June
1967-Israel’s Parliament (the Knesset) promulgated and adopted a law to the effect: ‘the Govern‘ment is .empowered by a decree to apply the law,
the jurisdiction and administration of the State to
any part of Eretz Israel (land of Israel-Palestine),
as stated in that decree’.
,.
,I:‘“On the b&is of this law, the Government of
Israel decreed in July 1967 that Jerusalem is. one
.eity, indivisible, the capital of the State of Israel.”
,_
44. There.is thus no substance to the allegation that,
Israel is in the,process of altering the existing situation
in%Jerusa!em.It is erroneous to suggest that the Government of Israel proposes to alter the status of
Jerusalem, which is the capita! of Israel.
f 6:’
45; We are a!! aware that religious and historical sites’
in Jerusalem are precious to Christians and Muslims
as‘we!! as to Jews. Israel is deeply mindful of the
spiritual treasures and universal interests in Jerusalem. This is expressed in Israel’s policy with regard
to~Jerusa!em’s Holy Places, as reflected in the Pro-.
tection of Holy Places Law of 27 June 1967. Under
this law, unrestricted access to all the Holy Places is
giraranteed to members of a!! faiths. Article 1provides
that:
“The Holy Places shall be protected from desecration and any other violation and from anything
‘;:like!y to violate the freedom of access of the mem,;bers of the different religions to the places sacred
” to them or their feelings with regard to those places.”
Article
2 goes on to say that:
*
I~; “(0) Whosoever desecrates or otherwise violates
..,~aHoly Place shall be liable to imprisonment for
i3 term of seven years.

“(h) Whosoever does anything likely to violate
the freedom of access of the members of the different religions to the places sacred to them or their
feelings with regard to those places shall be liable to
imprisonment for a term of five years.”
46. In this regard, it is relevant to recall again that’
for ‘19 years between 1948and 1967Jordan barred the
Muslim citizens of Israel from visiting and praying in
mosques in the Old City of Jerusalem. They gained
accessto them only in 1967when the City was reunited.
47. During the 19 years of Jordanian occupation of
the eastern part of Jerusalem, there had been no legislation to protect the Holy’Places in Jerusalem. Instead,
Jordan systematicallyrazed the Jewish Quarter within.
the Walled City of Jerusalem. Fifty-eight synagogues
and houses of worship were destroyed. The ancient
Jewish cemetery on the Mount of Olives was desecrated. Jewish religious, cultural and historical treasures ,in the Holy City .were defiled.
48. Since 1967, Jerusalem has once again become a
city open and accessible to all..Sacred buildings have
been rebuilt, places of worship rededicated. Millions
of Mulim and Christian tourists and pilgrims, in addition to Jewish visitors, have visited Jerusalem since
1967 and have prayed and worshipped freely at its
mosques and churches. These tourists and pilgrims
include hundreds of thousands of citizens of hostile
Arab States; they too have been afforded freedom of
accessto, and worship at, their respective Holy Places.
A!! these visitors can attest to the complete freedom
of access to, and worship at, al! the Holy Places to
the adherents of al! faiths, unprecedented in the history
of the City.
49. The measures taken by the Government of Israel
to secure the protection of the Holy. Places are only
one part of its effort to ensure respect for universal
interests in. Jerusalem. Israel has abundantly dis:
played its will and capacity to secure these universal
interests. It has ensured that the Holy Places of the
three great monotheistic ,faiths -are administered by
the ,respective religious authorities which hold them ,I
sacred, so that, for the first time in the City’s history,,..
the universal character of the -Holy Places has found
effective expression.
i
2”
50. I have already pointed to the purpose of this
debate. Let me add one more word. There is a danger
that this debate might be exploited to play upon religious sentiments and to fan the flames of incitement,
both religious and political. Surely, al! the members
of the Council must agree that the injection of fanaticism, incitement and hatred into the proceedings of
the Council is highly undesirable.
51. Experience has shown that questions of this kind
require a balanced approach. This cannot be achieved
and maintained in the contentious atmosphere prevailing here in the deliberations on any aspect of the

Arab-Israel conflict. If there were any doubts in anybody’s mind regarding the unsuitability of the Council
to deal with this issue in a positive manner, they surely
have been dispelled by the form and substance of this
debate. Anyone with even a rudimentary knowledge
of the history and reality of Jerusalem ,surely must
have been appalled by the flood of ignorance and prejudice, distortion and falsehood that has been let loose
in this chamber over the past week. Nor were these
distortions and falsehoods confined to Jerusalem,
which was ostensibly the subject of our discussion:
The champions of hatred and incitement seized this
occasion to widen the debate into yet another round
in their relentless campaign of vilification against
Israel. The Council must not let itself be led into
adopting positions which can only be to the detriment
of Jerusalem and obstructive to the cause of peace.
52. Israel for its part will continue to work for the
peace and well-being of Jerusalem and its people, as
well as for the preservation of the special place which
Jerusalem holds in the hearts of people of diverse
faiths around the globe.
-.
53. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the- representative of Jordan. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
54. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): The representative
of Israel has made several references to what he called
his country. How can it be that a man who only in the
1930scame from Czechoslovakia-a country for which
I have the deepest and greatest respect--claims Jerusalem as his country? Secondly, when I mentioned
a year or two ago that the Israelis had confiscated
almost 30 per cent of the occupied territory, I made
it categorically clear that that was the area colonized
in the West Bank, including Jerusalem. I itemized the
areas in which all that colonization was carried out
which ate up the heartland of the West Bank. The
Security Council Commission established under resolution 446 (1979) endorsed my facts and figures, and
the Council itself also endorsed them.
55. My reference to Jerusalem was that it had been
expanded many times so that it now extends from the
doorstep of Ramallah in the north to the doorstep of
Bethlehem in the south, let alone to the east, at Khan
Al-Ahmar, and to the entire hilly region in the west.
56. I have on many occasions already replied to
Israeli policies and deeds which have led to the dismemberment of Jerusalem. I do not intend at this point
to repeat myself again. Let me come now to Israel’s
claim that Jerusalem has always been the capital of
Israel.
57. We are now bringing a week’s debate on the
destiny of Holy Jerusalem-Al-Quds Al-Shari&to a
close and therefore it is essential to highlight a few
established facts.
58. First, and within the historical dimension upon
which the Zionists lean so heavily and with such dis-

tortion in trying to justify a universally obnoxious,
unacceptable and illegal military conquest and colonialism, scientific and archaeological scrutiny have
established beyond any shadow of a doubt that the
indigenous and ancestral inhabitants of Jerusalem
and Palestine were the Canaanite Semitic Arabs who
had migrated to Palestine from the Arabian Peninsula
more than 5,000 years ago-that is, 2,000 years before
the emergence of the prophet Moses and his followers
in the land of Canaan. The Jews, or the Haribus
-meaning Nomads-acquired their cultural orientation, their spiritual experience, their traditions and
even their dialects from the Canaanites, the Arameans
and the Phoenicians, all of whom heralded from the
Arabian Peninsula and spread into the Fertile Crescent, where they created the five great Semitic civilizations in the Near East-the Acadean, the Babylonian,
the Assyrian, the Chaldean and, finally, the ArabIslamic commonwealth. No wonder ProfessorToynbee
referred to the Israelis as a fossil of Syriac civilization. It was from that area of civilization, as well as,
especially, during their sojourn in Egypt during the
reign of Aknaton, that the followers of the prophet
Moses had learned the concept of monotheism in
place of the exclusive henotheism.
59. Furthermore, scholars are almost unanimous in
their conviction that the Canaanites and .their kinsmen, the Phoenicians-they were linked with each
other-were the first Arabs to invent the alphabet
and to pass it on between 850 B.C. and 750 B.C. to
the Greeks, the Latins and beyond. Subsequently, the
Aramean Arabs spread it throughout natural Syria, the
Near East, and it is known by its Arabic origin Alef
Baa’-the alphabet.
60. It is deplorable that there is a deliberate historical
distortion regarding the forefather of all the prophets
-1brahim Al-Khalil-Abraham.
Scholars are agreed
that his era dates back to 1,900 years B.C. It was a
purely Arab era in language, nationality and religion,
and it is divided from the age of the prophet Moses,
who came to Palestine subseque.nt to Abraham from
Egypt, by 700 years. Abraham was, of course, a Semitic Aramean Arab leader whose original roots were
in the Arabian peninsula before he migrated and settled
in Iraq. This explains why he is venerated as the
founder on the Ka’ba, God’s oldest house of worship
in Mecca. He preached the worship of La Illaha Ila
Allah, the universal God whose messageencompasses
the whole of mankind. The prophet Moses felt his
origins in Egypt and moved into the land of Canaan
13 centuries B.C. His followers deviated from his
teachings and followed their own exclusive God,
Yahweh; considering themselves to be the chosen
people.
61. Throughout the entire period, including the
72-year-old Israeli hegemony over the West Bank,,
which is adrop in the bucket compared with 5,000 years
of uninterrupted Canaanite habitation, the Canaanites
were the overwhelming majority in Jerusalem and the

occupied territories, which we are now discussing.
The citadel of Uru Salem, which was known as the
citadel of Canaan or the citadel of Zion on Mount Zion
-Al-Nabi-Daoud-remained
impregnable to all conquerors 2,000 years before the era of the prophet Moses
and for 300 years following it until King David succeeded in occupying it by seizing its water supply,
according to archaeologists and historians.

65. Thirdly, the Security Council has been rendered
ineffectual by the blind carter hlunche support that is
accorded to the Israeli conquest in real terms. As we
see it, since almost the whole of the rest of the world
supports the universal character of Jerusalem, it is
within our means, impelled by the massive forces of
humanity and of the faithful, to impose a wide range
of extremely potent sanctions against Israel and whomever aids and abets its conquests and annexations.
I am sure that the responsible people in our part of
the world will see to that. As long as we enjoy the
moral support of the United Nations, it is incumbent
upon us to implement the most effective measures to
save Jerusalem from the clutches of night-mongering.
Our decision-makers and our vast masses will not
shrink from their responsibilities in this most sacrosanct of human and spiritual issues.

62. I would not wish to delve into historical details
any further, out of respect for the Council’s precious
time. But in view of the falsifications and slanders
which the ancient Hebrews heaped mercilessly upon,
in particular, the indigenous ancient Palestinians,
much as the Israelis are now heaping them on the
present-day Palestinians through the mass media, it
would be an immeasurable contribution to truth and
to the history of the evolution of modem civilization
if the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization were to form a team of highlevel scholars without any preconceived ideas, prejudices or misguided emotions to study the history of
Palestine analytically, objectively and archaeologically as part of the great Syriac civilization and within
an integrated and unified theory of the Near Eastern
civilization. Representatives of all faiths, including
those who do not subscribe to monotheism, should
and could participate in such a study. The only criterion should be integrity and the pursuit of truth.
Since the struggle over the fate of Jerusalem, because
of Zionist intransigence and exclusivity, is going to be
a prolonged one-the Israelis today announced that
they were going to have their first reading of that
notorious bill before the Knesset-the Council and the
rest of the world are entitled to know the truth as it
really is and not as the Zionists want them to know it.

66. Fourthly, the Israeli representative has indulged
in his usual distortions. I shall spare the Council’s
precious time and not refute them now. I shall doaso
in writing, addressing myself to the President and
members of the Council, point for point and word
for word.
67. May I, in conclusion, express my gratitude to
the President of the Council, for having called upon
me once more. I would express gratitude to all the
Member States whose conscience, sense of justice and
legality have not succumbed to mundane and ultimately unworthy expediency. I can only pray for the
souls of those who have succumbed and who have
deviated from the path of righteousness.
68. Mr. HUSSON (France) (inrerprerurion from
According to the very statements of the
highest authorities of Israel, the Parliament of that
country will soon have before it a bill that would
annex the Arab part of Jerusalem and make the city
the capital of the country. France cannot concur in
such a plan, which would have serious consequences,
and we hope that it will not be carried out. In fact,
the plan goes beyond the measures to integrate the
Arab part of Jerusalem in a unified administrative
entity, which have already been condemned time and
again; it aims at modifying the status of the city.

French):

63. If anyone thinks that this would be redundant and
does not fall within the purview of the United Nations,
let me declare my own deep conviction that perversions, misconceptions and outright falsifications
have, directly and indirectly, contributed substantially
to the downfall of the people of Jerusalem and of the
rest of Palestine.
64. Secondly, there is universal agreement about
the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by
force both in the Jerusalem of 1948 and the Jerusalem
of after 1967. The applicability of the fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949” is a sine qua non and has been
repeatedly reiterated by the Security Council and the
General Assembly, as well as by all other relevant
organs of the United Nations. And yet, and without
prejudice to ail other measures vested in the Security
Council by the Charter, it may be helpful if, at the
request of the Council, the Secretary-General were
to seek a definitive and judicious opinion from the
International Court of Justice as to the legal imperatives which must govern the fate and future of Jerusalem in its entirety-barring, of course, the illegality
of military conquest.

69. The Council has had this problem before it a
number of times since 1967. In its resolutions 252
(1968) and 267 (1969), the Council censured in the
strongest terms all measures taken to change the
status of the City of Jerusalem and in fact declared
them invalid. Neither of those resolutions, and none
of the many others, many of them adopted unanimously, have been implemented by the Member State
to which they were addressed. It is, then, in defiance
of the will of the international community that Israel
has pursued its policy off& accompli.
70. The plans that have occasioned this meeting of
the Council have understandably aroused strong
feelings among most of those who belong to the three
7

major religions devoted to the preservation of an
indivisible spiritual heritage. Jerusalem is a Holy City
for Islam, for Christianity and for Judaism, and it must
not be allowed to become a prize to be fought over.
It must remain a symbol of peace. That which makes
Jerusalem unique and universal must be safeguarded.

76. My Government’s position is clear, and I believe
it is no secret to the Council. East Jerusalem is part of
the territories occupied in the war of 1967. It is subject
to the principles emphasized in resolution 242 (1967),
including the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by war.

71. For .that reason, -France feels that all legislative
and other measures adopted by the Israeli authorities
to integrate the part of Jerusalem that has been occupied since 1967 are, like the creation and extension of
the settlements, contrary to the rules of international
law under which the Administering Power must prey
serve the demographic, economic and cultural character of the occupied areas. If has been quite properly
recalled here, that, at its last meeting, in Venice, on
13 June; the European Council adopted the following
position:
.
“The .Nine recognize the special importance of
the role played by the question of Jerusalem for all
.:the parties ,concemed. The Nine stress that they
will not accept any unilateral initiative designed to
change the status of Jerusalem and that any agree,.ment on the city’s status shpuld guarantee .free“dom of access ,of everyone to the Holy Places.“.

77. We have consistently maintained our policy that
no unilateral action should or can change the status
of Jerusalem. No such action should be allowed to.
prejudge the future of the City. That position was most
recently reafXrmed in the declaration by. the nine
heads of State and Government of the European Community at Venice on 13 June. What the Community
said has been quoted by a number of. speakers in this
debate, most recently by the last speaker, the representative of France. I will therefore not repeat it..

[S/14009, para.’ 8.)

78. My delegation deplores the changes which Israel
has made to the physical and,demographic character
of Jerusalem in the years since the June.. 1967 war.
We. deplore Israel’s failure to heed earlier Council
resolutions on this subject. In view of the special
significance of the city to hundreds of millions of
followers of the three great religions., we strongly urge
Israel to eschew further such actions, which can only
serve to stoke the tires of resentment, frustration and
mistrust throughout the area and beyond, thus adding
to the burdens of the already desperately difficult
search,for a comprehensive settlement of the conflict
in’the Middle East.
a.
79. ‘By the same token, and turning to the draft resolution in front of us [S//4031], my delegation could
have wished that some of the language in it had been.
less abrasive. We understand the strong feelings. of .,
the’ sponsors of the draft resolution, but ,we frankly,.
doubt whether the use of such language ‘in ,reso!utions
is likely to produce the effect desired by a!! of us. ”

:

72. It is quite clear that this excerpt from the declaration’ of the heads of State and Government of the.
countries’ ‘.inembers of the,, European Community
cannot be dissociated from ‘their position on the
entire question of the Middle,.East. If there is no global
settlement in keeping with the principles and conditions proposed .at Venice, the problem of Jerusalem
cannot be resolved unilaterally.
.’
73. I would solemnly warn the Government of Israel
against the plans that have‘occasioned these meetings
of the Council. I appeal to it not to commit irreparable
acts that would only provoke violent reactions and
compromise the chances of peace. The very name of
Jerusalem commands that we seek peace along the
path ofjustice within the community of the faithful.
_.
I
74. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom)::.My.
delegation has followed the course of this debate with
the closest attention. I have been profoundly impressed
by the quality of some of the statements we have heard.
We -have listened to sombre words of warning all the
more telling because ‘of the restrained and measured
languagein which some speakers have uttered them.

80. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is Mr. Clo-’
vis M&soud;Permanent Observer for the League of’
Arab States to the United Nations, to whom the Courici! has extended an invitation under rule 39 of its pro-,
visional rules of procedure at its 2233rd meeting.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table-in order.
.,‘.‘*,
to make his statement.
-*:
:_.
81. Mr. MAKSOUD: During this debate we have
been subjected by the representative of Israel to the<
spectacle of a sort of semantic acrobatics, which was
an attempt to defuse the impact of the universal con:
demnation of Israel’s measures in the further annexa+,
tion of the .Holy City of Jerusalem. In that regard,
we are faced with what is perhaps a unique situation4
in which we find the Israeli representative seeking to:
undermine the credibility of the sponsors of the draft
resolution and the universality of attitude and perception held by the world community with respect to +
I>
Jerusalem.
.
I
82. To question even the attitude of the partners in’,
the Camp David accords concerning Jerusalem-ini

73.~ This debate .has heavily underscored once again
the universal importance of the question of the status
of Jerusalem. We, the British, after many centuries of
close involvement in the area now known as the Middle
East, are of all people unlikely to forget how strong
are the chords which Jerusalem strikes in the hearts
and minds of men and women not only in the area but
throughout the continents of the world.
8

community. It is-doing so effectively in Jerusalem.
To the extent it is doing so, we consider that the unilateral declaration, and the codicil constituted by the
letter from Mr. Begin to President Carter, show to a
large extent the looseness of the terms of reference .of
the Camp David accords, the imperative necessity of
dissociating ourselves from them, and the need-especially for the partners in the Camp David accordsto be clearer about their position of condemning the
unilateral interpretation of the status of Jerusalem’
put forward by Israel.
.

those agreements reference to Jerusalem was not
spelt out, although it is central-the Israeli representative has ascertained that the letter which Mr. Begin
sent to President Carter on that particular issue establishes by inference the status of Jerusalem as perceived
in the Camp David accords. We are not sure that the
other partners to those agreements subscribe to the
precise terms contained in the detinition given in the
codicil to the Camp David accords, as understood
by Mr. Begin.
83. In that regard, we find in the Egyptian interpretation of this debate and of its subject a definite refusal to accept a determination to dissociate itself from
Israel’s definition of the term Jerusalem as it is described in the letter that was read out this morning by
the Israeli representative. We are also sure that the
United States does not subscribe precisely to the
terms of reference found in that letter. Therefore, in
addition to the ,universal condemnation of the inter-’
national community, even the partners in the Camp
David accords do not subscribe to Israel’s determination on the status of Jerusalem.
:
,,
84. Hence, we find this is an attempt to impose on
the’ international community, in an ex cafhedra man- ’
ner, not only a unilateral definition by Israel of the
status of ,Jeiusalem as the capital of Israel but ‘the
idea that Israel is within its. rights in ‘changing ‘the
status of Jerusalem an in deciding whatever it wishes
to do inside Jerusalem, irrespective of the consequences for .the,region or of the question of peace in
the region.

88. It is this ex cuthe&~ approach on the part of
Israel that shows the degree to which the Zionist State
of Israel seeks not only to arrogate to itself the rightto sanctify its measures merely on the grouncls that’
they have been taken, but to impose the idea that any
measures taken by Israel must be approved by its
partners. This is therefore the time for the partners of
Israel in the Camp David accords to.put an end to the
equivocation that has ‘characterized their approach
and attitude to the question of Jerusalem and to the
’
question of the Palestinians.IS:
I.;
,.
89. The PRESIDENT: The ‘representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organization has asked to make
a statement in reply. I call on him.
90. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
At the outset, I should like to shed some.light. on the
”
credibility of the Zionist ent’ity.
91. Way back in July 1948, the then.Prime Minister,.
Mr. Sharrett, made. the followi,ng statement:
,. j .
,.
“Morally, we do not regard ourselves as bound
by our agreement to the November 29 decision concerning Jerusalem, even though we do. not consider
the time has come for us to make any clear decisions
concerning our new position.*’
.I
‘,’
/
.., ..:
..
.
92. I ,think this set the pattern for thecredibility of
the policy and the statements made by the representa- i
tives of Tel Aviv. However, the time has come to .
recall some biblical statements.
.
;
, ,
.
I am thinking of Micah, when hesays: :
’ ; ( ‘,
: c’ !
“Hear this, 1 . . ye heads of the tiouseeof’J&b
and princes of the house of 1srael;that abhor$tdge-’
ment and pervertall equity.
1i’
“They build up Zion with blood, and_’Jerusalem
with iniquiiy.4

85. ’ What is it that enables the Israeli representative,
aside from uttering a repetition of insults to this body
and attributing’ motives to the sponsors of the draft
resolution that are extraneous to this debate-what
is it that enables him alone, unilaterally, without
inhibition, to state ex cufhedru that Jerusalem is not
only, the capital of Israel but the capital of the socalled Jewish people?
861’ We are thus faced with a situation whereby Israel
wants to present the Council and the world community
with fairs uccomplis, finally established facts that
render any minor compliance of Israel with the international consensus a major sacrifice on its part. That
is what I meant by semantic acrobatics.
87. Jerusalem is a Holy City for three principal religions of the world-Judaism, Christianity and Islam,
But as the representative of the United Kingdom just
said, Jerusalem is an occupied city: East Jerusalem
has been occupied since the 1967 war., Therefore its
annexation is illegal. The attempt on the part of Israel
unilaterally to determine the fate of Jerusalem, which
is an Arab city, is an attempt to pre-empt the role of
the Council, which is responsible for deciding what
measures shall be taken and what measures may be
considered relevant or credible. Israel feels that it has
the power to paralyse the will of the international

“Woe to them that devise iniquity . . ..
“They covet fields and .take them by violence;
and houses and take them away:
9

“So they oppress a man and his house, even
a man and his heritage.

96. Then reference was made to the diktat of
Mr. Eban in July 1967. But we all know what that
diktat meant. It was rejected by the General Assembly
at its emergency special session; it was rejected by the
Security Council, as one can infer from resolutions
252 (1968), 267 (1969), 271 (1969) and, lately, resolutions 465 (1980).

“Therefore, thus saith the Lord; Behold,
against this family do I devise an evil, from which
ye shall not remove your necks; neither shall ye
go haughtily: for this time is evil”.5
93. We have listened to the representative of Tel
Aviv and heard him say: *‘Jerusalem is a city which
should be approached with veneration and respect,
with reverence and serenity” Iparu. 32 above]. Since
when do the Zionists consider Jerusalem with serenity
and reverence? Those who dropped bombs on Jerusalem in 1947 and 1948, those who planted mines and
explosives in the streets of the Old City of Jerusalem
have no reverence for Jerusalem. They are murderers.
Those who blew up the civilian secretariat of the
Mandate’s administration, killing more than 100 civilians, are criminals and they have no reverence for
the City.

97. But it so happens that the racists. who still think
in militarist terms; and who try to impose their diktat
on the international community, come here and make
a statement and expect the rest of the world to accept
it. But then the rest of the world does not accept their
diktat. Then, some reference is made to the Camp
David accords. Now, what is this? The Camp David
framework was rejected in the General Assembly and
was considered invalid. Anything based on an approach
which is not valid has no validity whatsoever. Notwithstanding what may have been agreed as far as the
future of the Palestinian people is concerned, the
General Assembly and the Palestinian people have said
that the Camp ,David accords have no validity whatsoever.

94. I quote again: “[there is] an attempt to divert
attention away from such uncomfortable topics as
Afghanistan” Iparu. 35 above]. The Security Council has been considering the acts of aggression, the
atrocities committed by the Zionists for decades now,
long before the question of Afghanistan came up. But
of course, the United States and its lackey, the State
of Israel, are happy with the obsession with Afghanistan because this obsession enables the United
States to avoid taking any action to stop its agent in
the Middle East from committing those crimes and
atrocities against the people of the Middle East. If
anybody is making any use of the problem of Afghanistan, it is the United States and Israel.

98. Reference was also made to an Israeli law, article 1 of which provides that the Holy Places shall be
protected. But this is a departure from the Zionist
doctrine that considers the beautiful dreamer of
Nazareth as a man who came to sow the seeds of
hatred. Do you really think any Christian would
believe that those Zionists who consider Christ as a
breeder of hate would consider the Christian shrine
as something sacred and holy?
99. It was also stated that: “since 1967, Jerusalem
has once again become a city open and accessible to
all” Iparu. 48 above]. The question, however, is not
one of accessibility. The question is one of the fate
of the worshippers and of the believers there. What
do you do with the believers in the City?

95. Now I quote again:
“Since modem population statistics first became
available in the early nineteenth century, those
statistics have consistently shown the existence
of an uninterrupted Jewish majority among the
City’s residents”. Ipara. 37 above.]

100. Now, L’Osservutore
Romuno of today’s date
has a beautiful article, from which I quote: “No less
than the monuments and Holy Places, the situation of
these communities cannot fail to be a matter of concern for all.” And L’Osservatore Roman0 is referring
to the religious communities of Jerusalem and the
international community, so it is not only the question
of the buildings. T.he buildings mean nothing if they
do not have worshippers. They could be museums.
As a matter of fact, His Holiness the Pope had mentioned that he was really concerned lest the places of
worship in Jerusalem should eventually become
museums for lack of worshippers. This is what we are
interested in. We are interested in the fate of people
-the human element-not just in the buildings.

But what does this mean? Let us have a look at the
statistics as of 31 December 1946 concerning the
population in Palestine. There were 1,845,560 Palestinians, of whom there were 608,230 of the Jewish
faith. So if statistics mean anything and the rights of
the majority of inhabitants mean anything, then one
would say that Palestine does not in any way belong
to those of the Jewish faith. But let us examine the
question of Jerusalem. In the district of Jerusalem
there were 395,320 Palestinians of whom 102,820 were
of Jewish faith. But if one has to confine oneself to
a small area and say that in that area there are a certain
number of members of a certain faith and so claim title
to that area, then I really do not know what the criterion should be. This is another distortion of fact;
or one could say that they are really misconstruing it
in a fallacious way.

101. The Council has on several occasions affirmed
that all the actions taken by the occupying Power to
change the characteristics of the City were invalid.
The Council is called upon to take adequate measures
10

to prevent the further deterioration
of this situation.
The meeting

and exacerbation

NOTES
’ United Nations, Trcwy Suk~,
vol. 75.
’ See Offlciui Records of the Gcncwd Assembly.
Fifth Emcvgcwcy
Spwkl
S~~ssicm. Plenmy
Mwtings.
3 United Nations, Trwty S&cs,
vol. 75. No. 973. p, 287. I

rose at 12.45 pm.

4 Micah 3: 9-10.
S Micah 2: 1-3.

11

.

.

‘_.

~~41 ,,aYl a\~+
b,+s,$li;uI~~+l

&

J,,.d

i.$

.rlWl.\r;~~~~~~~~r~~s~zYl~ls~~J~;k,
. d&

j

d dJx~+

$ &t

+

;*iJ1

r.y’

: J”

*;rl

,\

tllfm4~~~I8~&lk
at~~Hl~ft~B~dR~;~IOIR#L

illh+iB~B1B~iQfl!~~~~R~~~~~H~~~

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.

.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER LE!5 PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS UNIES

Lcs publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans la librairies et les agencesd&sitaires du
monde entier. Informezvous aupr&s de votre Libraire ou adressez-vousB : Nations Unies, Section
des vmtes. New York ou GentvC.
KAIC

IIOJIY’IHTh

H3naHHn

H3AAHHl’I

Opraxmaum4

3sixax u arenTcTBax

OPI’AHH3AI&WH

06ae~xHem4bIx

Haus@

OWhE~HHEHHhIX
YO)I(RO

nynmrb

HAII[UR
8 KHHKCHBIX

Mara-

~0 8cex paRoxax rnpa. HaBOAHTe
cnpasrta 06 u3ztaHnRx n
Km
nKtnKIe
no anpecy : OpraHHJauHR 06%enUHeHAbIX
npo~amce HaXaHHR, HbKdfOpK
Km )KeHeEa.

BarneM
HauH%

Km%Kom
CeKUHI!

Yaramae

COMO

CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES

no

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publieaciones de las Naciones Unidas est&n en venta en librerlas y casas diribuidoras en
todas pattes de1 mundo. Consulte a w brero o dirljase a: Nadones Unidas. Secci6n de Vmtas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.
VC.-.

Lhho in United Nations, New York

003txI

83-61462-October 1987-2.050
