RESOLUTIONS AND DECISIONS
OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
1998
SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS: FIFTY-THIRD YEAR

UNITED NATIONS
New York, 2000

NOTE

The volume Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council is published
on a yearly basis. The present volume contains the resolutions adopted and the
decisions taken by the Council on substantive questions during 1998, as well as
decisions on some of the more important procedural matters. The resolutions and
decisions are set out in parts I and 11, under general headings indicating the
questions under consideration. In each part, the questions are arranged according
to the date on which they were first taken up by the Council in the year under
review, and under each question the resolutions and decisions appear in
chronological order.

The resolutions are numbered in the order of their adoption. Each resolution
is followedby the result of the vote. Decisions are usually taken without a vote, but
in cases where a vote has been recorded, it is given immediately after the decisions.

ISSN 0257-1455

CONTENTS
Page

.....................................................
Resolutions adopted and decisions taken by the Security Council in 1998 .............................
Membership of the Security Council in 1998

part I:

V

i

Questions considered by the Security Council under its responsibiliQ for the maintenance of
internationalpeace and security

Items relating to the situation in the former Yugoslavia:
The situation in Croatia ...............................................................
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

.................................................

1

6

Letter dated 11 March 1998 from the Deputy Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the Resident of the Security Council
Letter dated 27 March 1998 from the Permanent Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council .............................

10

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia ........................

17

.................................
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait .......................................................
The situation Concerning Wcstem Sahara .....................................................
The situation in Angola ...................................................................
The situation in Georgia ...................................................................
The situation in the Middle East ............................................................
The situation in the Central African Republic ..................................................
The situation in Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan border .....................................
ThesituationinSierraLeone ...............................................................
The situation in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia

20
21

31

36
49

54

57

64
67

Exchange of letters between the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council
concerning the India-Pakistan question

......................................................

73

Letters dated 20 and 23 December 1991, from France, the United Kingdom of Great Britain andNorthm Ireland
and the United States of America .........................................................

73

..............................................................
The situation in Afghanistan ...............................................................
The question concerning Haiti

75
77

Items relating to the situation in Rwanda:

The situation concerning Rwanda

.........................................................
iii

84

Page
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Such
Violations Committed in the T h t o r y ofNeighbouring States ...................................

86

...................................................................
The situation in Africa ....................................................................

91

Letter dated 3 1 March 1998 from the Chargt d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Papua New Guinea to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council .............................

102

.........

103

ThesituationinCyprus

The responsibility of the Security Council in the maintenance of international peace and security

88

The situation between Eritrea and Ethiopia ....................................................

105

Children and armed conflict ................................................................

106

..................................................
The situation in Burundi ...................................................................

The situation in the occupied Arab temtories

107
108

Letter dated 29 June 1998 from the Secretary-General addressed to the Resident of the Security Council
Letter dated 25 June 1998 from the Permanent Representative of the Demowatic Republic of the Congo to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
Letter dated 25 June 1998 from the Permanent Representative of Rwanda to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General ..................................................................... 109
Threats to peace and security caused by international terrorist acts ..................................

110

...................................
Protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict situations .....................

113

The situation in Cambodia .................................................................

114

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

.............................................................
The situation in Liberia ...................................................................
Maintenance of peace and security and post-conflict peace-building ................................

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Part 11:

111

114

116
116

Other matters Considered by the Security Council

..............................................
Consideration of the draft report of the Security Council to the General Assembly .....................
Items included in the agenda of the Security Council in 1998 for the first time ..........................

119

Checklist of resolutions adopted by the Security Council in 1998 .....................................

123

Checklist of statements made a n d h issued by the President of the Security Council during 1998 ..........

127

Security Council working methods and procedure

iv

118

121

MEMBERSHIP OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL IN 1998

In 1998, the membership of the Security Council was as follows:
Bahrain
Brazil
China
Costa Rica
France
Gabon
Gambia
Japan
Kenya
Portugal
Russian Federation
Slovenia
Sweden
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United States of America

V

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED AND DECISIONS TAKEN BY
THE SECURITY COUNCIL IN 1998
Part I. Questions considered by the Security Council under its responsibility for the maintenarrce
of international peace and securily

ITEMS RELATING TO THE SITUATION IN THE FORlMER YUGOSLAVIA
The situation in Croatia
[Resolutionsor decisions on this question were also adopted by the SecurifyCouncil in 1993, 1995, 1996 and 1997.1

Decision
At its 3847th meeting, on 13 January 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representative of Croatia to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled:
“The situation in Croatia

“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Prevlaka
(SA 997/10 19)”.

’

Resolution 1147 (1998)
of 13 January 1998
The Security Council,
Recalling its earlier relevant resolutions, in particular
resolutions 779 (1992) of 6 October 1992, 981 (1995) of
31 March 1995, 1025 (1995) of 30 November 1995,
1038 (1996) of 15 January 1996,1066 (1996) of 15 July 1996,
1093 (1997) of 14 January 1997 and 1119 (1997) of 14 July
1997,

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of
30 December 1997,’ and welcoming the positive developments

noted therein,
ReafJirming once again its commitment to the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Croatia,
Noting again the Joint Declaration signed at Geneva on
30 September 1992 by the Presidents of the Republic of

in particular
Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yug~slavia,~
article 3, which reaffirmed their agreement concerning the
demilitarization of the Prevlaka peninsula, and emphasizing
the contribution that this demilitarization has made to the
decrease of tension in the region,
Noting with concern continued long-standing violations
of the demilitarizationregime in the UnitedNations designated
zones in the region, but welcoming a decrease in the number
of violations,

‘ See Oflcial Records of the Security Council, FHy-second Year,

Supplement for October, November and December 1997.
Ibid., document Sl199711019.
Ibid., Forty-seventh Year, Supplement for October, November and
December 1992, document 924476, annex.

’

’

Welcomingthe first substantial progress in implementing
the practical options proposed by the United Nations military
observers in May 1996, as referred to in the report of the
Secretary-General of 3 1 December 1996,4
Noting with concern that there has been no progress
towards a settlement of the disputed issue of Prevlaka through
mutual negotiations,
Recalling the Agreement on Normalization of Relations
between the Republic of Croatia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, signed in Belgrade on 23 August 1996,*
committing the parties to settle peacehlly the disputed issue of
Prevlaka by negotiations in the spirit of the Charter of the
United Nations and good neighbourly relations, and stressing
the need for the Republic of Croatia and the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia to agree on a settlementwhich would peacefully
resolve their differences,
Noting that the presence of the United Nations military
observers continues to be essential to maintain conditions that
are conducive to a negotiated settlernent of the disputed issue
of Prevlaka,
1. Authorizes the United Nations military observers to
continue monitoring the demilitarization of the F’revlaka
peninsula, in accordance with resolutions 779 (1992) and
981 (1995) and paragraphs 19 and 20 of the report of the
Secretary-General of 13 December 1995,6until 15 July 1998;

Welcomessteps taken by the parties in adopting the
2.
practical options proposed by United Nations military
observers to reduce tension and improve safety and security in
the area, and calls upon the parties to make further pragress in
this regard;

3. Reiterates its call upon the parties to cease all
violations of the demilitarization regime in the UnitedNations
designated zones, to cooperate fully with the United Nations
military observers and to ensure their safety and freedom of
movement;
4.
Urges the parties to abide by their mutual
commitments and to implement filly the Agreement on
Normalization of Relations between the Republic of Croatia
and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia of 23 August 1996;5
Ibid., Fgy-jrst Year, Supplement f i r October, November and
December 1996, document S11996/1075.
Ibid., SupplementforJuly, August and September 1996, documents
S/I 9961‘706 and S/ 19961744.
Ibid., Fflieth Year, Supplement for October, November and
December 1995, document Sl1995/1028.

’
‘

Secretary-General of 22 January 1998.” The experience
of this multifunctional operation may be useful for

5 . Expresses its support for the commitment by the
parties to a negotiated resolution of the disputed issue of
Prevlaka in accordance with article 4 of the agreement
mentioned in paragraph 4 above;

similar situations in the future.
“The Council commends the commitment shorn by
the Government of the Republic of Croatia to the
implementation of its comprehensive programme of
national reconciliation, and stresses the need for
continued progress in this regard. The Council is also
encouraged by signs of increasing participation in
Croatian political life by the region’s ethnic Serb citizens,
and underlines the importance of continued efforts by the
Government of the Republic of Croatia to ensure full
participation by the Serb minority in the political life of
the country, including through urgent funding of the
Joint Council of Municipalities.

6. Urges the parties to take concrete steps towards a
negotiated resolution of the disputed issue of Prevlaka in good
faith and without delay;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Council by 5 July 1998a report on the situation in the Prevlaka
peninsula and, in particular, on progress made by the Republic
of Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia towards a
settlement which would peacefully resolve their differences;

8. Requests the United Nations military observers and
the multinational StabilizationForce authorizedby the Council
in resolution 1088 (1996) of 12 December 1996 to cooperate
fully with each other;
9.

“The Council notes that, despite the positive
conclusion of the Transitional Administration and the
efforts of the Government of the Republic of Croatia,
including its request for the establishment of the civilian
police support group, much remains to be done, The
Government of the Republic of Croatia remains
responsible for the rights and safety of members of all
ethnic groups within the Republic of Croatia and bound
by its obligations and commitments under the Basic
Agreement on the Region of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja
and Western Sirmium” and other international
agreements. In this regard, the Council calls upon the
Government of the Republic of Croatia to intensify its
efforts to promote full reintegration of the region, in
particular to resolve property issues and other problems
which are hindering the return of refugees and displaced
persons, to protect human rights, including by taking
action against harassment, to address in full uncertainties
about the implementation of the Amnesty Law and to
take measures to improve public confidence in the
Croatian police.

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the

3847th meeting.

Decisions
On 13 January 1998, the President of the Security
Council addressed the following letter to the SecretaryGeneral:’
“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 8 January 1998 concerning the appointment of
Mr.Souren Seraydarian, of the Syrian Arab Republic, as
the representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the support group and the United Nations Liaison Office
in Zagreb’ has been brought to the attention of the
members of the Security Council, They agree with the
intention that you express therein.”

At its 3854thmeeting, on 13 February 1998, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Croatia to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled:

“In this context, the Council emphasizes the key
role of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe throughout the Republic of Croatia, including in
the Danubian region. T h e Council strongly supports the
closest possible cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, in particular between the mission of that
organization and the support group and other United
Nations offices and agencies in the Republic of Croatia,
as envisaged by the Secretary-General, and, to that end,
encourages the support group and the mission to keep
each other fully informed.

“The situation in Croatia
“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Transitional Administration for Eastern
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium
(5/1998/59)”.’
At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:’

“The Council pays tribute to the dedicntedmen and
women of the Transitional Administration and, in
particular, expresses its appreciation to the Transitional
Administrators and the Force Commanders for their
leadership of the mission of the Transitional
Administration.”

“The Security Council welcomes the successful
completion of the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium, as described in the report of the

10

Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fgy-third Year,
Supplement Jor January, February and March 1998, document
SJ 1998159.
I ‘ Ibid., Ffliietk Year, Supplenteni for October, November and
December 1995. document S/1995/951.

~

’

S/1998/30.
S/1998/29.
SIPRSTII998J3.
2

implement fully and fairly its legislation on amnesty; to
act promptly to pass equitable property and tenancy
rights legislation which would encourage returns and
stimulate additional international reconstruction
assistance; to ensure fair employment benefit practices
and equal economic opportunity; and to ensure the nondiscriminatory application of the rule of law.

At its 3859th meeting, on 6 March 1998, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Croatia to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled “The
situation in Croatia”.
At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:”

“The Council recognizes that, since the end of the
mandate of the Transitional Administration, the
performance of the Croatian police has been generally
satisfactory, and in this context it expresses its
appreciation and support for the work of the United
Nations civilian police support group. The Council notes,
however, that public confidence in the police is low. The
Council calls upon the Croatian Government to take
measures, including through pubiic information and
police preventive action, to improve public Confidence in
the police as part of a wider programme of measures to
prevent ethnically motivated crime and ensure the
protection and equal treatment of all Croatian citizens,
regardless of ethnicity.

“The Security Council expresses its concern at the
Croatian Government’s lack of compliance with
obligations assumed under the Basic Agreement on the
Region of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sinnium,” the letter from the Croatian Government
dated 13 January 199713and the agreement of 23 April
1997 between the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the Croatian
Government concerning the return of refugees and
displaced persons. The Council notes that the overall
security situationin the Danube region remains relatively
stable, but is particularly concerned about the increasing
incidence of harassment and intimidation of the local
Serb community in the region and the failure of the
Croatian Government to apply the process of national
reconciliation in an effective way at the local level. This
worrying situation,togetherwith recent statementsby the
Croatian authorities,cast doubt upon the commitment of
the Republic of Croatia to include ethnic Serbs and
persons from other minorities as full and equal members
of Croatian society.

“The Council stresses that, following the
termination of the Transitional Administration,
responsibility for the fill reintegration of the Danube
region lies clearly with the Croatian Government. The
United Nations will continue to work closely with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in
monitoring the situation and reminding the Croatian
Government of its obligations.”
On 24 June 1998, the President of the Security Council
addressed the following letter to the Secretary-General:15

“The Council, recallin$ the statement by its
President of 13 February 1998 and having taken note of
the letter dated 5 March 1998 fiom the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Croatia to the United
Nations,14calls upon the Croatian Government publicly
to reaffirm and by its actions to demonstrate its
commitment to fulfilling its obligations under the Basic
Agreement and other agreements in full, including
through progress onnational reconciliation at every level.
In particular, the Council calls upon the Croatian
Government to take prompt and unequivocal steps to
ensure the safety, security and rights of all Croatian
citizens and to build confidence among the Serb
community throughout Croatia, including by providing
promised funding for the Joint Council of Municipalities.
These steps should include measures to create the
conditions to allow local Serbs to remain in the region, to
facilitate the return of refugees and displacedpersons and
to address underlying practical and economic issues
which inhibit returns. The Council calls upon the
Croatian Government to establish clear procedures for
the documentation of refugees from Croatia; to issue an
equitable plan for nationwide two-way returns; to

“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 22 June 1998 concerning your intention to appoint
Lieutenant Colonel Graeme Roger Williams, of New
Zealand, as the next Chief Military Observer of the
United Nations Mission of Observers in Prevlakat6has
been brought to the attention of the members of the
Security Council. They agree with the intention
expressed in your letter.”
At its 3901st meeting, on 2 July 1998, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Croatia to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled:
“The situation in Croatia
“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Police Support Group (S/1998/500)’1.’7
At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

S/PRST/1998/6.
I’ OJJiciaI Records of the Security Council, Fijity-second Year,
Supplement for January, Februaty and March 1997, document
S11997127, annex.
l4 Ibid., F$y-third Year, Supplernent for January, February and
March 1998, document S/1998/191.

Is 5119981564.

S119981563.
I7 See Qficial Records of the Security Council, Fijiifhird Year,
sup~’enlcntfor
May and June 1998’
Is S/PRST/1998/19.
l6

3

“The Council calls upon the Government of Croatia
to improve p o k e response to ethnically related incidenh,
evictions and housing intimidation cases and to take
other measures to strengthen public confidence in the
police, including through public information and police
preventive action. In this context, the Council stresses the
importance of the implementation of the guidelines
issued by the Ministry of the Interior on 9 January 1998
and the institution of a community policing programme
by the Ministry.

“The Security council has considered the report of
the Secretary-General of 11 June 1998 pursuant to its
resolution 1145 (1997) of 19 December 1997.’9
“The Council notes that the overall security
situation in the Danube region is relatively stable. It also
notes that the generally satisfactory performance of the
Croatian police in the region is largely due to
comprehensive monitoring by the United Nations Police
Support Group and the special atlention paid to the
situation by the Ministry of the Interior of the Republic
of Croatia. However, the Council is concerned that,
despite the large presence of the Croatian police,
ethnically related incidents, evictions and housing
intimidation cases have not been stopped, and that such
incidents have increased in the recent period,

“The Council fully supports the activities of the
United Nations Police Support Group and the United
Nations Liaison Office in Zagreb. It welcomes the
decision of 25 June 1998 ofthe Permanent Council of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to
deploy civilian police monitors to assume, from
15 October 1998, the responsibilities of the Support
Group. It also welcomes the invitation by the
representative of the Secretary-General to the head of the
nlission of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe in Croatia to begin planning for the intended
transfer of the police monitoring function in the region to
that organization. It supports the establishment of a
timetable for the handover of the functions of the Support
Group to the organization and agrees with the intention
of the Secretary-General to reduce gradually the number
of civilian police monitors, under the conditions specified
in his report. The Council looks forward to a report by
the Secretary-General by mid-September detailing the
arrangements for the termination of the mandate of the
Support Group by 15 October 1998.”

“The Council expresses its grave concern that a
large number of Serb residents and displaced persons
have emigrated from the Republic of Croatia since late
1996, mainly because of continued security incidents,
ethnicallyrelated intimidation, a dire economic situation,
bureaucratic hurdles, discriminatory legislation and a
stalled return programme. A continuation of this trend
could have a seriously negative effect on the restoration
of a multi-ethnic society in the Republic of Croatia. The
Council, therefore, welcomes the adoption by the
Government of Croatia, on26 June 1998, ofa nationwide
programme for the return and accommodation of
displaced persons, refugees and exiled persons” and calls
for its prompt and full implementation at all levels,
including the abolition of discriminatory property laws
and the establishment of effective mechanisms allowing
owners to recover their property. It stresses the
importance of the prompt and full implementation of the
programme on reconciliation at all levels throughout
Croatia and of preventing and responding to incidents of
harassment and unlawful evictions.

At its 3907th meeting, on 15 July 1998, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Croatia, Germany and
Italy to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item
entitled:
“The situation in Croatia

“The Council reiterates the continuing obligations
of the Governmentof Croatia under the Basic Agreement
on the Re ion of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Simium’ as well as under internationalconventions and
other agreements. It notes with satisfaction that the
Government of Croatia has met the majority of its
obligations concerning the provision of public services
and employment within the public sector, set out in the
Basic Agreement. The Council, however, reiterates that
a number of obligations have yet to be fulfilled in such
areas as the implementation of the Convalidation Law
and the Amnesty Law, the functioning of local
municipalities and the permanent funding of the Joint
Council of Municipalities. In this regard, the Council
stresses the significance of the Article 11 Commission,
formed under the provisions of article 11 of the Basic
Agreement, as a key instrument in encouraging the
Government of Croatia to meet its obligations fully and
in underscoring continued international commitment to
the successful completion of peaceful reintegration.

“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Prevlaka
(S/1998/578)”.17

B

Resolution 1183 1998)
of 15 July 19 8

6

The Security Council,
Recalling all its earlier relevant resolutions, in particular
resolutions 779 (1992) of 6 October 1992, 981 (1995) of
31 March 1995 and 1147 (1998) of 13 January 1998,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-Generalof
26 June 1998,2’ and noting the positive assessment in the
report of the Secretary-General of recent developments,
including the initiative by the Republic of Croatia for a final
resolution of the disputed issue of Prevlaka,22

Oficial Records of the Security Council, Fifty-third Year,
Supplementfor April, May and June 1998, document S/1998/500.
2o Ibid., document Sl19981589,annex.

22

4

Ibid., document S/1998/578.
Ibid., document S/1998/533,
annex.

Noting the proposal by the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia on the permanent settlement of the disputed issue
of P r e ~ l a k a , ~ ~

of the disputed issue of Prevlaka in accordance with article 4
of the Agreement, and calls upon them to engage proniptly and
constructivelyin negotiations;

Reaflrming once again its comniitment to the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Croatia within its internationally recognized
borders,

5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Council by 15 October 1998 a report on the situation in the
Prevlaka peninsula and in particular on progress made by the
Republic of Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
towards a settlement which would peacefully resolve their
differences, and, in this context, on the possible adaptation of
the United Nations Mission of Observers in Prevlaka;

Noting again the Joint Declaration signed at Geneva on
30 September 1992 by the Presidents of the Republic of
Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia: in particular
article 3, which reaffirmed their agreement concerning the
demilitarization of the Prevlaka peninsula, and emphasizing
the contribution that this demilitarization has made to the
decrease of tension in the region,

6. Requests the United Nations military observers and
the multinational StabilizationForce authorizedby the Council
in resolution 1088 (1996) of 12 December 1996 and extended
by resolution 1174 (1998) of 15 June 1998 to cooperate fully
with each other;

Concerned, however, at the continued long-standing
violations of the demilitarization regime in the United Nations
designated zones in the region and the failure of the parties to
improve their compliance with the demilitarization regime as
recommended by the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Prevlaka, including important demining activities within the
demilitarized area, and by continued restrictions on the
freedom of movement of its personnel within their area of
responsibility,

7.

Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the
3907th meeting.
Decisions

At its 3941st meeting, on 6 November 1998,the Security
Council decided to invite the representative of Croatia to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled:

Recalling the Agreement on Normalization of Relations
between the Republic of Croatia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, signed in Belgrade on 23 August 1996,5
committingthe parties to settle peacefully the disputed issue of
Prevlaka by negotiations in the spirit of the Charter of the
United Nations and good-neighbourly relations, and deeply
concerned at the lack of significant progress towards such a
settlement,

“The situation in Croatia
“Final report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Police Support Group
(S/1 998/1004)”.24
At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:25

Noting that the presence of the United Nations military
observers continues to be essential to maintain conditions that
are conducive to a negotiated settlement of the disputed issue
of Prevlaka,

“The Security Council welcomes the final report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Police
Support Group26and, in particular, his description of the
successful conclusion of the mandate of the Support
Group and the smooth transition of responsibilities to the
police monitoring programme of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. The Council recalls
the commitment of the Government of Croatia to ensure
that police monitors of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe will have the same access to
police stations, documents and police operations,
including investigations and checkpoints, as that
accorded to the Support Group.

1. Authorizes the United Nations military observers to
continue monitoring the demilitarization of the Prevlaka
peninsula, in accordance with resolutions 779 (1992) and
981 (1995) and paragraphs 19 and 20 of the report of the
Secretary-General of 13 December 1995,6until 15 January
1999;
2. Calls upon the parties to take further steps to reduce
tension and improve safety and security in the area;
3. Reiterates its call upon the parties to cease all
violations of the demilitarizationregime in the United Nations
designated zones, to cooperate fully with the United Nations
military observers and to ensure their safety and full and
unrestricted freedom of movement, and calls upon them to
complete promptly the demining of the area;

“While the overall security situation in the Danube
region remains satisfactory and police performance has
improved notably and the Government of Croiltia has
taken steps to ensure that this continues,a worrying trend
of ethnically motivated incidents persists in the region.
The Council remains deeply concerned at the continuing

4. Urges the parties to abide by their mutual
commitments and to implement fully the Agreement on
Normalization of Relations between the Republic of Croati;
and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia of 23 Au ust 1996,
in particular their commitmentto reach a negotiatedgresolution

24

Ibid., Supplementfor October, November und December 1998.
S/PRST/I 998132.

26 Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fifty-third Year.
Supplementfor October, November and December 1998, document

23

Ibid., Supplementfor July,August and September 1998, document
Sl19981632, annex.

S/1998/1004.

5

returnee status and benefits, and implementation of the
Convalidation Law.

departures of Serb residents, resulting to a
considerable extent fkom these incidents. In this context,
the Council is mindful of the importance of economic
revitalization and reconstruction in creating an
environment for sustained returns. The Council calls
upon the Government of Croatia to make every effort to
enhance public confidence in the police force and to
recommit itself fully to the process of reconciliation
between ethnic groups.

“The Council expresses particular concern about the
Joint Council of Municipalities, which representsall Serb
ethnic communities in the region and which is described
by the Secretary-General as being on the b r i i of
collapse. The Council reiterates the continuing
obligationsof the Government of Croatia under the Basic
Agreement on the Region of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja
and Western Sirmium,” as well as under international
conventions and other agreements, and, in this context,
stresses the importance of full implementation of the
‘Programme for the Establishment of Trust, Accelerated
Return and Normalization of Living Conditions in the
War-Affected Regions of the Republic of Croatia’?*

‘The Council also calls upon the Government of
Croatia to address the perceived lack of security, which
is contributingto continuing departures of Serbs from the
region, and to remedy a number of problems that are
preventing the full implementation of the ‘Programme
for the Return and Accommodation of Displaced
Persons, Refugees and Exiled Persons’.’’ While noting
that in his previous repod’ the Secretary-General
recognized progress in the implementation of the
Programme, the Council calls upon the Government of
Croatia promptly and fblly to address all unresolved
issues, which include restitution of property to Croatian
citizens of Serb ethnicity, harmonization of legislation
with the provisions of the return programme to enable
non-discriminatoryimplementation,effectivefunctioning
of all housing commissions, equal access to
reconstruction funding, restoration of rights to socially
owned apartments, access to information, removal of
impediments to the acquisition of documents needed for

27

“The Council expresses its full support for the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
which has now assumed the role of the Support Group,
and looks forward to being kept informed, whenever
necessary, of relevant developments in the Danube
region of Croatia.
T h e Council expresses its deep appreciation to all
the men and women who participated in the United
Nations peacekeeping operations in the Danube region of
Croatia. Their dedication and perseverance made a
significant contribution to regional peace.”

Ibid., Supplemenffor July, August and September 1998, document

2a Ibid., Fifty-second Year, Supplementfor October, November and
December 1997, document SA 9971772, annex.

S/1998/887.

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
[Resolulions or decisions on this Question have been adopted by the Security Council every year since 1992.1

Decisions

“The Council, recalling that the 1997 award helped
to promote the start of a peaceful, orderly and phased
return process in Brcko and the beginnings of the
establishment of a multi-ethnic administration,considers
that the decision of 15 March 1998 represents the best
interests of the peace process. The Council cornmends
the efforts of the Presiding Arbitrator and of the
International Supervisor for Brcko.

At i& 3862nd meeting, on 19 March 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to participate, without vote, in the discussion of
the item entitled “The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina”.
At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:29

“The Council calls upon the parties to annex 2 to
the General Framework Agreement to im lement the
decision without delay, as they are oblige to do. The
Council underscores the importance of prompt and full
cooperation by the parties to the Agreement in carrying
out their commitments to implement the Agreementin its
entirety, including cooperation with the International
Supervisor for Brcko and the Office of the High
Representative.”

8

“The Security Council welcomes the announcement
of the decision on 15 March 1998 relating to Brcko by
the arbitral tribunal pursuant to article V of annex 2 to
the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and p r z e g ~ v i n aand
~ ~ to the award of 14 February
1997.

At its 3883rd meeting, on 21 May 1998, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Germany and Italy to participate, without vote,
in the discussion of the item entitled:

S/PRST/I 998/7.
OflcialRecords of the Security Council,Fgiefh Year, Supplement
for October, November and Decetnber 1995, document Sl19951999.
” Ibid., FiJly-second Year, Supplementfir January, February and
March 1997, document S/1997/126, annex.
29

30

“The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

6

“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/1998/227 and Corr. 1 and Add.

judicial reform, and taking note 2f the report of the High
Representative of 9 April 1998, which emphasizes that
judicial reform is a priority for further progress,

6

1. Decides to authorize an increase in the strength of
the International Police Task Force by 30 posts, to a total
authorized strength of 2,057;

Resolution 1168 1998)
of 21 May 19 8

The Security Council,

2. Supports the improvements in the overall
management of the InternationalPolice Task Forceundertaken
by the Secretary-General,his Special Representatives, and the
Task Force Commissioners and personnel in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, stresses the importance of continued reforms in
this area, and in this regard strongly encourages the SecretaryGeneral to make further improvements to the Task Force, in
particular with regard to personnel management issues;

Recalling all its previous relevant resolutions concerning
the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia, including resolutions
1031 (1995) of 15 December 1995, 1035 (1995) of
21 December 1995, 1088 (1996) of 12 December 1996,
1103(1997)of31March1997,1107(1997)of16May1997
and 1144 (1997) of 19 December 1997,
Expressing its continued commitment to the political
settlementof conflicts in the former Yugoslavia,preserving the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States there within
their internationally recognized borders,

3. Encourages Member States to intensify their efforts
to provide, on a voluntary funded basis and in coordination
with the International Police Task Force, training, equipment
and related assistance for local police forces in Bosnia and
Herzegovina;

Recalling the conclusions of the Ministerial Meeting of
the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council held
in Sintra, Portugal, on 30 May 199733 and the Peace
Implementation Conference held in Bonn on 9 and
10 December 1997,34

4. Recognizes that establishing an indigenous public
security capability is essential to strengthening the rule of law
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, agrees to consider expeditiously
a court monitoring programme led by the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina as part of an overall
programme of legal reform as outlined by the Office of the
High Representative, and requests the Secretary-General to
submit recommendationson the possibility of utilizing locally
hired personnel as far as is practical and of voluntary Eunding;

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of
12 March 1998,35and taking note ofhis observations and the
planning outlined in paragraphs 37 to 46 of that report,
Reaffirming its full support for the High Representative
and his staff and his responsibility in implementingthe civilian
aspects of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the annexes thereto (collectively
the “Peace

5.

Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the
3883rd meeting.

Commending the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, including the International Police Task Force,
and recalling the recommendations of the Bonn Peace
Implementation Conference relating to the Mission, including
the Task Force,

Decision
At its 3892nd meeting, on 15 June 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representatives of Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Germany, Italy, Malaysia
and Turkey to participate,without vote, in the discussion of the
item entitled:

Expressing its appreciation to the personnel of the
Mission, including the International Police Task Force, and to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Task Force Commissioner,

“The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) (S/19981491)”. ”

Emphasizing the increasing importance of specialized
training for local police in Bosnia and Herzegovina, especially
in the areas of critical incident management, corruption,
organized crime and drug control, a$ outlined in the report of
the Secretary-General,

6

Resolution 1174 1998)
of15June19 8

Acknowledging that success in the area of police reform
in Bosnia and Herzegovina is closely linked to complementary

The Security Council,
Recalling all its previous relevant resolutions concerning
the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia, including resolutions
1031 (1995) of 15 December 1995, 1035 (1995) of
21 December 1995, 1088 (1996) of 12 December 1996,
1144(1997)of19December 1997and 1168(1998)of21 May
1998,

l2 Ibid., Fijiy-third Year, Supplement for January, February and
March 1998.
” Ibid., F$y-second Year,Supplementfor April, May and June 1997,
document Sl19971434, annex.
Ibid., Supplement for Ociober, November and December 1997,

’‘

document Sl1997l979, annex.
35

Ibid., Supplement for April, May and June 1998, document
S11398f314, annex.

Ibid., Ffi-third Year, Supplement for January, February and
March 1998, documents Sl19981227 and Add.1.

36

7

with the authoritiesin Bosnia and Herzegovina themselves and
that the continued willingness of the international community
and major donors to assume the political, military and
economicburden of implementation and reconsimctioneffoas
will be determined by the compliance and active participation
by all the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
implementing the Peace Agreement and rebuilding a civil
society, in particular in full cooperation with the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991, in strengthening joint institutions and in facilitating
returns of refugees and displaced persons;

Reafirrning its commitment to the political settlement of
the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia, preserving the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States there within
their internationally recognized borders,
Underlining its commitment to supporting
implementation of the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the annexes thereto
(collectively the “Peace Agreement”),30
Emphasizing its appreciation to the High Representative,
the Commander and personnel of the multinational
Stabilization Force, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the personnel of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including the
Commissioner and personnel of the International Police Task
Force, and the personnel of other international organizations
andagencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina for their contributions
to the implementation of the Peace Agreement,

3. Once again reminds the parties that, in accordance
with the Peace Agreement, they have committed themselves to
cooperatefully with all entities involved in the implementation
of this peace settlement, as described in the Peace Agreement,
or which are otherwise authorized by the Security Council,
including the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, as it carries out its responsibilitiesfor dispensing
justice impartially, and underlines that full cooperation by
States and entities with the International Tribunal includes the
surrender for trial of all persons indicted by the Tribunal and
provision of information to assist in Tribunal investigations;

Underlining once again the important role for the
Republic of Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in
the successfuldevelopment of the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina,
Stressing that a comprehensive and coordinatedreturn of
refugees and displaced persons throughoutthe region is crucial
to lasting peace,

4. Emphasizes itsfull support for the continuedrole of
the High Representative in monitoring the implementation of
the Peace Agreement and giving guidance to and coordinating
the activities of the civilian organizations and agencies
involved in assisting the parties to implement the Peace
Agreement, and reaffirms that the High Representative is the
final authority in theatre regarding the interpretation of annex
10 on civilian implementation of the Peace Agreement and that
in case of dispute, he may give his interpretation and make
recommendations, and make binding decisions as he judges
necessary on issues as elaborated by the Peace Implementation
Council in Bonn on 9 and 10 December 1997;34

Taking note of the declaration of the Steering Board of
the Peace Implementation Council in Luxembourg on 9 June
1998” and the conclusions of its previous meetings,

Having considered the report of the Secretary-Generalof
10 June 1998,38
Noting the report of the High Representative of 9 April
1998,36
Determining that the situation in the region continues to
constitute a threat to international peace and security,

5. Expresses its support for the declaration of the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council in
Lu~embourg;~~

Determined to promote the peaceful resolution of the
conflicts in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations,

6. Recognizes that the parties have authorized the
multinational force referred to in paragraph 10 below to take
such actions as required, including the use of necessary force,
to ensure compliance with annex 1-A of the Peace Agreement;

Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter,

I

7. ReafJirms its intention to keep the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina under close review, taking into
account the reports submitted pursuant to paragraphs 18 and
25 below, and any recommendations those reports might
include, and its readiness to consider the imposition of
measures if any party fails significantlyto meet its obligations
under the Peace Agreement;

1. $firms once again its support for the Peace
Agreement, as well as for the Dayton Agreement on
Implementing the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina of
10November 1995,39calls upon the parties to comply strictly
with their obligations under those agreements, and expresses
its intention to keep the implementation of the Peace
Agreement and the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovisla under
review;

I1

2. Reiterates that the primary responsibility for the
further successful implementation of the peace process lies
37

8. Pays tribute to those Member States which
participatedin the multinationalStabilizationForce established
in accordance with its resolution 1088 (1996), and welcomes
their willingness to assist the parties to the Peace Agreement
by continuing to deploy a multinational Stabilization Force;

Ibid., document S/1998/498, annex,

’*Ibid., document S/1998/491.
’’

Ibid., Fijieth Year, Supplement for October, November and
December I995,document S/1995/1021, annex.
8

the Peace Agreement to continue to report to the Council,
through the appropriate channels and at least at monthly
intervals;

9. Notes the support of the parties to the Peace
Agreement for the continuation of the Stabilization Force set
out in the declaration of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council at Luxembourg;

*
* *

10. Authorizes the Member States acting through or in
cooperation with the organhation referred to in annex 1-A of
the Peace Agreement to continue for a further planned period
of twelve months the Stabilization Force as established in
accordance with its resolution 1088 (1996), under unified
command and control, in order to fi~lfilthe role specified in
annex 1-A and annex 2 of the Peace Agreement, and expresses
its intention to review the situation with a view to extending
this authorization further as necessary in the light of
developments in the implementation of the Peace Agreement
and the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina;

Reafiming the legal basis in the Charter of the United
Nations on which the International Police Task Force was
given its mandate in resolution 1035 (1995),

I11
19. Decides to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which includes
the International Police Task Force, for an additional period
terminating on 21 June 1999, and also decides that the Task
Force shall continue to be entrusted with the tasks set out in
annex 11 of the Peace Agreement, including the tasks referred
to in the conclusionsof the peace implementation conferences
in London on 4 and 5 December 1996;' Born on 9 and
10 December 199734and Luxembourg on 9 June 199837and
agreed upon by the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovha;

1 1. Authorizes the Member States acting under
paragraph 10 above to take all necessary measures to effect the
implementation of, and to ensure compliance with, annex 1-A
of the Peace Agreement, stresses that the parties shall continue
to be held equally responsible for compliance with that annex
and shall be equally subject to such enforcement action by the
Stabilization Force as may be necessary to ensure
implementation of that annex and the protection of the Force,
and notes that the parties have consented to the Force taking
such measures;

20. Requests the Secretary-Generalto keep the Council
regularly informed on the work of the International Police
Task Force and its progress in assisting therestructuring of law
enforcementagencies, and to report every three months on the
implementation of the mandate of the Mission as a whole;

12. Authorizes Member States to take all necessary
measures, at the request of the Stabilization Force, either in
defence of the Force or to assist the Force in carrying out its
mission, and recognizes the right of the Force to take all
necessary measures to defend itself from attack or threat of
attack;

21. Reiterates that the successful implementation of the
tasks of the International Police Task Force rests on the
quality, experience and professional skills of its personnel, and
once again urges Member States, with the support of the
Secretary-General, to ensure the provision of such qualified
personnel;

13. Authorizes the Member States acting under
paragraph 10 above, in accordance with annex 1-A of the
Peace Agreement, to take all necessary measures to ensure
compliance with the rules and procedures, established by the
Commander of the Stabilization Force, governing command
and control of airspace over Bosnia and Herzegovina with
respect to all civilian and military air traffic;

22. Reaflrms the responsibility of the parties to
cooperate fully with, and instruct their respective responsible
officials and authorities to provide their full support to the
International Police Task Force on all relevant matters;
23. Reiterates its call upon all concerned to ensure the
closestpossible coordinationbetween the High Representative,
the Stabilization Force, the Mission and the relevant civilian
organizations and agencies so as to ensure the successfbl
implementation of the Peace Agreement and of the priority
objectives of the civilian consolidation plan, as well as the
security of International Police Task Force personnel;

14. Requests the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
to cooperate with the Commander of the StabilizationForce to
ensure the effective management of the airports of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in the light of the responsibilities conferred on
the Force by annex 1-A of the Peace Agreement with regard to
the airspace of Bosnia and Herzegovina;
15. Demands that the parties respect the security and
freedom of movement of the Stabilization Force and other
international personnel;

24. Urges Member States, in response to demonstrable
progress by the parties in restructuring their law enforcement
institutions, to intensify their efforts to provide, on a
voluntary-funded basis and in coordination with the
International Police Task Force, training, equipment and
related assistance for local police forces in Bosnia and
Hemegovina;

16. Invites all States, in particular those in the region, to
continue to provide appropriate support and facilities,
including transit facilities, for the Member States acting under
paragraph 10 above;

25. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
submit to the Council reports from the High Representative, in
accordance with annex 10 of the Peace Agreement and the
conclusions of the Peace Implementation Conference held in

17. Recalls all the agreements concerning the status of
forces as referred to in appendix B to annex 1-A of the Peace
Agreement, and reminds the parties of their obligation to
continue to comply therewith;
18. Requests the Member States acting through or in
cooperation with the organization referred to in annex 1-A of

40 Ibid., Fiftv-JirstYear, Supplement fir October, November and
December 1996, document Sl1996l1012, annex.

9

Taking note of the conclusions of the Peace
Implementation Conference in Bonn on 9 and 10 December
199734and of the declaration of the Steering Board o f &
Peace Implementation Council in Luxembourg on 9 June
1 998:7

London, on the implementation of the Peace Agreement and,
in particular, on compliance by the parties with their
commitments under the Agreement;

26. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

Taking note also Of the r!fommendations
Representative of 9 April 1998,

Adopted unanimously at the
3892nd meeting.
Decision

of the High

Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General
of 12 March3’ and 10 June 1998,38 in particular his
observations and planning regarding the issue of legal reform,

At its 3909th meeting, on 16 July 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Germany and Italy to participate, without vote,
in the discussion of the item entitled:

1, Approves the establishment by the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina of a programme to
monitor and assess the court system in Bosnia and
“The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Herzegovha, as part of an overall programme of legal reform
as
outlined by the Office of the High Representative, in the
“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
light
the Peace Agreement,?’ the recommendations of the
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina PeaceofImplementation
Conference in
and the Steerin
(UNMIBH) (S/1998/227 and Corr.1 and Addel)?* Board of the Peace Implementation
Council in Luxembourg,li
“Report of the Secretary-General on the United and the recommendations of the High R~presentative;~~
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
2. Requests the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) (S/1998/49 1)” ,”
to cooperate fully with, and instruct their respective
responsible officials to provide their full support to the court
Resolution 1184’ 1998)
monitoring programme;
of 16 July 19 8

4

3. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Council
regularly informed on the implementation of the programme
to monitor and assess the court system in Bosnia and
Herzegovina through his reports on the implementation of the
mandate of the Mission as a whole;

The Security Council,
Recalling all its previous relevant resolutions concerning
the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia, in particular resolutions
1168 (1998) of 21 May 1998 and 1174 (1998) of 15 June
1998.

4.

Recalling also the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the annexes thereto
(collectively the “Peace Agree~nenf”),~’

Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the
3909th meeting.

Letter dated 11 March 1998from the Uepu Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom o Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the Unite Nations addressed ta ihe President of ihe Security ouncil

cf

$

Letter dated 27March I998 from the Permanent Representative of the United States of America to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Decisions

At the same meeting, the Council decided to extend an
invitation to Mr. Vladislav Jovanovic, at his request, to address
the Council in the course of the discussion of the item.

At its 3868th meeting, on 31 March 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representatives of Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada, Croatia, Egypt, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Pakistan,
Poland, Turkey and Ukraine to participate, without vote, in the
discussion of the item entitled:

Resolution 1160 1998)
of 31 March 1 98

6

The Security Council,
Noting with appreciation the statements by the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of France, Germany, Italy, the Russian
Federation, the United Kingdom of Great Britain andNorthern
Ireland and the United States of America (the Contact Group)
of 9 and 25 March 1998;’ including the proposal on a
comprehensive arms embargo on the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, including Kosovo,

“Letter dated 11 March 1998 from the Deputy Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/1998/223)32
“Letter dated 27 March 1998 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/f 99 8/272)”.”

41

Ibid., Fffy-third Year, Supplement for January, February and
March 1998, document SII 9981223, annex, and document
SII 998t272, annex,
10

United Nations, and that such a solution must also take into
account the rights of the Kosovo Albanians and all who live in
KOSOVO,
and expresses its support for an enhanced status for
KOSOVO,
which would include a substantially greater degree of
autonomy and meaningful self-administration;

Welcomingthe decision adopted at the special session of
the Permanent Council of the Organhation for Security and
Cooperation in Europe on 1 1 March 1998,42

Condemning the use of excessive force by Serbian police
forces against civilians and peaceful demonstrators in KOSOVO,
6 . Welcomes the signature on 23 March 1998 of an
as well as all acts of terrorism by the Kosovo Liberation Army
or any other group or individual and all external support for agreement on measures to implement the 1996 Education
terrorist activity in KOSOVO,including fiance, arms and Agreement, calls upon all parties to ensure that its
implementation proceeds smoothly and without delay
training,
according to the agreed timetable, and expresses its readiness
Taking note of the declaration of 18 March 1998 by the to consider measures if either party blocks implementation;
President of the Repub4fic of Serbia on the political process in
7 . Expresses its support for the efforts of the
Kosovo and Metohija,
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe for a
Noting the clear commitment of senior representatives of peaceful resolution of the crisis in KOSOVO,
including through
the Kosovo Albanian community to non-violence,
the Personal Representative of the Chairman-in-Office for the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, who is also the Special
Noting that there has been some progress in Representative of the European Union, and the return of the
implementing the actions indicated in the Contact Group long-term missions of the Organization for Security and
statement of 9 March 1998,44but stressing that further progress Cooperation in Europe;
is required,
8. Decides that all States shall, for the purposes of
Afirming the commitment of all Member States to the fostering peace and stability in Kosovo, prevent the sale or
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of supply to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, including
Yugoslavia,
KOSOVO,
by their nationals or from their territories or using
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United their flag vessels and aircraft, of arms and related mattlriel of
all types, such as weapons and ammunition, military vehicles
Nations,
and equipment and spare parts for the aforementioned, and
1. Calls upon the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia shall prevent arming and training for terrorist activities there;
immediately to take the further necessary steps to achieve a
9. Decides to establish, in accordance with rule 28 of
political solution to the issue of Kosovo through dialogue and
its
provisional
rules of procedure, a committee of the Security
to implement the actions indicated in the Contact Group
Council, consisting of all the members of the Council, to
statements of 9 and 25 March 1998:’
undertake the following tasks and to report on its work to the
2. Also calls upon the Kosovo Albanian leadership to Council with its observations and recommendations:
condemn all terrorist action, and emphasizes that all elements
( a ) To seek from all States information regarding the
in the Kosovo Albanian community should pursue their goals
action taken by them concerning the effective implementation
by peaceful means only;
of the prohibitions imposed by the present resolution;
3. Underlines the fact that the way to defeat violence
(b) To consider any information brought to its attention
and terrorism in Kosovo is for the authorities in Belgrade to
offer the Kosovo Albanian community a genuine political by any State concerning violations of the prohibitions imposed
by the present resolution and to recommend appropriate
process;
measures in response thereto;
4. Calls upon the authorities in Belgrade and the
(c) To make periodic reports to the Security Council on
leadership of the Kosovo Albanian community urgently to
enter without preconditions into a meaningful dialogue on inforniation submitted to it regarding alleged violations of the
political status issues, and notes the readiness of the Contact prohibitions imposed by the present resolution;
Group to facilitate such a dialogue;
(6) To promulgate such guidelines as may be necessary
to facilitate the implementation of the prohibitions imposed by
5 . Agrees, without prejudging the outcome of that
dialogue, with the proposal in the Contact Group statements of the present resolution;
9 and 25 March 1998 that the principles for a solution of the
( e ) To examine the reports submitted pursuant to
Kosovo problem should be based on the territorial integrity of paragraph
12 below;
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and should be in
accordance with standards of the Organization for Security and
10. Calls upon all States and all international and
Cooperation in Europe, including those set out in the Final Act regional organizations to act strictly in conformity with the
of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, present resolution, notwithstanding tlie existence of any rights
signed at Helsinki on 1 August 1975, and the Charter of the granted or obligations conferred or imposed by any
international agreement or of any contract entered into or any
license or permit granted prior to the entry into force of the
prohibitions imposed by the present resolution, and stresses in
42 Ibid., document S/1998/246,annex.
this context the importance of continuing implementation of
‘’Ibid., document S/1998/250.
44 Ibid., document S/ 1998/223.
~~~

11

17. Urges the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Temtory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991, established pursuant to resolution
827 (1993) of 25 May 1993, to begin gathering information
related to the violence in Kosovo that may fall within its
jurisdiction, and notes that the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia have an obligation to cooperate with
the Tribunal and that the Contact Group countries will make
available to the Tribunal substantiatedrelevant information in
their possession;

the Agreement on Subregional Arms Control signed in
Florence, Italy, on 14 June 1996;
1I. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
necessary assistance to the Committee established pursuant to
paragraph 9 above and to make the necessary arrangements in
the Secretariat for this purpose;
12. Requests States to report to the Committee
established pursuant to paragraph 9 above within thirty days of
adoption of the present resolution on the steps they have taken
to give effect to the prohibitions imposed by the present
resolution;

18. AJgirms that concrete progress to resolve the serious
political and human rights issues in Kosovo will hprove the
international position of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and prospects for normalization of its international
relationshipsand full participationin internationalinstitutions;

13. Invites the Organization for Security and

Cooperation in Europe to keep the Secretary-Generalinformed
on the situation in Kosovo and on measures taken by that
organization in this regard;
14. Requests the Secretary-Generalto keep the Council
regularly informed and to report on the situation in Kosovo
and the implementation of the present resolution no later than
thirty days followingthe adoption of the present resolution and
every thirty days thereafter;

19. Emphasizes that failure to make constructive
progress towards the peaceful resolution of the situation in
Kosovo will lead to the consideration of additional measures;

15. AZso requests that the Secretary-General, in
consultation with appropriate regional organizations, include
in his frst report recommendations for the establishment of a
comprehensive regime to monitor the implementation of the
prohibitions imposed by the present resolution, and calls upon
all States, in particular neighbouring States, to extend full
cooperation in this regard;

Adopted at the 3868th meeting
by 14 votes to none,
with 1 abstention (China).

20. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

Decisions
At its 3918th meeting, on 24 August 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representatives of Germany and
Italy to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item
entitled:

16, Decides to review the situation on the basis of the
reports of the Secretary-General, which will take into account
the assessments of, inter alia, the Contact Group, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the
European Union, and decides also to reconsider the
prohibitions imposed by the present resolution, including
action to terminate them, following receipt of the assessment
of the Secretary-General that the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, cooperating in a constructive manner
with the Contact Group, has:

“Letter dated 11 March 1998 from the Deputy Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/1998/223)32
“Letter dated 27 March 1998 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1998/272)32

( a ) Begun a substantive dialogue in accordance with
paragraph 4 above, with the participation of an outside
representative or representatives, unless any failure to do so is
not because of the position of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia or Serbian authorities;

“Report of the Secretary-Generalprepared pursuant
to Security Council resolution 1160 (1998)
(SA 998/7 12)”.”

(6) Withdrawn the special police units and ceased

action by the security forces affecting the civilian population;

At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:46

(c) Allowed access to Kosovo by humanitarian
organizations as well as representatives of the Contact Group
and other embassies;

“The Security Council has considered the report of
the Secretary-General of 5 August 1998 submitted
pursuant to its resolution 1160 (1998) of 31 March
1998.“’

(d) Accepted a mission by the Personal Representative

ofthe Chairman-in-Officeof the Organizationfor Security and
Cooperation in Europe for the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
that would include a new and specific mandate for addressing
the problems in KOSOVO,
as well as the return of the long-term
missions of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe;

” Ibid., Supplementfor July, Augusf and September 1998.

S/PRST/l998/25.
Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fifty-third Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1998, document
S/1998/712,
46

4’

(e) Facilitated a mission to Kosovo by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights;
12

At its 3930th meeting, on 23 September 1998, the
Council decided to invite the representatives of Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Germany and Italy to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled

“The Council remains gravely concerned about the
recent intense fighting in Kosovo which has had a
devastating impact on the civilian population and has
greatly increased the numbers of refugees and displaced
persons.
“The Council shares the concern of the SecretaryGeneral that the continuation or further escalation of the
conflict in Kosovo has dangerous implications for the
stability of the region. In particular, the Council is
gravely concerned that given the increasing numbers of
displaced persons, coupled with the approaching winter,
the situation in Kosovo has the potential to become an
even greater humanitarian disaster, The Council a f f m s
the right of all refugees and displaced persons to return
to their homes. In particular, the Council emphasizes the
importance of unhindered and continuous access of
humanitarian organizations to the affected population.
The Council is concerned over reports of increasing
violations of international humanitarian law.
“The Council calls for an immediate ceasefire. The
Council emphasizes that the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Kosovo Albanians must
achieve a political solution to the issue of Kosovo and
that all violence and acts of terrorism from whatever
quarter are unacceptable,and reiterates the importanceof
the implementation of its resolution 1160 (1998). The
Council reaffirms the commitment of all Member States
to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, and urges the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Kosovo
Albanian leadership to enter immediately into a
meaningful dialogue leading to an end to the violence
and a negotiatedpolitical solution to the issue ofKosovo.
It supports in this context the efforts of the Contact
Group, including its initiatives to engage the authorities
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Kosovo
Albanian leadership in discussions on the future status of
Kosovo.

“Letter dated 11 March 1998 from the Deputy Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/1998/223)”
“Letter dated 27 March 1998 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1998/272)”
“Report of the Secretary-Generalprepared pursuant
to Security Council resolution 1160 (1998)
(S/1998/834 and Add. 1)’’,45

Resolution 1199 (1998)
of 23 September 1998
The Security Council,
Recalling its resolution 1160 (1998) of 3 1 March 1998,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General
pursuant to resolution 1160 (1998), and in particular his report
of 4 September 1998:*
Taking note with appreciation of the statement by the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of France, Germany, Italy, the
Russian Federation, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America (the
Contact Group) of 12 June 1998 at the conclusion of the
meeting of the Contact Groug with the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Canada and Japan, and the further statement of the
Contact Group made in Bonn on 8 July 1998,50
Taking note also with appreciation of the joint statement
of 16 June 1998 by Presidents of the Russian Federation and
the Federal Republic of Y~goslavia,~’

“In this regard, the Council welcomes the
announcementby Mr. Ibrahim Rugova, the leader of the
Kosovo Albanian community, of the formation of a
negotiating team to represent the interests of the Kosovo
Albanian community. The formation of the Kosovo
Albanian negotiating team should lead to the early
commencement of a substantial dialogue with the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, with
the aim of ending the violence and achieving a peaceful
settlement, including the safe and permanent return of all
internally displaced persons and refugees to their homes.

Taking note of the communication by the Prosecutor of
the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991 addressed to the Contact Group on
7 July 1998, expressing the view that the situation in Kosovo
represents an armed conflict within the terms of the mandate
of the Tribunal,
Grave4 concerned at the recent intense fighting in
Kosovo and in particular the excessive and indiscriminate use
of force by Serbian security forces and the Yugoslav Army,
which have resulted in numerous civilian casualties and,
according to the estimate of the Secretary-General, the
displacement of over 230,000 persons from their homes,

“It remains essential that the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Kosovo
Albanians accept responsibility for ending the violence
in Kosovo, for allowing the people of Kosovo to resume
their normal lives and for moving the political process
forward.

‘’Ibid., documents SA9981834 and Add. 1.
‘’ Ibid., Supplement for April, May and June 1998, document

“The Council will continue to follow the situation
in Kosovo closely and will remain seized of the matter.”

S A 9981567, annex.
ibid., document S/1998/657,annex.
Ibid., document SI19981526,annex.
13

leading to an end of the crisis and to a negotiated political
solution to the issue of KOSOVO,
and welcomes the current
efforts aimed at facilitating such a dialogue;

Deeply concerned by the flow of refugees into mrthern
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and other European
countries as a result of the use of force in Kosovo, as well as
by the increasingnumbers of displaced persons within KOSOVO,
and other parts of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, up to
50,000 of whom the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees has estimated are without shelter
and other basic necessities,

4. Demands that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
in addition to the measures called for under resolution
1160 (1998), implement immediately the following concrete
measures towards achieving a political solution to the situation
in Kosovo as contained in the Contact Group statement of
12 June 1998:49

Reafirming the right of all refugees and displaced
persons to return to their homes in safety, and underlining the
responsibility of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia for
creating the conditions which allow them to do so,

(a) Cease all action by the security forces affecting the
civilian population and order the withdrawal of security units
used for civilian repression;

Condemning all acts of violence by any party, as well as
terrorism in pursuit of political goals by any group or
individual, and all external support for such activities in
Kosovo, including the supply of arms and training for terrorist
activities in Kosovo, and expressing concem at the reports of
continuingviolations of the prohibitions imposed by resolution
1160 (1998),

( b ) Enable effective and continuous international
monitoring in Kosovo by the European Community
Monitoring Mission and diplomatic missions accredited to the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, including access and
complete freedom of movement of such monitors to, from and
within KOSOVO,
unimpeded by government authorities, and
expeditious issuance of appropriate travel documents to
international personnel contributing to the monitoring;

Deeply concerned by the rapid deterioration in the
humanitarian situation throughout Kosovo, alarmed at the
impendinghumanitarian catastrophe as described in the report
of the Secretary-General, and emphasizing the need to prevent
this from happening,

(c) Facilitate, in agreement with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
International Committee of the Red Cross, the safe return of
refugees and displaced persons to their homes, and allow free
and unimpeded access for humanitarian organizations and
supplies to Kosovo;

Deeply concerned also by reports of increasingviolations
of human rights and of international humanitarian law, and
emphasizing the need to ensure that the rights of all inhabitants
of Kosovo are respected,

(d) Make rapid progress to a clear timetable, in the
dialogue referred to in paragraph 3 above with the Kosovo
Albanian community, which was called for in resolution
1160 (1 998), with the aim of agreeing to confidence-building
measures and finding a political solution to the problems of
Kosovo;

Reafirming the objectives of resolution 1160 (1998), in
which the Council expressed support for a peaceful resolution
of the Kosovo problem, which would include an enhanced
status for KOSOVO,
a substantially greater degree of autonomy,
and meaningful self-administration,
ReaJgirming also the commitment of all Member States
to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia,

5. Notes, in this connection, the commitments of the
President of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, in his joint
statement with the President of the Russian Federation of
16 June 1998?

Afirrning that the deterioration of the situation in
KOSOVO,
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, constitutes a threat
to peace and security in the region,

(a) To resolve existing problems by political means on
the basis of equality for all citizens and ethnic communities in
Kosovo;

Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations,

( b ) Not to carry out any repressive actions against the
peaceful population;

1. Demands that all parties, groups and individuals
immediately cease hostilities and maintain a ceasefire in
Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which would
enhance the prospects for a meaningful dialogue between the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
Kosovo Albanian leadership and reduce the risks of a
humanitarian catastrophe;

(c) To provide full freedom of movement for and
ensure that there will be no restrictions on representatives of
foreign States and international institutions accredited to the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia monitoring the situation in
Kosovo;

(d) To ensure full and unimpeded access for
humanitarianorganizations, the International Committeeof the
Red Cross and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, and delivery of humanitarian
supplies;

2. Demands also that the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Kosovo Albanian leadership
take immediate steps to improve the humanitarian situation
and to avert the impending humanitarian catastrophe;

(e) To facilitate the unimpeded return of refugees and
displaced persons under programmes agreed upon with the
Office of the High Commissioner and the International
Committee of the Red Cross, providing State aid for the
reconstruction of destroyed homes;

3. Calls upon the authorities in the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and the Kosovo Albanian leadership to enter
immediately into a meaningful dialoguewithout preconditions
and with international involvement, and to a clear timetable,
14

and calls for the full implementation of these commitments;

6 . Insists that the Kosovo Albanian leadership
condemn all terrorist action, and emphasizes that all elements
in the Kosovo Albanian community should pursue their goals
by peaceful means only;

to consider further action and additional measures to maintain
or restore peace and stability in the region;
17. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

Adopted at the 3930 meeting
by 14 votes to none,
with 1 abstention (China).

7. Recalls the obligations of all States to implement
fully the prohibitions imposed by resolution 1160 (1998);

Decisions
8. Endorses the steps taken to establish effective
On 19 October 1998, the President of the Security
international monitoring of the situation in Kosovo, and in this
connection welcomes the establishment of the KOSOVO Council addressed the following letter to the SecretaryGeneral:52
Diplomatic Observer Mission;
‘‘I have the honour to inform you that your letter
9. Urges States and international organizations
dated
14 October 1998 concerning your intention to send
represented in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to make
an
interdepartmental
mission, headed by Mr. Staffan de
available personnel to fulfil the responsibility of carrying out
has
Mistura,
to
the
Federal
Republic of Y~goslavia’~
effective and continuous international monitoring in Kosovo
been
brought
to
the
attention
of
the
members
of
the
until the objectives of the present resolution and those of
Security Council. They take note of the intention
resolution 1160 (1998) are achieved;
expressed in your letter.”
10. Reminds the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia that it
At its 3937th meeting, on 24 October 1998, the Council
has the primary responsibilityfor the security of all diplomatic
decided
to invite the representatives of Germany, Italy, Poland
personnel accredited to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia as
well as the safety and security of all international and non- and Ukraine to participate, without vote, in the discussion of
governmental humanitarian personnel in the Federal Republic the item entitled:
of Yugoslavia, and calls upon the authorities of the Federal
“Letter dated 1 1 March 1998 fromthe Deputy Permanent
Republic of Yugoslavia and all others concerned in the Federal
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
Republic of Yugoslavia to take all appropriate steps to ensure
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to
that monitoring personnel performing functions under the
the President of the Security Council (S/1998/223)32
present resolution are not subject to the threat or use of force
or interference of any kind;
“Letter dated 27 March 1998 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
11. Requests States to pursue all means consistent with
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
their domestic legislation and relevant international law to
Council (SA 998/272)32
prevent funds collected on their territory being used to
contravene resolution 1160 (1998);
“Report of the Secretary-Generalprepared pursuant
to Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998) and
12. Calls upon Member States and others concerned to
1199 (1998) (S/1998/912)”.24
provide adequate resources for humanitarian assistance in the
region and to respond promptly and generously to the United
Resolution 1203 (1998)
Nations Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal for Humanitarian
of 24 October 1998
Assistance Related to the Kosovo Crisis;
The Security Council,
13, Calls upon the authorities of the Federal Republic
Recalling i t s resolutions 1160 (1998) of 3 1 March 1998
of Yugoslavia, the leaders of the Kosovo Albanian community
and all others concerned to cooperate fidly with the Prosecutor and 1199 (1998) of 23 September 1998, and the importance of
Federal
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in the the peaceful resolution of the problem of KOSOVO,
investigation of possible violations within the jurisdiction of Republic of Yugoslavia,
the Tribunal;
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General
14. Underlines the need for the authorities of the pursuant to resolutions 1160 (1998) ind 1199 (1998), in
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to bring to justice those particular his report of 3 October 1998,
members of the security forces who have been involved in the
Welcoming the agreement signed in Belgrade on
mistreatment of civilians and the deliberate destruction of
16
October
1998 by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
property;
FederalRepublic of Yugoslavia and the Chairman-in-Office of
15 Requests the Secretary-General to provide regular the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
reports to the Council as necessary on his assessment of
compliance with the present resolution by the authoritiesof the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and all elements in the Kosovo ” 5119981967.
Albanian community, including through his regular reports on
5119981966.
compliance with resolution 1160 (1998);
54 OJicial Records o/ the Security Council, I7ijf-third Year,
16. Decides, should the concrete measures demanded in Supplemenifor October, November and December 1998, document
the present resolution and resolution 1160 (1998) not be taken, S/1998/912.
I

’’

15

Reuflrming the commitment of all Member States to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia,

providing for that organization to establish a verification
mission in K O S O V O
including
,~~
the undertaking of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to comply with resolutions
1160 (1998) and 1199 (1998),

Affinnning that the unresolved situation in KOSOVO,
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, constitutes a continuing threat
to peace and security in the region,

Welcoming also the agreement signed in Belgrade on
15 October 1998 by the Chief of General Staff of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Supreme Allied Commander,
Europe, of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, providing
for the establishment of an air verification mission over
Kosovo,S6complementing the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Verification Mission in KOSOVO,

Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations,
1. Endorses and supports the agreements signed in
Belgrade on 16 October 1998 between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Eur~pe,~’
and on 15 October 1998 between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization,s6concerning the verification of compliance by
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and all others concerned
in Kosovo with the requirements of its resolution 1199 (1998),
and demands the full and prompt implementation of those
agreements by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia;

Welcomingfurther the decision of the Permanent Council
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe of
15 October 1998,’’
Welcoming the decision of the Secretary-Generalto send
a mission to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to establish a
first-hand capacity to assess developments on the ground in
KOSOVO,

2, Notes the endorsement by the Government of Serbia
of the accord reached by the President of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and the United States Special
and the
public commitment of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
complete negotiations on a framework for a political
settlement by 2 November 1998, and calls for the full
implementation of these commitments;

ReafJming that, under the Charter of the UnitedNations,
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security is conferred on the Security Council,
Recalling the objectives of resolution 1160 (1998), in
which the Council expressed support for a peaceful resolution
of the Kosovo problem, which would include an enhanced
status for KOSOVO,
a substantially greater degree of autonomy
and meaningful self-administration,

3. Demands that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
comply fully and swiftly with resolutions 1160 (1998) and
1199 (1998) and cooperate fully with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Verification Mission in
Kosovo and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization Air
Verification Mission over Kosovo according to the terms of
the agreements referred to in paragraph 1 above;

Condemning all acts of violence by any party, as well as
terrorism in pursuit of political goals by any group or
individual, and all external support for such activities in
KOSOVO,
including the supply of arms and training for terrorist
activities in KOSOVO,
and expressing concern at the reports of
continuing violations of the prohibitions imposed by resolution
1160 (1998),

4. Demands also that the Kosovo Albanian leadership
and all other elements of the Rosovo Albanian community
comply fully and swiftly with resolutions 1160 (1998) and
1199 (1998) and cooperate fully with the Verification Mission
in Kosovo;

Deep& concerned at the recent closure by the authorities
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia of independent media
outlets in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and
emphasizing the need for these to be allowed freely to resume
their operations,

5. Stresses the urgent need for the authorities in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Kosovo Albanian
leadership to enter immediately into a meaningful dialogue
without preconditions and with international involvement, and
a clear timetable, leading to an end of the crisis and to a
negotiated political solution to the issue of Kosovo;

Deeply alarmed and concerned at the continuing grave
humanitarian situation throughout Kosovo and the impending
humanitarian catastrophe, and re-emphasizing the need to
prevent this from happening,
Stressing the importance of proper coordination of
humanitarian initiatives undertaken by States, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and international
organizations in KOSOVO,

6 . Demunds that the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, the Kosovo Albanian leadership and
all others concerned respect the fieedom of movement of the
Verification Mission in Kosovo and other international
personnel;

Emphasizing the need to ensure the safety and security of
members of the Verification Mission in Kosovo and the Air
Verification Mission over KOSOVO,

7. Urges States and international organizations to
make available personnel to the Verification Mission in
Kosovo;

” Ibid., document S/1998/978,annex.
56

57

Ibid., document S/1998/991, annex.
Ibid., document 5/1998/959,annex.

Ibid., document ,5119981953,annex.
16

8. Reminds the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia that it
has the primary responsibility for the safety and security of all
diplomatic personnel accredited to the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, including members of the Verification Mission in
KOSOVO,
as well as the safety and security of all international
and non-governmental humanitarian personnel in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, and calls upon the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and all others concerned
throughout the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, including the
Kosovo Albanian leadership, to take all appropriate steps to
ensure that personnel performing functions under the present
resolution and the agreements referred to in paragraph 1 above
are not subject to the threat or use of force or interference of
any kind;
9. Welcomes in this context the commitment of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to guarantee the safety and
security of the Verification Missions as contained in the
agreements referred to in paragraph 1 above, notes that, to this
end, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
is considering arrangements to be implemented in cooperation
with other organizations, and a f f m s that, in the event of an
emergency, action may be needed to ensure their safety and
freedom of movement as envisaged in the agreements referred
to in paragraph 1 above;

12. Reaffirms the right of all refugees and displaced
persons to return to their homes in safety, and underlines the
responsibility of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia for
creating the conditions which allow them to do so;
13. Urges Member States and others concerned to
provide adequate resources for humanitarian assistance in the
region and to respond promptly and generously to the United
Nations Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal for Humanitarian
Assistance Related to the Kosovo Crisis;
14. Culls for prompt and complete investigation,
including international supervision and participation, of all
atrocities committed against civilians and full cooperation with
the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 199 1, including compliance with its orders,
requests for information and investigations;
15. Decides that the prohibitions irnposedby paragraph
8 of resolution 1160 (1998) shall not apply to relevant
equipment for the sole use of the Verification Missions in
accordance with the agreements referred to in paragraph 1
above;

means only;

17. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

11. Demands immediate action from the authorities of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Kosovo Albanian
leadership to cooperate with international efforts to improve
the humanitarian situation and to avert the impending
humanitarian catastrophe;

Adopted at the 3937th meeting
by 13 votes to none, with 2 abstentions
(China and Russian Federation).

International Tribunalfor the Prosecution of Persons Responsiblefor Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
[Resolutions or decisions on this question were also adopted by the Security Council in 1996.1

Decision

Having considered the letter dated 5 May 1998 from the
Secretary-General to the President of the Security Co~ncil,’~

At its 3878th meeting. on 13 May 1998. the Securitv
Council considered the ite& entitled %ternational Tribunal
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia”.

Convinced of the need to increase the number of judges
and Trial Chambers, in order to enable the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991 (“the International Tribunal”) to try without delay the
large number of accused awaiting trial,

Resolution 1166 1998)
of 13 May 193! 8

The Security Council,

Noting the significant progress being made in improving
the procedures of the International Tribunal, and convinced of
the need for its organs to continue their efforts to further such
progress,

Reafirming its resolution 827 (1993) of 25 May 1993,
Remaining convinced that the prosecution of persons
responsible for serious violations of international humanitarian
law committed in the territory of the former Yugoslavia
contributes to the restoration and maintenance of peace in the
former Yugoslavia,

Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations,

’’ Ibid., Supplement for April, May and. June i998, document
S/1998/376.
17

1. Decides to establish a third Trial Chamber of the
International Tribunal, and to this end decides to amend
articles 11, 12 and 13 of the statute of the Tribunal,60replacing
those articles with the text set out in the annex to the present
resolution;

(a) Three judges shall serve in each of the Trial
Chambers;

2. Decides that three additionaljudges shall be elected
as soon as possible to serve in the additional Trial Chamber,
and decides also, without prejudice to pnagraph 4 of article 13
of the statute of the International Tribunal, that once elected
they shall serve until the date of expiry of the terms of office
of the existing judges, and that for the purpose of that election
the Security Council shall, notwithstanding paragraph 2 (c) of
article 13 of the statute, establish a list fromthe nominations
received of no less than six and no more than nine candidates;

Qualifications arid election ofjudges

(b) Five judges shall serve in the Appeals Chamber.
Article I 3

1. The judges shall be persons of high moral character,
impartiality and integrity who possess the qualifications
required in their respective COilntrieS for appointment to the
highest judicial offices. In the overall composition of the
Chambers due account shall be taken of the experience ofthe
judges in criminal law, international law, including
international humanitarian law and human rights law.

3. Urges all States to cooperate fully with the
International Tribunal and its organs in accordance with their
obligations under resolution 827 (1993) and the statute of the
Tribunal, and welcomes the cooperation already extended to
the Tribunal in the fblfilment of its mandate;

2. The judges of the International Tribunal shall be elected
by the General Assembly from a list submitted by the Security
Council, in the following manner:
(a) The Secretary-General shall invite nominations for
judges of the International Tribunal from States Members of
the United Nations and nonmember States maintaining
permanent observer missions at United Nations Headquarters;

4. Requests the Secretary-General to make practical
arrangementsfor the electionsmentioned in paragraph 2 above
and for enhancing the effective fimctioning of the International
Tribunal, including the timely provision of personnel and
facilities, in particular for the third Trial Chamber and related
offices of the Prosecutor, and fbrther requests him to keep the
Security Council closely informed of progress in this regard;
5.

(b) Within sixty days of the date of the invitation of the
Secretary-General, each State may nominate up to two
candidates meeting the qualifications set out in paragraph 1
above, no two of whom shall be of the same nationality;
(c) The Secretary-General shall forward the
nominations received to the Security Council. From the
nominations received the Security Council shall establish a list
of no less than twenty-eight and no more than forty-two
candidates, taking due account of the adequate representation
of the principal legal systems of the world;

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

Adopted unanimously at the
3878th meeting.

ANNEX

(d) The President of the Security Council shall transmit
the list of candidates to the President of the General Assembly,
From that list the General Assembly shall elect the fourteen
judges of the International Tribunal. The candidates who
receive an absolute majority of the votes of the States
Members of the United Nations and of the nonmember States
maintaining permanent observer missions at United Nations
Headquarters shall be declared elected. Should two candidates
of the same nationality obtain the required majority vote, the
one who received the higher number of votes shall be
considered elected,

Amendments to the statute of the International Tribunal
Replace articles 11, 12 and 13 by the following:
Article 1I
Organization of the International Tribunal

The International Tribunal shall consist of the following
organs:
(a) The Chambers, comprising three Trial Chambers
and an Appeals Chamber;

3. In the event of a vacancy in the Chambers, after
consultation with the Presidents of the Security Council and of
the General Assembly, the Secretary-General shall appoint a
person meeting the qualifications ofparagraph 1 above, for thc
remainder of the term of office concerned.

(b) The Prosecutor; and
(c) A Registry, servicing both the Chambers and the
Prosecutor.

Article 12

4. The judges shall be elected for a term of four years. The
terms and conditions of service shall be those of the Judges of
the International Court of Justice, They shall be eligible for reelection.

Composition of the Chambers

The Chambers shall be composed of fourteen
independent judges, no two of whom may be nationals of the
same State, who shall serve as follows:

Decision

At its 3919th meeting, on 27 August 1998, the Security
Council considered the item entitled
60

Ibid., Forty-eighth Year, SuppleinentforApril, May andJune 1993,

document S/25704, annex.
18

“Letter dated 6 November 1998 from the President
of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious VioIations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1998/1040)”.24

“International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia
“Establishment of the list of candidates forjudges”.
Resolution 1191 (1998)
of 27 August 1998

Resolution 1207 (1998)
of 17 November 1998

The Security Council,

The Security Council,

Recalling its resolutions 808 (1993) of 22 February 1993,
827 (1993) of25 May 1993 and 1166 (1998) of 13 May 1998,

Recalling all its previous relevant resolutions concerning
the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia, in particular resolution
827 (1993) of 25 May 1993,

Having decided to consider the nominationsforjudges of
the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991 received by the Secretary-General by
4 August 1998,

Recalling also the statement by its President of 8 May
1996,6’
Recallingfurther the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Werzegovina and the annexes thereto,” in
particular article IX of the Agreement and article X of annex
1-A,

Forwards the following nominations to the General
Assembly in accordance with paragraph 2 (d) of article 13 of
the statute of the International Tribunal:

Havin considered the letters dated 8 September,62
22 October85 and 6 November 1998“ from the President of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991 addressed to the President of the
Security Council,

Mr. Mohamed Bennouna (Morocco)
Mr. David Anthony Hunt Australia)
Mr. Per-Johan Lindholm (f;inland)
Mr. Hug0 Anibal Llanos Mansilla (Chile)
Mr. Patrick Robinson Jamaica)
Mr. Jan Skupinski (POand)
Mr. S . W. B. Vadu odapitiya Sri Lanka)
Mr. Luis Valencia-%odri uez Ecuador)
Mr, Peter H. Wilkitzki (dermany)

i

t

Deploring the continued failure of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia to cooperate fully with the International
Tribunal, as described in those letters,

Adopted unanimously at the
3919th meeting.

Reaflrming the commitment of all Meniber States to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia,

Decision

At its 3944th meeting, on 17 November 1998, the
Security Council decided to invite the representatives of
Gemany and Italy to participate, without vote, in the
discussion of the item entitled:

Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations,

1. Reiterates its decision that all States shall cooperate
fully with the International Tribunal and its organs in
accordance with resolution 827 (1993) and the statute of the
Tribunal, including the obligation of States to comply with
requests for assistance or orders issued by a Trial Chamber
under article 29 of the statute, to execute arrest warrants
transmitted to them by the Tribunal, and to comply with its
requests for information and investigations;

“International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia
“Letter dated 8 September 1998 from the President
of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S11998/839)4s

2. Calls again upon the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, and all other States which have not already done
so, to take any measures necessary under their domestic law to
implement the provisions of resolution 827 (1993) and the

“Letter dated 22 October 1998 from the President
of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(Sll 998/990)24

SIPRSTII 996123.
Q//icial Records of the Security Council, Pi%-ihird Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1998, document
6’

S/1998/839.

‘’ Ibid., Supplement for October, November and December 1998,
document Sl19981990.
Ibid., document S/1998/1040.
19

community and all others concerned to cooperate fully with
the Prosecutor in the investigation of all possible violations
within the jurisdiction of the International Tribunal;

statute of the International Tribunal, and affirms that a State
may not invoke provisions of its domestic law as justification
for its failure to perform binding obligations under
international law;

5. Requests the President o f the Tribunal to keep the
Council informed about the implementation of the present
resolution for the further consideration of the Council;

3. Condemns the failure to date of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to execute the arrest warrants issued
by the International Tribunal against the three individuals
referred to in the letter dated 8 September 1998,62and demands
the immediate and unconditional execution of those arrest
warrants, including the transfer to the custody of the Tribunal
of those individuals;

6,

Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Adopted at the 3944th meeting
by 14 votes to none,
with 1 abstention (China).

4. Reiterates itscall upon the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, the leaders of the Kosovo Albanian

The situation in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
[Resolutions or decisions on this question were also adopted by the Council in 1995, 1996 and 1997.1

Commending the role of the Force in monitoring the
border areas and reporting to the Secretary-General on any
developments which could pose a threat to the former
YugoslavRepublic of Macedonia and by its presence deterring
threats and preventing clashes, including monitoring and
reporting on illicit arms flows within its area of responsibility,

Decision
At its 391 Ith meeting, on 21 July 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representatives of Austria,
Germany, Italy and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedoniato participate, without vote, in the discussion of the
item entitled:

Reiteratin its call on the Governments of the former
Yugoslav Repuhc of Macedonia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to implement in full their agreement of 8 April
1996,6sin particular regarding the demarcation of their mutual
border,

“The situation in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia
“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Preventive Deployment Force (S/1998/454
and C0rr.l)”

Taking note o f the letters dated 15 May66and 9 July
199867from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to the Secretary-General,
requesting the extension of the mandate of the Force and
endorsing the option of an increase in its troop strength,

“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Preventive Deployment Force
(S/ 1998f644)”.45

4

Resolution 1186 1998)
of21 July19 8

Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General
of I June6 and 14 July 199869and the recommendations
contained therein,

The Security Council,

Reafirming its commitment to the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia,

Recalling all its relevant resolutions concerning the
conflicts in the former Yugoslavia, in particular resolution
795 (1992) of 11 December 1992, in which it addressed
possible developmentswhich could undermine confidence and
stability in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia or
threaten its territory, and resolution 1142 (1997) of
4 December 1997,

1. Decides to authorize an increase in the troop
strength of the United Nations Preventive Deployment Force
up to 1,050 and to extend the current mandate of the Force for
a period of six months until 28 February 1999, under which
the Force would continue by its presence to deter threats and
prevent clashes, to monitor the border areas, and to report to
the Secretary-General any developments which could pose a

Recalling also its resolutions 1101 (1997) of 28 March
1997 and 1114 (1997) of 19 June 1997, in which it expressed
its concern over the situation in Albania, and its resolution
1160 (1998) of 31 March 1998, in which it decided that all
States shall prevent the sale or supply to the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, including Kosovo, of arms and related matdriel
of all types and shall prevent arming and training for terrorist
activities there,

65

Ibid., Fifty-jlrst Year, Supplement for April, May and June 1996,
document S/1996/291, annex.
66 Ibid., Fifty-third Year, Supplement for April, May and June 1998,
document S/1998/401, annex.
67
Ibid., Supplementf o r July, August and September 1998, document
S/1998/627, annex.
Ibid., Supplement for April, May and June 1998, document

Reiterating its appreciation for the important role played
by the United Nations Preventive Deployment Force in
contributing to the maintenance of peace and stability, and
paying tribute to its personnel in the performance of their
mandate,

S/I998/454.
69

Ibid., SupplemeniforJuly, August and September 1998, document

S119981644.
20

appoint Brigadier General Ove Johnny Strarnberg, of
Norway, as the Force Commander of the United Nations
Preventive Deployment Force” has been brought to the
attention of the members of the Security Council. They
take note of the intention expressed in your letter.”

threat to the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
including the tasks of monitoring and reporting on illicit arms
flows and other activities that are prohibited under resolution
1160 (1998);
2. Expresses its intention to consider further the
recommendations of the Secretary-General in his report of
14 July 1998;
3.

On 18 December 1998, the President of the Security
Council addressed the following letter to the SecretaryGeneral:”

Decides to remain seized of the matter.

“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 16 December 1998 concerning your intention to
appoint Mr. Fernando Valenzuela Marzo as yow Special
Representative for the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia73has been brought to the attention of the
members of the Security Council. They take note of the
intention expressed in your letter.”

Adopted unanimously at the
3911th meeting.

Decisions
On 15 September 1998, the President of the Security
Council addressed the following letter to the SecretaryGenerak7’
“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 9 September 1998 concerning your intention to

70

S11998/853.
S/1998/1192.
73 S/1998/1191,

S/1998/854.

7‘

72

THE SITUATION BETWEEN IRAQ AND KUWAIT
[Resolutionsor decisions on this question have been udopted by the Security Coumcil every year since 1990.1

that this failure is unacceptable and a clear violation of
the relevant resolutions.

Decisions
At its 3848th meeting, on 14 January 1998, the Security
Council considered the item entitled:

“The Council recalls the statement by its President
of29 October 199776in which it condemned the decision
of the Government of Iraq to try to dictate the terms of its
compliance with its obligations to cooperate with the
Special Commission.

“The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
“Letter dated 12 January 1998 from the Executive
Chairman of the Special Commission established
by the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
9 (b) (i) of Security Council resolution 687 (1991)
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(U1998/27)74

“The Council reiterates its demand, contained in
resolution 1137 (1997), that Iraq cooperate fully and
immediately and without conditions or restrictions with
the Special Commission in accordance with the relevant
resolutions, which constitute the governing standard of
Iraqi compliance.

“Letter dated 13 January 1998 from the Permanent
Rebresentative of Iraa to the United Nations
adhressed to the P r e s i d h of the Security Council
(S/1998/28)”.74

“The Council expresses its full support for the
Special Commission and its Executive Chairman,
including in his forthcoming travel to Iraq to continue his
discussions with officials of the Government of Iraq
aimed at the full implementation of the relevant
resolutions and at increasing the effectiveness and
efficiency of the operations of the Special Commission to
this end. In this context, the Council recalls the
statements by its President of 3 December7’ and
22 December 1997’* and encourages the efforts reported
to it by the Executive Chairman.

At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:7s
“The Security Council deplores the statement of
the Iraqi official spokesman of 12 January 1998 and the
subsequent failure of Iraq to hlfil its obligations to
provide the Special Commission with full, unconditional
and immediate access to all sites, The Council determines

’‘ S/PRST/1997/49.
’’ SIPRST/1997/54.

14

See Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fpy-third Year,
Supplement for January, February and March 1998.
7s S/PRST/1998/1

70

I

21

S/PRST/I997/56.

Determined to avoid any further deterioration of the
current humanitarian situation,

<‘The Council requests a full briefing by the
Executive Chairman on these discussions as soon as
possible after they have taken place, so that it can decide
as necessary on an appropriate response on the basis of
the relevant resolutions.

Reaffirming the commitment of all Member States to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq,
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations,

“The Council will remain seized of the matter.”
At its 3855thmeeting, on20February 1998, the Security
Council considered the item entitled

1. Decides that the provisions of resolution
986 (1995), except those contained in paragraphs 4,11 and 12,
shall remain in force for a new period of 180 days beginning
at 0001 hours eastern standard time, on the day after the
President of the Security Council has informed the members of
the Council that he has received the report of the SecretaryGeneral requested in paragraph 5 below, on which date the
provisions of resolution 1143 (1997), if still in force, shall
terminate, except as regards sums already produced pursuant
to that resolution prior to that date;

“The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
“Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 7 of resolution 1143 (1997)
(S/1998/90)74
“Letter dated 30 January 1998 from the Chairman
of the Security Council Committee established by
resolution 661 (1990) concerning the situation
between Iraq and Kuwait addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/1998/92)”.74

2. Decides also that the authorization given to States
by paragraph 1 of resolution 986 (1995) shall permit the
import of petroleum and petroleum products originating in
Iraq, including financial and other essential transactions
directly relating thereto, sufficient to produce, in the 180-day
period referred to in paragraph 1 above, a sum not exceeding
a total of 5.256 billion United States dollars, of which the
amounts recommended by the Secretary-General for the
foodhutrition and health sectors should be allocated on a
priority basis, and of which between 682 million United States
dollars and 788 million United States dollars shall be used for
the purpose referred to in paragraph 8 (b) of resolution
986 (1995), except that if less than 5.256 billionunited States
dollars worth of petroleum or petroleum products is sold
during the 180-day period, particular attention will be paid to
meeting the urgent humanitarian needs in the foodnutrition
and health sectors and the Secretary-General may provide a
proportionately smaller amount for the purpose referred to in
paragraph 8 ( b ) of resolution 986 (1995);

Resolution 1153 (1998)
of 20 February 1998
The Security Council,
Recalling its previous relevant resolutions, in particular
resolutions 986 (1995) of 14 April 1995, 1111 (1997) of
4 June 1997, 1129 (1997) of 12 September 1997 and
1143 (1997) of 4 December 1997,
Convinced of the need as a temporary measure to
continue to provide for the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi
people until the fulfilment by Iraq of the relevant resolutions,
including notably resolution 687 (1991) of 3 April 1991,
allows the Council to take further action with regard to the
prohibitions referred to in resolution 661 (1990) of 6 August
1990, in accordance with the provisions of those resolutions,
and emphasizing the temporary nature of the distribution plan
envisaged by the present resolution,

3, Directs the Committee established by resolution
661 (1990) to authorize, on the basis of specific requests,
reasonable expenses related to the Hajj, to be met by funds in
the escrow account;

Convinced also of the need for equitable distribution of
humanitarian supplies to all segments of the Iraqi population
throughout the country,

4. Requests the Secretary-General to take the actions
necessary to ensure the effective and efficient implementation
of the present resolution and, in particular, to enhance the
United Nations observation process in Iraq in such a way as to
provide the required assurance to the Council of the equitable
distribution of the goods produced in accordance with the
present resolution and that all supplies authorized for
procurement, including dual-usage items and spare parts, are
utilized for the purpose for which they have been authorized;

Welcomingthereport submittedby the Secretary-General
on 1 February 1998 in accordance with paragraph 7 of
resolution 1143 (1997)79and his recommendations, as well as
the report submitted on 30 January 1998 by the Committee
established by resolution 661 (1990)doin accordance with
paragraph 9 of resolution 1143 (1997),
Noting that the Government of Iraq did not cooperate
Mly in the preparation of the report of the Secretary-General,

5. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Council when he has entered into any necessary arrangements
or agreements and approved a distribution plan, submitted by
the Government of Iraq, which includes a description of the
goods to be purchased and effectively guarantees their
equitable distribution,in accordance with his recommendations

Noting with concern that, despite the ongoing
implementation of resolutions 986 (1995), 1111 (1997) and
1143 (1997), the population of Iraq continues to face a very
serious nutritional and health situation,
79 O ! c i a l Records cf the Security Council, Fijly-third Year,
Supplement for January, Februav and March 1998, document

Si1998f90.

Ibid., document S/1998/92, annex.

22

&at the plan should be ongoing and should reflect the relative
priorities of humanitarian supplies as well as their
interrelationships within the context of projects or activities,
required delivery dates, preferred points of entry and targeted
objectives to be achieved;“
6. Urges all States and, in particular, the Government
of Iraq, to provide their full cooperation in the effective
implementation of the present resolution;
7. Appeals to all States to cooperate in the timely
submission of applications and the expeditious issue of export
licences, facilitating the transit of humanitarian supplies
authorized by the Committee established by resolution
661 (1990), and taking all other appropriate measures within
their competence in order to ensure that urgently required
humanitarian supplies reach the Iraqi people as rapidly as
possible;

8. Stresses the need to ensure respect for the security
and safety of all persons directly involved in the
implementation of the present resolution in Iraq;
9. Decides to conduct an interim review of the
implementation of the present resolution 90 days after the
entry into force of paragraph 1above and a thorough review of
all aspects of its implementation prior to the end of the
180-day period, upon receipt of the reports referred to in
paragraphs 10 and 14 below, and expresses its intention, prior
to the end of the 180-day period, to consider favourably the
renewal of the provisions of the present resolution as
appropriate, provided that the reports referred to in paragraphs
10 and 14 below indicate that those provisions are being
satisfactorily implemented;

13. Also requests the Secretary-Generalto report to the
Council, if Iraq is unable to export petroleum or petroleum
products sufficient to produce the total sum referred to in
paragraph 2 above and, following consultations with relevant
United Nations agencies and the Iraqi authorities, making
recommendations for the expenditure of the sum expected to
be available, consistent with the distributionplan referred to in
paragraph 5 above;

14. Requests the Committee established by resolution
661 (1990), in coordination with the Secretary-General, to
report to the Council 90 days after the entry into force of
paragraph 1 above, and again prior to the end of the 180-day
period, on the implementation of the arrangements in
paragraphs 1,2,6, 8,9 and 10 of resolution 986 (1995);
15. Also requests the Committee established by
resolution 661 (1990) to implement the measures and take
action on the steps referred to in its report of 30 January
1998,” with regard to the refining and clarifying of its working
procedures, to consider the relevant observations and
recommendations referred to in the report of the SecretqGeneral of 1 February 1998,79in particular with a view to
reducing to the extent possible the delay between the export of
petroleum and petroleum products from Iraq and the supply of
goods to Iraq in accordance with the present resolution, to
report to the Council by 31 March 1998 and thereafter to
continue to review its procedures whenever necessary;

10. Requests the Secretary-Generalto submitaninterim
report to the Council 90 days after the entry into force of
paragraph 1 above, and to submit a full report prior to the end
of the 180-day period, on the basis of observationsby United
Nations personnel in Iraq, and on the basis of consultations
with the Government of Iraq, on whether Iraq has ensured the
equitable distribution of medicine, health supplies, foodstuffs
and materials and supplies for essential civilian needs,
financed in accordance with paragraph 8 (a) of resolution
986 (1995), including in his reports any observations he may
have on the adequacy of the revenues to meet Iraq’s
humanitarian needs and on Iraq’s capacity to export sufficient
quantities of petroleum and petroleum products to produce the
sum referred to in paragraph 2 above;

16, Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the
3855th meeting.

Decision
At its 3858th meeting, on 2 March 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representatives of Argentina,
Egypt, Kuwait, Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan and Peru to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled

11. Takes note of the observation by the SecretaryGeneral that the situation in the electricity sector is extremely
grave, and notes his intention to return to the Council with
proposals for appropriate funding, requests him to submit
urgently to the Council a report for this purpose prepared in
consultation with the Government of Iraq, and further requests
hirn to submit to the Council other studies, drawing upon
United Nations agencies as appropriate and in consultation
with the Government of Iraq, on essential humanitarian needs
in Iraq, including necessary improvements to infrastructure;

“The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
“Letter dated25 February 1998from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1998/166)”.74

Resolution 1154 (1998)
of 2 March 1998

12. Requests the Secretary-Generalto establish a group
of experts to determine, in consultation with the Government
81

of Iraq, whether Iraq is able to export petroleum or petroleum
products sufficient to produce the total sum referred to in
paragraph 2 above and to prepare an independent report on
Iraqi production and transportation capacity and necessary
monitoring, also requests him, in the light of that report, to
make early and appropriate recommendations, and expresses
its readiness to take a decision, on the basis of those
recommendations and the humanitarian objectives of the
present resolution, notwithstanding paragraph 3 of resolution
661 (1990), regarding authorization of the export of the
necessary equipment to enable Iraq to increase the export of
petroleum or petroleum products and to give the appropriate
directions to the Committee established by resolution
66 1 (1990);

The Security Council,
Recalling all its previous relevant resolutions, which
constitute the governing standard of Iraqi compliance,

Ibid., document S/1998/90, sect. IV.
23

Determined to ensure immediate and full compliance by
Iraq without conditions or restrictions with its obligations
under resolution 687 (1991) of 3 April 1991 and the other
relevant resolutions,

At its 3865th meeting, on 25 March 1998, the Council
considered the item entitled:

Reafh-ming the commitment of all Member States to the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of
Iraq, Kuwait and the neighbouring States,

“Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 4 of resolution 1143 (1997) (S/1998/194
and Corn.

“The situation between Iraq and Kuwait

Resolution 1158 1998)
of 25 March 1 98

6

Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Commends the initiative by the Secretary-General
to secure commitments from the Government of Iraq on
compliance with its obligations under the relevant resolutions,
and in this regard endorses the memorandum of understanding
signed by the Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq and the SecretaryGeneral on 23 February 1998,*’and looks forward to its early
and full implementation;

The Security Council,

1.

2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Council as soon as possible with regard to the frnalization of
procedures for presidential sites in consultation with the
Executive Chairman of the Special Commission and the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency;

Welcoming the report submittedby the Secretary-General
on 4 March 1998 in accordance with paragraph 4 of resolution
1143 (1997),” and noting with appreciation, as mentioned in
the report, the commitment expressed by the Iraqi Government
to cooperate with the Secretary-General in the implementation
of resolution 1153 (1998),
Concerned about the resulting humanitarian
consequences for the Iraqi people of the shortfall in the
revenue from the sale of petroleum and petroleum products
during the first 90-day period of implementation of resolution
1143 (1997), due to the delayed resumption in the sale of
petroleum by Iraq and a serious price drop since the adoption
of resolution 1143 (1997),

3, Stresses that complianceby the Government of Iraq
with its obligations, repeated again in the memorandum of
understanding, to accord immediate, unconditional and
unrestricted access to the Special Commission and the
International Atomic Energy Agency in conformity with the
relevant resolutions is necessary for the implementation of
resolution 687 (1991), but that any violation would have
severest consequences for Iraq;

Determined to avoid any further deterioration of the
current humanitarian situation,

4. Reaffirms its intention to act in accordance with the
relevant provisions of resolution 687 (1991) on the duration of
the prohibitions referred to in that resolution, and notes that by
its failure so far to comply with its relevant obligations Iraq
has delayed the moment when the Council can do so;

Reaffirming the commitment of all Member States to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq,
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations,

5. Decides, in accordancewith its responsibility under
the Charter of the United Nations, to remain actively seized of
the matter, in order to ensure implementation of the present
resolution and to secure peace and security in the area.

1. Decides that the provisions of resolution
1143 (1997) shall remain in force, subject to the provisions of
resolution 1153 (1998), except that States are authorized to
permit the import of petroleum and petroleum products
originating in Iraq, including financial and other essential
transactions directly relating thereto, sufficient to produce a
sum not exceeding a total of 1.4 billion United States dollars
within the period of 90 days from 000 1 eastern standard time
on 5 March 1998;

Adopted unanimously at the
3858ih meeting.

Decisions
On 9 March 1998, the President of the Security Council
addressed the following letter to the Se~retary-General:’~

2.

“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 5 March 1998 concerning your decision to appoint
Mr. Prakash Shah as your Special Envoy in Baghdad for
an initial period of six monthsg4has been brought to the
attention of the members of the Security Council. They
agree with the decision contained in your letter and take
note of the information contained therein.”

Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the
3865th meeting.

Decisions
On 3 April 1998, the President of the Security Council
addressed the following letter to the Secretary-General?
85

OJlicial Records of the Security Council, F$y-third Year,
Supplement for January, February and March 1998, document

** Ibid., document S/1998/166.
” S/1998/214.
84

Recalling its previous resolutions, in particular
resolutions 986 (1995) of 14 April 1995, 1111 (1997) of
4 June 1997,1129 (1997) of 12 September 1997,1143 (1997)
of 4 December 1997 and 1153 (1998) of 20 February 1998,

S/1998/194.

S/1998/213.

a6

24

S/1998/296.

“In accordance with the provisions of Security
Council resolution 689 ( 1991) of 9 April 1991 and in the
light of your report of 25 March 1998:’ the members of
the Council have reviewed the question of termination or
continuation of the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait
Observation Mission and its modalities of operation.
“I have the honour to inform you that the members
of the Council concur with your recommendationthat the
Mission be maintained. In accordance with resohtion
689 (1991), they have decided to review the question
once again on 9 October 1998.”

reports of the technical evaluation meetings,9’ indicate
that Iraq has not provided full disclosure in a number of
critical areas, in spite of repeated requests from the
Special Commission, and calls upon Iraq to do so. The
Council encourages the Special Commission to continue
its efforts to improve its effectiveness and efficiency and
looks forward to a technical meeting of the members of
the Council with the Executive Chairman of the Special
Cornmission as a follow-up to the review of sanctions
held by the Council on 27 April 1998.
“The Council notes that the Special Commission
and the International Atomic Energy Agency must
discharge their mandates as defmed under resolutions
687 (1991) of3 April 1991 and707 (1991) of 15 August
1991 with full Iraqi cooperation in all areas, including
fulfilment by Iraq of its obligation to provide fill, fmal
and complete declarations of all aspects of its prohibited
programmes for weapons of mass destruction and
missiles.

At its 3880th meeting, on 14 May 1998, the Council
considered the item entitled:
“The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
“Letter dated 9 April 1998 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1998/312)”
“Note by the Secretary-General(S/1998/332)”.88
At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:89
“The Security Council has reviewed the report of
16 April 1998 from the Executive Chairman of the
Special Commissiongoand the report of 7 April 1998
from the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy A g e n ~ y .The
~ ’ Council welcomes the improved
access provided to the Special Commission and the
Agency by the Government of Iraq following the
signature of the memorandum of understanding by the
Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq and the Secretary-General
on 23 February 199882and the adoption of its resolution
1154 (1998) of 2 March 1998. The Council calls for
continued implementation of the memorandum of
understanding,
“The Council expresses the hope that the agreement
by the Government of Iraq to fulfil its obligation to
provide immediate, unconditional, and unrestricted
access to the Special Commission and the International
Atomic Energy Agency will reflect a new Iraqi spirit
with regard to providing accurate and detailed
information in all areas of concern to the SpeciaI
Commission and the Agency as required by the relevant
resolutions.

“The Council notes that the investigations by the
International Atomic Energy Agency over the past
several years have yielded a technically coherent picture
of Iraq’s clandestine nuclear programme, although Iraq
has not supplied full responses to all ofthe questions and
concerns of the Agency, including those specified in
paragraphs 24 and 27 of the report of the Director
General of 7 April 1998.
“The Council affirms its intention, given the
progress of the InternationalAtomic Energy Agency, and
in line with paragraphs 12 and 13 of resolution
687 (1991), to agree in a resolution that the Agency
dedicate its resources to implementing its ongoing
monitoring and verification activities under resolution
715 (1991) of 11 October 1991, upon receipt of a report
from the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency stating that the necessary technical and
substantive clarifications have been made, including
provision by Iraq of the necessary responses to all
Agency questions and concerns, in order to permit fill
implementation of the ongoing monitoring and
verification plan approved by resolution 715 (1991). In
this regard, the Council requests the Director General to
provide this information in his report due on 11 October
1998 and to submit a status report by the end of July
1998 for possible action at that time.
“The Council acknowledges that the International
Atomic Energy Agency is focushg most of its resources
on the implementationand strengtheningof its activities
under the ongoing monitoring and verification plan. The
Council notes that, within the framework of its ongoing
monitoring and verification responsibilities, the Agency
will continue to exercise its right to investigate any
aspect of Iraq’s clandestine nuclear programme, in
particular through the follow-up of any new information
developed by the Agency or provided by Member States
and to destroy, remove or render harmless any prohibited

“The Council expresses its concern that the most
recent reports of the Special Commission, including the
87

Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fiji-third Year,
Supplement for January, February and March 1998, document

S/1998/269.
88
Ibid.. Supplementfor April, May and June 1998.
89 SIPRST/1998/11.
90
O j f i a l Records of the Security Council, Fgy-thtrd Year,
Supplemen!for April, May and June 1998, document S/1998/332, 92 Ibid., Supplement /’or January, February and March 1998,
annex.
document Sll998/176;and ibid., SupplementforApril, May andJune
Ibid., document S/1998/312.
1998, document S A 998/308.
25

Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations,

items discovered through such investigations falling
under resolutions 687 (1991) and 707 (1991) in
conformity with the Agency’s ongoing monitoring and
verification plan approved by resolution 715 (199 I).’’

1. Authorizes States, subject to the provisions of
paragraph 2 below, to permit, notwithstanding the provisions
of paragraph 3 (c) of resolution 661 (1990), the export to Iraq
of the necessary parts and equipment to enable Iraq to increase
the export of petroleum and petroleurn products, in quantities
sufficient to produce the sum established in paragraph 2 of
resolution 1153 (1 998);

At its 3893rd meeting, on 19 June 1998, the Council
considered the item entitled:
“The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
“Letter dated 15 April 1998 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (SI1 998/330)88

2. Requests the Committee established by resolution
66 1 (1 990), or a panel of experts appointed by that Committee
for this purpose, to approve contracts for the parts and
equipment referred to in paragraph 1 above according to lists
of parts and equipment approved by the Committee for each
individual project;

“Letter dated 29 May 1998 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1998/446)”.88
Resolution 1175 1998)
of 19 June 19 8

b

3. Decides‘that the funds in the escrow account
produced pursuant to resolution 1153 (1998) up to a total of
300 million United States dollars may be used to meet any
reasonable expenses, other than expenses payable in Iraq,
which follow directly from contracts approved in accordance
with paragraph 2 above;

The Security Council,
Recalling its previous relevant resolutions, in particular
resolutions 986 (1995) of 14 April 1995, 1111 (1997) of
4 June 1997,1129 (1997) of 12 September 1997,1143 (1997)
of 4 December 1997, 1153 (1998) of 20 February 1998 and
1158 (1998) of25 March 1998,

4. Decides also that the expenses directly related to
such exports may, until the necessary funds are paid into the
escrow account, and following approval of each contract, be
financed by letters of credit drawn against future oil sales, the
proceeds of which are to be deposited in the escrow account;

Welcoming the letter from the Secretary-General dated
15 April 1998, to which was annexed the summary of the
report of the group of experts established pursuant to
paragraph 12 of resolution 1153 (1998), and noting the
assessment that under existing circumstances Iraq is unable to
export petroleum or petroleum products sufficient to produce
the total sum of 5.256 billion United States dollars referred to
in resolution 1153 (1998),
Welcoming also the letter from the Secretary-General
dated 29 May 199gg4 expressing his approval of the
distribution plan submitted by the Government of Iraq,95

5. Notes that the distribution plan approved by the
Secretary-Generalon 29 May 1998,” or any new distribution
plan agreed on by the Government of Iraq and the SecretaryGeneral, will remain in effect, as required, for each subsequent
periodic renewal of the temporary humanitarian arrangements
for Iraq and that, for this purpose, the plan will be kept under
constant review and amended as necessary through the
agreement of the Secretary-General and the Government of
Iraq and in a manner consistent with resolution 1153 (1998);

Convinced of the need to continue the programme
authorized by resolution 1153 (1998) as a temporary measure
to provide for the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people until
fulfilment by the Government of Iraq of the relevant
resolutions, including notably resolution 687 (199 1) of 3 April
1991, allows the Council to take hrther action with regard to
the prohibitions referred to in resolution 661 (1990) of
6 August 1990, in accordance with the provisions of those
resolutions,

6 . Expresses its gratitude to the Secretary-Generalfor
making available to the Committee established by resolution
661 (1990) a comprehensive review, with comments by the
group of experts established pursuant to paragraph 12 of
resolution 1153 (1998), of the list of parts and equipment
presented by the Government of Iraq, and requests the
Secretary-General,in accordance with the intention expressed
in his letter dated 15 April 1998,93 to provide for the
monitoring of the parts and equipment inside Iraq;

Reaffrming its endorsement, in paragraph 5 of resolution
1 153 (1998), of the recommendations made by the SecretaryGeneral in his report of 1 February 199g7’ concerning an
improved, ongoing and project-based distribution plan,

7.

Decides to remain seized of the matter,
Adopted unanimously at the
3893rd meeting.

Decisions

Reaffirming also the commitment of all Member States
to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq,

On 18August 1998,the President of the Security Council
addressed the following lctter to the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency?

Ibid., Supplement for April, May and June 1998, document
SlI9981330.
Ibid., document 511998l446.
Ibid., annex 11.
93

’‘
’’

%

26

Sl19981768.

“The members of the Council take note with
concern that Iraq’s decision to suspend cooperation with
the Special Commission established by the SecretaryGeneral pursuant to paragraph 9 (b) (i) of Council
resolution 687 (1991) prevents the Special Commission
from carrying out the full range of its activities, as
mandated under the relevant Council resolutions, in
particular resolution 687 (1991), which constitute the
governing standard for Iraqi compliance.

“On behalf of the members of the Security Council,
I am replying to your letter dated 11 August 1998 to the
President of the Security Co~ncil.~’
“The members of the Council take note with
concern that Iraq’s decision to suspend cooperation with
the International Atomic Energy Agency prevents the
Agency from carrying out the full range of its activities,
as mandated under the relevant Council resolutions, in
particular resolution 687 (1991), which constitute the
governing standard for Iraqi compliance.

“The members of the Council, as their initial
reaction, consider that Iraq’s announcement is totally
unacceptable and contravenes the relevant Council
resolutions and the memorandum of understanding
signed by the Secretary-General and the Deputy Prime
Minister of Iraq on 23 February 199KE2The members of
the Council note with regret that the announcement was
made after a period of improved cooperation and
achievement of some tangible results since the signing of
the memorandum of understanding.

“The members of the Council, as their initial
reaction, consider that Iraq’s announcement is totally
unacceptable and contravenes the relevant Council
resolutions and the memorandum of understanding
signed by the Secretary-General and the Deputy Prime
Minister of Iraq on 23 February 1998.82The members of
the Council note with regret that the announcement was
made after a period of improved cooperation and
achievement of some tangible results since the signing of
the memorandum of understanding.

“The members of the Council also take note with
concern of your assessment that under current
circumstances, The Special Commission cannot continue
to provide the Council with the same level of assurances
of Iraq’s compliance with its obligation not to reestablish its proscribed weapons programmes.

“The members of the Council also take note with
concern of your assessment that current circumstances
result in a significantly reduced level of assurance than
would be provided through the full implementation ofthe
ongoing monitoring and verification plan.

“The members of the Council reiterate their full
support for the International Atomic Energy Agency and
the Special Commission in the full implementation of
their mandates. Iraq is obliged under the relevant Council
resolutions to provide the Agency and the Special
Commission with the cooperation necessary for them to
undertake their activities, including inspections. YOU
should continue to report to the Council on all occasions
that you deem necessary.

“The members of the Council reiterate their full
support for the International Atomic Energy Agency and
the Special Commission in the full implementation of
their mandates, Iraq is obliged under the relevant
Security Council resolutions to provide the Agency and
the Special Commission with the cooperation necessary
for them to undertake their activities, including
inspections. You should continue to report to the Council
on all occasions that you deem necessary.

“The members of the Council also express their
support for the continuing efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Envoy. The members of the
Council emphasize the need for an early resumption of
dialogue between the United Special Commission and
Iraq and will be ready to respond favourably to future
progress made in the disarmament process.”

“The members of the Council also express their
support for the continuing efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Envoy, The members of the
Council emphasize the need for an carly resumption of
dialogue between the International Atomic Energy
Agency and Iraq and will be ready to respond favourably
to future progress made in the disarmament process.’’
On 18 August 1998, the President ofthe Security Council
addressed the following letter to the Executive Chairman of the
Special Commission established by the Secretary-General
p k u a n t to paragraph 9 (b) (i)- of Council resolution
687 (199 1):9a

At its 3924th meeting, on 9 September 1998,the Council
considered the item entitled “The situation between Iraq and
Kuwait”.

Resolution 1194 (1998)
of 9 September 1998

“On behalf of the members of the Security Council,
I am replying to your letter dated 12 August 1998 to the
President of the Council,99

The Security Council,
Recalling all its previous relevant resolutions, in
particular resolutions 687 (1991) of 3 April 1991,707 (1991)
of 15 August 1991, 715 (1991) of 11 October 1991,
1060 (1996) of 12 June 1996, 1115 (1997) of 21 June 1997
and 1154 (1998) of 2 March 1998,

97
Oflcial Records of the Security Council, FLJly-third Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1998, document

S/1998/166, annex,
SI199817G9.

Noting the announcement by Iraq on 5 August 1998 that
it had decided to suspend cooperation with the Special
Commission and the International Atomic Energy Agency on

99

Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fvy-third Year,
Supplement for July, August arid September 1998, document
S/1998/lGl.
27

relevant resolutions once Iraq has rescinded its abovementioned decision and demonstrated that it is prepared to
fulfil all its obligations, including, in particular on
disarmament issues, by resuming full cooperation with the
Special Commission and the International Atomic Energy
Agency consistent with the memorandum of understanding, as
endorsed by the Council in resolution 1154 (1998), and, to that
end, welcoming the proposal of the Secretary-General for such
a comprehensive review and inviting the Secretary-General to
provide his views in that regard,

all disarmament activities and restrict ongoing monitoring and
verification activities at declared sites, andor actions
implementing the above decision,
Stressing that the necessary conditions do not exist for
the modification of the measures referred to in section F of
resolution 687 (1991),
Recalling the letter dated 12 August 1998 from the
Executive Chairman of the Special Commission to the
President of the Security
in which the Executive
Chairman reported to the Council that Iraq had halted all
disarmament activities of the Special Commission and placed
limitations on the rights of the Commission to conduct its
monitoring operations,

Reiterating the commitment of all Member States to the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of
Kuwait and Iraq,
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations,

Recalling also the letter dated 11 August 1998 from the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
to the President of the Security Council,” in which the
Director General reported the refbsal by Iraq to cooperate in
any activity involving investigation of its clandestine nuclear
programme and other restrictions of access placed by Iraq on
the ongoing monitoring and verification programme of the
Agency,

1. Condemns the decision by Iraq of 5 August 1998 to
suspend cooperation with the Special Commission and the
International Atomic Energy Agency, which constitutes a
totally unacceptable contravention of its obligations under
resolutions 687 (1991), 707 (1991)) 715 (1991), 1060 (1996),
1115 (1997) and 1154 (1998)) and the memorandum of
understanding signed by the Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq
and the Secretary-General on 23 February 1998;82

Tukingnote ofthe letters dated 18 August 1998 from the
President of the Security Council to the Executive Chairman
of the Special Commission98and the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency,96in which the Council
expressed its full support for those organizations in the
implementation of the full range of their mandated activities,
including inspections,

2. Demands that Iraq rescind its above-mentioned
decision and cooperate fully with the Special Commission and
the International Atomic Energy Agency in accordance with its
obligations under the relevant resolutions and the
memorandum of understanding as well as resume dialogue
with the Special Commission and the Agency immediately;

Recalling the memorandum of understanding signed by
the Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq and the Secretary-General
on 23 February 1998,82in which Iraq reiterated its undertaking
to cooperate fully with the Special Commission and the
International Atomic Energy Agency,

3. Decides not to conduct the review scheduled for
October 1998 provided for in paragraphs 21 and 28 of
resolution 687 (1991), and not to conduct any further such
reviews until Iraq rescinds its above-mentioned decision and
the Special Commission and the International Atomic Energy
Agency report to the Council that they are satisfied that they
have been able to exercise the full range of activities provided
for in their mandates, including inspections;

Noting that the announcement by Iraq of 5 August 1998
followed a period of increased cooperation and some tangible
progress achieved since the signing of the memorandum of
understanding,

4. Reaffirms its full support for the Special
Commission and the International Atomic Energy Agency in
their efforts to ensure the implementation of their mandates
under the relevant resolutions of the Council;

Reiterating its intention to respond favourably to future
progress made in the disarmament process, and reaffirming its
commitment to comprehensive implementation of its
resolutions, in particular resolution 687 (1991),

5. Also reaftirms its full support for the SecretaryGeneral in his efforts to urge Iraq to rescind its abovementioned decision;

Determined to ensure full compliance by Iraq with its
obligations under all previous resolutions, in particular
resolutions 687 (1991), 707 (1991), 715 (1991), 1060 (1996),
1115 (1997) and 1154 (1998), to permit immediate,
unconditional and unrestricted access to the Special
Commission and the International Atomic Energy Agency to
all sites they wish to inspect, and to provide the Special
Commission and the Agency with all the cooperation
necessary for them to fulfil their mandates under those
resolutions,

6. Reaflrms its intention to act in accordance with the
relevant provisions ofresolution 687 (1991) on the duration of
the prohibitions referred to in that resolution, and notes that by
its failure so far to comply with its relevant obligations, Iraq
has delayed the moment when the Council can do so;
7.

Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the
3924th meeting.

Stressing the unacceptability of any attempts by Iraq to
deny access to any sites or to refuse to provide the necessary
cooperation,
Expressing its readiness to consider, in a comprehensive
review, Iraq’s compliance with its obligations under all
28

2 November 1998’04to the President of the Security Council,
which reported to the Council the decision by Iraq and
described the implications of that decision for the work of the
Special Commission, and taking note also of the letter from the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
dated 3 November 1998,”’ which described the implications
of the decision for the work of the Agency were described,

Decisions
On 7 October 1998, the President of the Security Council
addressed the following letter to the Secretary-General: loo
“In accordance with the provisions of Security
council resolution 689 (1991) and in the light of your
report of 24 September 1998,’’’ the members of the
Council have reviewed the question of termination or
continuation of the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait
Observation Mission and its modalities of operation.

Determined to ensure immediate and full compliance by
Iraq without conditions or restrictions with its obligations
under resolution 687 (1991) of 3 April 1991 and the other
relevant resolutions,

“I have the honour to inform you that the members
of the Council concur with your recommendation that the
Mission be maintained. In accordance with resolution
689 (1991), they have decided to review the question
once again by 7 April 1999.”

Recalling that the effective operation of the Special
Commission and the International Atomic Energy Agency is
essential for the implementation of resolution 687 (1991),
Reafiirming its readiness to consider, in a comprehensive
review, Iraq’s compliance with its obligations under all
relevant resolutions once Iraq has rescinded its abovementioned decision and its decision of 5 August 1998 and
demonstrated that it is prepared to fulfil all its obligations,
including in particular on disarmamentissues, by resuming full
cooperationwiththe Special Commission and the International
Atomic Energy Agency consistent with the memorandum of
understanding signed by rhe Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq
and the Secretary-General on 23 February 1998,82endorsed by
the Council in resolution 1154 (1998),

At its 3939thmeeting, on 5 November 1998, the Council
considered the item entitled:
“The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
“Letter dated 31 October 1998 from the Deputy
Executive Chairman of the Special Commission
established by the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 9 (h) (i) of Security Council resolution
687 (1991) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1998/1023) Io2

Reiterating the commitment of all Member States to the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of
Kuwait and Iraq,

“Letter dated 2 November 1998 from the Executive
Chairman of the Special Commission established
by the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
9 (b)(i) of Security Council resolution 687 (199 1)
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1998/1032)102

Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations,

1, Condemns the decision by Iraq of 3 1 October 1998
to cease cooperation with the Special Commissionas a flagrant
violation of resolution 687 (1991) and other relevant
resolutions;

“Letter dated 3 November 1998 fromthe SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1998/1033)”.

1.

Resolution 1205 1998)
of 5 November 998

Recalling all its previous relevant resolutions on the
situation in Iraq, in particular resolution 1154 (1998) of
2 March 1998 and 1194 (1998) of 9 September 1998,

2. Demands that Iraq rescind immediately and
unconditionallythe decision of 3 1October 1998, as well as the
decision of 5 August 1998, to suspend cooperation with the
Special Commission and to maintain restrictions on the work
of the International Atomic Energy Agency, and that Iraq
provide immediate, complete and unconditional cooperation
with the Special Commission and the Agency;

Noting with alarm the decision of Iraq on 31 October
1998 to cease cooperation with the Special Commission, and
its continued restrictions on the work of the International
Atomic Energy Agency,

3 , Reaflrnis its full support for the Special
Commission and the International Atomic Energy Agency in
their efforts to ensure the implementation of their mandates
under the relevant resolutions of the Council;

The Security Council,

4. Expresses itsfullsupport for the Secretary-General
Taking note of the letters from the Deputy Executive
Chairman of the Special Commission dated 3 1 October 1998’03 in his efforts to seek full implementation of the memorandum
and the Executive Chairman of the Special Commission dated of understanding of 23 February 1998;”
5, Reaflrms its intention to act in accordance with the
relevant provisions of resolution 687 (1991) on the duration of
the prohibitionsreferred to in that resolution, and notes that, by

S/1998/925.

IW

101

Uflcial Records of the Security Council, Filty-third Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1998, document
S/1998/889.
102
’03

Ibid., Supp/emeritfor October, November and December 1998.
Ibid., document S/1998/1023.

IM

Ibid., document S/1998/1032.

‘OS Ibid.,

29

document S/1998/1033, annex.

its failure so far to comply with its relevant obligations, Iraq
has delayed the moment when the Council can do so;
6. Decides, in accordance with its primary
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations for the
maintenance of international peace and security, to remain
actively seized of the matter.

Also decides that paragraph 2 of resolution
2.
1153 (1998) shall remain in force and shall apply to the
180-day period referred to in paragraph I above;

Adopted unanimously at the
3939th meeting.

3. Directs the Committee established by resolution
661 (1990) to authorize, on the basis of specific requests,
reasonable expenses related to the Hajj, to be met by funds in
the escrow account;

Decision

At its 3946th meeting, on 24 November 1998, the
Security Council considered the item entitled:

4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
the actions necessary to ensure the effective and efficient
implementation of the present resolution, and to review, by
31 December 1998, the various options to resolve the
difficulties encountered in the fiiancial process, referred to in
the report of the Secretary-General of 19 November 1998,’06
and to continue to enhance as necessary the United Nations
observation process in Iraq in such a way as to provide the
required assurance to the Council that the goods produced in
accordance with the present resolution are distributed equitably
and that all supplies authorized for procurement, including
dual usage items and spare parts, are utilized for the purpose
for which they have been authorized;

“The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
“Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 10 of SecurivozCouncil resolution
1153 (1998) (S/1998/1100)
“Letter dated 20 November 1998 from the
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
establishedbyresolution 661 (1990) concerning the
situation between Iraq and Kuwait addressed to the
P r e s i d e n t o f the S e c u r i t y Council
(S/ 1998/1104)”.’02

5. Decides to conduct a thorough review of all aspects
of the implementation of the present resolution 90 days after
the entry into force of paragraph I above and again prior to the
end of the 180-day period, upon receipt of the reports referred
to in paragraphs 6 and 10 below, and expresses its intention,
prior to the end of the 180-day period, to consider favourably
renewal of the provisions of the present resolution as
appropriate, provided that the said reports indicate that those
provisions are being satisfactorily implemented;

Resolution 1210 (1998)
of24 November 1998
The Security Council,
Recalling its previous relevant resolutions, in particular
resolutions 986 (1995) of 14 April 1995, 1111 (1997) of
4 June 1997,1129 (1997) of 12 September 1997,1143 (1997)
of 4 December 1997, 1153 (1998) of 20 February 1998 and
1175 (1998) of 19 June 1998,

6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Council 90 days after the date of entry into force of paragraph
1 above, and again prior to the end of the 180-day period, on
the basis of observations of United Nations personnel in Iraq,
and of consultations with the Government of Iraq, on whether
Iraq has ensured the equitable distribution of medicine, health
supplies, foodstuffs, and materials and supplies for essential
civilian needs, financed in accordance with paragraph 8 (a) of
resolution 986 (1995), including in his reports any
observations he may have on the adequacy of the revenues to
meet Iraq’s humanitarian needs, and on Iraq’s capacity to
export sufficient quantities of petroleum and petroleum
products to produce the sum referred to in paragraph 2 of
resolution 1153 (1998);

Convinced of the need as a temporary measure to
continue to provide for the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi
people until the fulfilment by the Government of Iraq of the
relevant resolutions, including notably resolution 687 ( 1991)
of 3 April 1991, allows the Council to take hrther action with
regard to the prohibitions referred to in resolution 661 (1990)
of 6 August 1990, in accordance with the provisions of those
resolutions,
Convinced also of the need for equitable distribution of
humanitarian supplies to all segments of the Iraqi population
throughout the country,
Welcomingthe positive impact of the relevant resolutions
on the humanitarian situation in Iraq, as described in the report
of the Secretary-General of 19 November 1998,’06

7 . Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Council if Iraq is unable to export petroleum and petroleum
products sufficient to produce the total sum provided for by
paragraph 2 above and, following consultations with relevant
United Nations agencies and the Iraqi authorities, make
recommendations for the expenditure of the sum expected to
be available, consistent with the priorities established in
paragraph 2 ofresolution 1153 (1998) and with the distribution
plan referred to in paragraph 5 of resolution 1175 (1998);

Determined to improve the humanitarian situation in Iraq,
Reuflrming the commitment of all Member States to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq,
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations,
~~

‘06

1. Decides that the provisions of resolution
986 (1995), except those contained in paragraphs 4 , l l and 12,
shall remain in force for a new period of 180 days beginning
at 0001 hours eastern standard time on 26 November 1998;

Ibid., document 5/1998/1100.

30

8. Decides that paragraphs 1 , 2 , 3 and 4 of resolution
1175 (1998) shall remain in force and shall apply to the new
180-day period referred to in paragraph 1 above;

their competence in order to ensure that urgently required
humanitarian supplies reach the Iraqi people as rapidly as
possible;

9. Requests the Secretary-General,in consultation with
the Government of Iraq, to submit to the Council, by
31 December 1998, a detailed list of parts and equipment
necessary for the purpose described in paragraph 1 of
resolution 1175 (1998);

13, Stresses the need to continue to ensure respect for
the security and safety of all persons directly involved in the
implementation of the present resolution in Iraq;

10. Requests the Cbrnmittee established by resolution
661 (1990), in close coordination with the Secretary-General,
to report to the Council 90 days after the entry into force of
paragraph 1 above and again prior to the end of the 180-day
period on the implementation of the arrangements in
paragraphs 1,2, 6, 8 , 9 and 10 of resolution 986 (1995);

Adopted unanimously at the
3946th meeting.

11. Urges all States, and in particular the Government
of Iraq, to provide their full cooperation in the effective
implementation of the present resolution;

14. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

Decision
At its 3955th meeting, on 16 December 1998, the
Security Council decided to invite the representative of Iraq to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled:
“The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
“Letter dated 15 December 1998 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1998/1172)”.’02

12. Appeals to all States to continue to cooperate in the
timely submission of applications and the expeditious issue of
export licences, facilitating the transit of humanitariansupplies
authorized by the Committee established by resolution
661 (1990), and to take all other appropriate measures within

THE SITUATION CONCERNING WESTERN SAHARA
[Resolutions or decisions on this question were also adopted by the Security Council in 1975, 1988 and 1990 to 1997,]

Decision

Having considered the report of the Secretary-Generalof
13 November 1997,“’ which contains a detailed plan, a
timetable and financial implications for the increase in the
strength of the Mission,

At its 3849th meeting, on 26 January 1998, the Security
Council considered the item entitled:

Welcoming the letter dated 12 December 1997 from the
Secretary-General to the President of the Security C o ~ n c i l , ” ~
which, inter alia, records the resumption of the identification
of eligible voters in accordance with the settlement pIan”’ and
the agreements reached between the parties for its
implementation, T3d the report of the Secretary-General of
15 January 1998, which, inter aka, records progress made
since the resumption of the identification process,

“The situation concerning Western Sahara
“Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
concerning Western Sahara (S/1998/35)”.‘a7
Resolution 1148 (1998)
of 26 January 1998
The Security Council,

Welcoming also the appointment of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Western Sahara,

Recalling all its previous resolutions on the question of
Western Sahara, in particular resolution 1133 (1997) of
20 October 1997 in which it decided to extend the mandate of
the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara until 20 April 1998 and to increase its size in
accordance with the recommendation ofthe Secretary-General
contained in his report of 24 September 1997,”’

‘09 Ibid., Supplement for October, November and December 1997,
documents S119911882 and Add. 1 .
‘Io Ibid., document Sl19971974.
I ” Ibid., Forty-Jjlh Year,Supplementfor April, May and June 1990,
document Sl21360; and ibid., Forty-sixth Year,SuppleinentforApril,
May and June 1991, document S122464.
‘I2 Ibid., Fwy-third Year, Supplement for January, February and
March 1998, document Sl1998135.

Io7 See O’cial
Records ofthe Security Council, Fgy-third Year,
Supplementfor January, February and March 1998.
108
Ibid., Fi&-second Year, Supplement for July, August and
September I997, documents S/1997/742 and Add. I .

31

I. Approves the deployment of the en ineering unit
required for demining activities and of t%e additional
administrative staff required to support the deployment of
military personnel atproposed in annex I1 to the report of the
Secretary-General ;

Reiterating also its commitment to the holding without
further delay of a free, fair and impartial referendum for the
self-determination of the people of Western Sahara in
accordance with the settlement plan, which has been accepted
by the two parties,

2. Expresses its intention to consider positively the
request for the remaining additional military and civilian
police assets for the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara as proposed in annex I1 to the
report of the Secretary-General, as soon as the SecretaryGeneral reports that the identification process has reached a
stage which makes the deployment of these assets essential;

Welcoming the report of the Secretary-General of
13 April 1998,’15 and supporting the observations and
recommendations contained therein,

1. Decides to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara until
20 July 1998, in order that the Mission may proceed with its
identification tasks, with the aim of completing the process;

3. Calls upon both parties to cooperate with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and to
cooperate further with the Identification Commission
established pursuant to the settlement plan”’ in order that the
identification process can be completed in a timely fashion in
accordance with the settlement plan and the agreements
reached between the parties for its implementation;

2. Calls upon the parties to cooperate constructively
with the United Nations, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Identification Commission
established pursuant to the settlement plan”’ in order to
complete the identification- of-voters phase of the settlement
plan and the agreements reached for its implementation;

3. Notes the continuing deployment ofthe engineering
unit required for demining activities and of the administrative
staff required to support the deployment of military personnel
as proposed in annex I1 to the report of the Secretary-General
of 13 November 1997,”’ as further described in the
recommendations of the report of the Secretary-General of
13 April 1998;’15

4. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Council
fully informed of further developments in the implementation
of the settlement plan;
5.

Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Adopted unanintously at the
3849th meeting.

4. Expresses again its intention to consider positively
the request for the remaining additional military and police
assets for the Mission as proposed in annex 11to the report of
the Secretary-General of 13 November 1997, as soon as the
Secretary-General reports that the identification process has
reached a stage which makes the deployment of these assets
essential;

Decision
At its 3873rd meeting, on 17 April 1998, the Security
Council considered the item entitled:
“The situation concerning Western Sahara
“Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
concerning Western Sahara (S/1998/3 16)”.’14

5. Calls upon the Governments of Morocco, Algeria
and Mauritania to conclude respective status-of-forces
agreements with the Secretary-General, and recalls that
pending the conclusion of such agreements, the model statusof-forces agreement dated 9 October 1990,’I6as provided for
in General Assembly resolution 52/12 B of 19 December 1997,
should apply provisionally;

Resolution 1163 (1998)
of 17 April 1998

The Security Council,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on the question of
Western Sahara,

6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Council every thirty days from the date of extension of the
mandate of the Mission on the progress of the implementation
of the settlement plan and the agreements reached between the
parties, and to keep the Council regularly informed of all
significant developments in the interim period, and, as
appropriate, on the continuing viability of the mandate of the
Mission;

ReafJirming itsfull support for the Secretary-General,his
Personal Envoy, his Special Representative and the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara in the
implementation of the settlement plan’ I ’ and the agreements
reached by the two parties for its implementation, and recalling
that under these agreements the responsibility for
implementing the identification process lies with the
Identification Commission,

7.

Decides to remain seized of the matter.

Reiterating its commitment to assist the parties to achieve
a just and lasting solution to the question of Western Sahara,

Adopted unanimously at the
3873rd meeting.

Ibid., F f - s e c o n d Year, Supplement f i r October, November and
December 1997, document Sl19971882.
Ibid., Ffi-third Year, Supplementfor April, May and June 1998.

‘I5

Ibid., document S/1998/3 16,

‘I6 AA51594

32

Decisions

3. Calls upon the parties to cooperate constructively
with the United Nations, the Personal Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the Identification Commission established pursuant to the
settlement plan in order to complete the identification-ofvoters phase of the settlement plan and the agreements reached
for its implementation;

On 30 April 1998, the President of the Security Council
addressed the following letter to the Secretary-General:’”

‘‘I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 31 March 1998 concerning your intention to add
Sweden to the list of countries contributing military
personnel to the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Saharall’has been brought to the
attention of the members of the Security Council. They
agree with the intention expressed in your letter.”

4. Notes with satisfaction the expressed readiness of
the Moroccan Government to cooperate with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in order to
formalize the presence of the Office of the High Commissioner
in Western Sahara, according to the settlement plan;

At its 3910th meeting, on 20 July 1998, the Security
Council considered the item entitled:
“The situation concerning Western Sahara
“Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
concerning Western Sahara (S/1998/634)”.”9

Resolution 1185 1998)
of 20 July 19 8

6

6 , Expresses again its intention to consider positively
the request for the remaining additional military and police
assets for the Mission as proposed in annex I1 to the report of
the Secretary-General of 13 November 1997, as soon as the
Secretary-General reports that the identification process has
reached a stage which makes the deployment of these assets
essential;

The Security Council,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on the question of
Western Sahara,
Reafirming itsfull support for the Secretary-General,his
Personal Envoy, his Special Representative and the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara in the
implementation of the settlement plan,”’ and the agreements
reached by the two parties for its implementation,and recalling
that under these agreements the responsibility for
implementing the identification process lies with the
Identification Commission,

7 . Calls for a prompt conclusion of status-of-forces
agreements with the Secretary-General which would greatly
facilitatethe full and timely deployment of the Mission-formed
military units, in particular the deployment of the military
engineering support and demining units, and in this context
notes progress that has been made, and recalls that pending the
conclusion of such agreements, the model status-of-forces
agreement dated 9 October 1990,’I6as provided for in General
Assembly resolution 52/12 13 of 19 December 1997, should
apply provisionally;

Reiterating its commitment to assist the parties to achieve
a just and lasting solution to the question of Western Sahara,
Reiterating also its commitment to the holding without
further delay of a free, fair and impartial referendum for the
self-determination of the people of Western Sahara in
accordance with the settlement plan, which has been accepted
by the two parties,

8. Calls for the lifting of any restrictions imposed on
the Mission aircraft, or on passengers whose travel the Mission
determines to be of assistance to the fulfilment of the mandate,
in line with the practice of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and notes that discussions are being held to this
end;

Welcomingthe report of the Secretary-Generalof 10 July
1998,I2Oand supportingthe observationsand recommendations
contained therein,

9. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Council every thirty days from the date of extension of the
mandate of the Mission on the progress of the implementation
of the settlementplan and the agreements reached between the
parties, and to keep the Council regularly informed of all
significant developments in the interim period, and, as
appropriate, on the continuing viability of the mandate of the
Mission;

1. Decides to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara until
21 September 1998, in order that the Mission may proceed
with its identification tasks, with the aim of completing the
process;
2. Welcomes, in line with the report of the SecretaryGeneral,”’ engagementby his Personal Envoy with the parties
to seek a solution to those issues bearing upon implementation
of the settlement plan;”’
~~

‘I7

5 . Notes the continuing deployment of the engineering
unit required for demining activities and of the administrative
staff required to support the deployment of military personnel
as proposed in annex I1 to the report of the Secretary-General
of 13 November 1997,Ii3 as further described in the
recommendations of the report of the Secretary-General of
13 April 1998;”’

10. Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the
3910th meeting.

~

Decision

Sl19981357.

‘Ig Sl19981356.

At its 3929th meeting, on 18 September 1998, the
Security Council considered the item entitled:

I I9

Sec OJJicialRecords of the Security Council, Fijiiy-third Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1998.
lZo Ibid., document S/1998/634.

T h e situation concerning Western Sahara
33

Decision

"Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
concerning Western Sahara (S/1998/849)"."9

At its 3938th meeting, on 30 October 1998, the Security
Council considered the item entitled:

Resolution 1198 (1998)
of 18 September 1998

"The situation concerning Western Sahara

The Security Council,

"Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
concerning Western Sahara (S/1998/997)".'22

Recalling all its previous resolutions on the question of
Western Sahara,

Resolution 1204 (1998)
of 30 October 1998

Reiteruting its commitment to assist the parties to achieve
a just and lasting solution to the question of Western Sahara,

The Security Council,

Reiterating also its commitment to the holding without
further delay of a free, fair and impartial referendum for the
self-determination of the people of Western Sahara in
accordance with the settlement plan,"' which has been
accepted by the two parties,

Recalling all its previous resolutions on the question of
Western Sahara,
Reiterating its commitment to assist the parties to achieve
a just and lasting solution to the question of Western Sahara,

Welcoming the report of the Secretary-General of
11 September 1998,''' and supporting the observations and
recommendations contained therein,

Reiterating its commitment also to the holding without
hrther delay of a free, fair and impartial referendum for the
self-determination of the people of Western Sahara in
accordance with the settlement plan,"' which has been
accepted by the two parties,

1. Decides to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara until
31 October 1998;

Welcoming the report of the Secretary-General of
26 October 1998Iz3and the observations and recommendations
contained therein,

Welcomes,inline with paragraph 23 of the report of
the Secretary-General,engagement of his Personal Envoy with
the parties to seek a solution to those issues bearing upon
implementation of the settlement plan;"'
2.

Welcoming also the stated intentions of the Government
of Morocco and the Frente Popular para la Liberacibn de
Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de Oro to cooperate actively with
the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara in implementing the proposals contained in the report,

3. Welcomes also the agreement of the Moroccan
authorities to formalize the presence of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Western
Sahara, and requests both parties to take concrete action to
enable the Office of the High Commissioner to carry out the
necessary preparatory work for the repatriation of Saharan
refugees eligible to vote, and their immediate families,
according to the settlement plan;

1. Decides to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara until
17 December 1998;
2 . Welcomes paragraph 4 of the report of the
Se~retary-General,'~~
regarding the protocol relating to the
identificationof those presenting themselves individually from
tribes H41, H61 and J51/52, the protocol relating to the
appeals process, the memorandum pertaining to the activities
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Rehgees in the re ion, and an outline of the next stages of the
settlement plan,"'and calls on the parties to agree to this
package of measures by mid-November 1998 in order to allow
positive consideration of further stages in the settlement
process;

4. Calls for a prompt conclusion of status-of-forces
agreements with the Secretary-General which would greatly
facilitate the full and timely deployment of the Mission-formed
military units, and in this context notes new progress that has
been made, and recalls that pending the conclusion of such
agreements, the model status-of-forces agreement dated
9 October 1990,"6 as provided for in General Assembly
resolution 52/12 8 of 19 December 1997, should apply
provisionally;

5 . Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Council thirty days from the date of extension of the mandate
of the Mission on the progress of the implementation of the
settlement plan and the agreements reached between the
parties, and to keep the CounciI regularly informed of all
significant developments and, as appropriate, on the
continuing viability of the mandate of the Mission;
6.

3, Notes the intention of the Office of the High
Commissioner to forward to the parties soon a protocol
relating to the repatriation of refugees, and supports efforts in
this regard;

4. Welcomes also the agreement of the Moroccan
authorities to formalize the presence of the Office of the High
Commissioner in Western Sahara, and the agreement of the
Frente Popular para la Liberacibn de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio
de Oro to resume pre-registration activities in the refugee

Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the
3929th meeting.

I22 Ibid.,

'*' Ibid., document S/1998/849.

Supplement for October, November and December 1998.

"' Ibid., document S/1998/997.
34

camps, and requests both parties to take concrete action to
enable the Office of the High Commissioner to carry out the
necessary preparatory work for the repatriation of Saharan
refugees eligible to vote, and their immediate families,
according to the settlement plan;

‘‘

5 . Notes with regret the constraints on the operational
capability of engineering support unit of the Mission, calls for
a prompt conclusion of status-of-forces agreements with the
Secretary-General which is an indispensable prerequisite for
fie full and timely deploymentof the Mission -formed military
units, and recalls that pending the conclusion of such
agreements, the model status-of-forces agreement dated
9 October 1990,”6 as provided for in General Assembly
resolution 52/12 B of 19 December 1997, should apply
provisionally;

1. Decides to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara until
3 1 January 1999 to allow for further consultations in the hope
that those consultations will lead to agreement on the various
protocols without undermining the integrity of the SecretaryGeneral’s proposed package or calling into question its main
elements;

6. Supports the intention of the Mission to start
publishing the provisional list of voters by 1 December 1998,
as proposed by the Secretary-General, and supports also the
proposed increase in staff of the Identification Commission
from eighteen to twenty-five members, and the increase also
in the necessary support personnel, in order to strengthen the
Commission and enable it to continue working with utmost
rigour and impartiality with a view to keeping to the proposed
timetable;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Council by 11 December 1998 on the implementation of the
present resolution and on the progress of the implementation
of the settlement plan and the agreements reached between the
parties, and to keep the Council regularly informed of all
significant developments and, as appropriate, on the
continuing viability of the mandate of the Mission;
8.

Noting the stated position of the Government of
Morocco, and welcoming the formal acceptance by the Frente
Popular para la Liberacih de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de
Oro to implement the package of measures contained in
paragraph 2 of the report of the Secretary-General,in order to
move forward with the implementation of the settlement
plan,‘

2. Notes, in this regard, that the implementation of the
proposal of Secretary-General to launch simultaneously the
identificationand appeals processes could clearly demonstrate
the willingness of the parties to accelerate the referendum
process, in accordance with the wishes they have publicly
expressed in recent months;
3. Calls upon the parties and the interested States to
sign as soon as possible the proposed refugee repatriation
protocol with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, urges the Government of
Morocco to formalize the presence of the Office of the High
Commissioner in the Temtory, and requests both parties to
take concrete action to enable the Office of the High
Commissioner to carry out the necessary preparatory work for
the repatriation of Saharan refugees eligible to vote, and their
immediate families, according to the settlement plan;” I

Urges the Government of Morocco promptly to sign
4.
a status-of-forcesagreement with the Secretary-General as an
indispensable condition for the full and timely deployment of
the Mission-formed military units, and recalls that pending the
conclusion of such agreement, the model status-of-forces
agreement dated 9 October 1990,’l6as provided for in General
Assembly resolution 52/12 B of 19 December 1997, should
apply provisionally;

Decides to remain seized of the matter.

Adopted unanimously at the
3938th meeting.
Decision
At its 3956th meeting, on 17 December 1998, the
Security Council considered the item entitled

5. Notes that the contracts of the majority of the
Identification Commission staff will expire by the end of
December 1998, and that future extensions will depend on the
prospects for resuming the identification work in the
immediate future and on the decisions the Council will take
concerning the mandate of the Mission;

T h e situation concerning Western Sahara
“Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
concerning Western Sahara (S/1998/1160)”.122

Resolution 1215 (1998)
of 17 December 1998

6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Council by 22 January 1999 on the implementation of the
present resolution and on the progress in the implementation
of the settlementplan and the agreements reached between the
parties, and further requests him to keep the Council regularly
informed of all significant developments including, as
appropriate, a reassessment by his Personal Envoy of the
continuing viability of the mandate of the Mission;

The Security Council,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on the question of
Western Sahara, and reaffirming in particular resolution
1204 (1998) of 30 October 1998,
Welcoming the r y o r t of the Secretary-General of
11 December 1998’
and the observations and
recommendations contained therein,

7.

Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Adopred unanimously at the
3956th meeting.

Ibid., document S/1998/1160.

35

THE SITUATION IN ANGOLA
[Resolutionsor decisions on this question have been adopted by the SecuriQ Council every year since 1992.1

3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit no later
than 13 March 1998a comprehensive report, which would also
incorporate the report requested in paragraph 7 of resolution
1135 (1997) of 29 October 1997, on the situation in Angola,
especially in regard to the implementation of the timetable
approved by the Joint Cornmission, with recommendations
regarding the possible reconfigurationbefore 30 April 1998 of
the components of the Mission, referred to in section VII of the
report of the Secretary-General of 12 January 1998, as well as
preliminary recommendations regarding the United Nations
presence in Angola after 30 April 1998;

Decision
At its 38SOthmeeting, on 27 January 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representatives of Angola, Cape
Verde, Mozambique, Namibia and Zimbabwe to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled:
“The situation in Angola
“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA)
(S/1998/17)”.

4. Stresses the importance of strengtheningthe rule of
law, including the full protection of all Angolan citizens
throughout the national territory;

Resolution 1149 (1998)
of 27 January 1998

The Security Council,

5. Requests the Governmentof Angola, in cooperation
with the Mission, to take appropriate steps, including through
its integrated national police and armed forces, to ensure an
environment of confidence and safety in which the United
Nations and humanitarian personnel may carry out their
activities;

Reaffirmingits resolution 696 (1991) of 30 May 1991
and all subsequent relevant resolutions,
Expressing i t s j r m commitment to preserve the unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola,
Having considered with upprecia2n the report of the
Secretary-General of 12 January 1998,

6 . Calls upon the Government of Angola and in
particular the Unilo Nacional para a Independhcia Total de
Angola to refrain from any action which might undermine the
process of normalization of State administration or lead to
renewed tensions;

Welcoming the timetable approved by the Joint
Commission on 9 January 1998,127according to which the
Government of Angola and the Unilo Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola agreed to complete the
remaining tasks of the Lusaka Protocol“* by the end of
February 1998,

7. Demands that the Government of Angola and in
particular the UniZo Nacional para a Independiincia Total de
Angola cooperate fully with the Mission, including by
providing full access for its verification activities, and
reiterates its call upon the Government of Angola to notify the
Mission in a timely manner of its troop movements, in
accordance with the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol and
established procedures;

Recognizing the important role of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola at this critical stage of the peace
process,
1. Stresses the urgent need for the Government of
Angola and in particular the Unilo Nacional para a
Independhcia Total de Angola to complete, in accordance
with the theta$$ approved by the Joint Commission on
9 January 1998, the implementation of their obligations
under the Lusaka Protocoltz8 as well as to complete the
implementation of their obligations under the “Acordos de
paw 129 and relevant Security Council resolutions;

8, Reaffirms its readiness to review the measures
specified in paragraph 4 of resolution 1 127 (1997) of
28 August 1997 or to consider the imposition of additional
measures in accordance with paragraphs 8 and 9 of resolution
1127 (1997) and on the basis of the report referred to in
paragraph 3 above;
9. Reiterates its belief that a meeting between the
President of the Republic of Angola and the leader of the
Unilo Nacional para a Independiincia Total de Angola could
facilitate the process of peace and national reconciliation;

2. Decides to extend the mandate of United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola, including the military task force
as outlined in paragraphs 35 and 36 of the report of the
Secretary-General of 12 January 1998,’26until 30 April 1998;

10. Urges the international community to provide
assistance to facilitate the demobilization and social
reintegration of ex-combatants, demining, the resettlement of
displaced persons and the rehabilitation and reconstruction of
the Angolan economy in order to consolidate the gains in the
peace process;

See Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fiji&-third Year,
Supplementfor January. Februaty and March 1998.
‘26 Ibid., documents S/1998117and Add. 1.
Ibid., document Sl1998156,annex.
Ibid., Forty-ninth Year, Supplementfor October, November and
December 1994, document Sl199411441.
’*’ Ibid., Forty-sixth Year,SupplementforApril, May and June 1991,

”’

11, Endorses the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral that his Special Representative continue to chair the
Joint Commission, as established under the Lusaka Protocol,
which has proved to be a vital mechanism for the advancement
of the peace process;

document S122609.

36

obligations in the areas of demobilization of all remaining
militaly elements of the Uniiio Nacionat para a Independdncia
Total de Angola, normalization of State administration
throughout the national territory, transformation of Radio
Vorgan into a non-partisan broadcasting facility, as well as
disarmament of the civilian population;

12, Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General,
his SpecialRepresentative and the personnel of the Mission for
assisting the Government of Angola and the Unilo Nacional
pars a Independencia Total de Angola to implement the peace
process;
13. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

3. Endorses the planned visit by the Chairman of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993) of
15 September 1993 to Angola and other interested countries to
discuss the full and effective implementation of the measures
specified in paragraph 4 of resolution 1127 (1997) of
28 August 1997 with a view to urging compliance by the
Unilo Nacionalpara a Independdncia Total de Angola with its
obligations under the Lusaka Protocol and relevant Security
Council resolutions;

Adopted unanimously at the
3850th meeting.

Decision
At its 3863rd meeting, on 20 March 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representative of Angola to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled:
“The situation in Angola

4. Calls upon all Member States to implement hlly
and without delay the measures specified in paragraph 4 of
resolution 1127 (1997), reiterates its request that Member
States having information on flights and other actions
prohibited in paragraph 4 of resolution 1127 (1997) provide
this information to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 864 (1993), and requests the Secretary-General to
report on those violations by the Unilo Nacional para a
Independbncia Total de Angola and certain Member States in
the report referred to in paragraph 8 below;

“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA)
(SA 998/236)”.

‘’’

Resolution 1157 1998)
of 20 March 1 98

6

The Security Council,
Reaflrming its resolution 696 (1991) of 30 May 1991
and all subsequent relevant resolutions,

5 . Reaflrnts its readiness to review the measures
specified in paragraph 4 of resolution 1127 (1997) or to
consider the imposition of additional measures in accordance
with paragraphs 8 and 9 of resolution 1 127 (1 997);

Expressing its firm comniitment to preserve the unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of
13 March 1998,I3O

6. Endorses the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral to resume the gradual downsizing of the military
component of the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola
before 30 April 1998, with the understanding that the
withdrawal of all formed military units, with the exception of
one infantry company, the helicopter unit and the signals and
medical support units, wiI1 be completed as soon as conditions
on the ground permit, but no later than 1 July 1998;

Deploring the failure by the Unilo para a Independbncia
Total de Angola to complete the implementation of the
remaining tasks of the Lusaka Protocol12’ according to the
timetable approved by the Joint Commission on 9 January
1998,‘”
Taking note of the declaration by the Unilo Nacional
para a Independbncia Total de Angola on the complete
demilitarization of its forces as of 6 March 199813’and of the
declaration by the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation on 11 March 1998 legalizing the status of the
Unilo Nacional para a Independbncia Total de Angola as a
political party,13’

7, Decides to increase gradually and as needed the
number of civilian police observers, giving special emphasis
to their language qualifications, by up to eighty-three, to assist
the Government of Unity and National Reconciliation and the
Unilo Nacional para a Independgncia Total de Angola to
resolve disputes during the normalization of State
administration, identify and investigate allegations of abuse,
and facilitate the training of the Angolan National Police
according to internationally accepted standards, and requests
the Secretary-General to keep the modus operandi of the
civilian police component under review and to report by
17 April 1998 on whether its tasks can be performed on the
basis of a more limited increase in the number of personnel or
with a reconfiguration of existing personnel;

1. Stresses the urgent need for the Government of
Unity and National Reconciliation and in particular the Unizio
Nacional para a Independhcia Total de Angola to complete
immediately and without conditions the implementation of all
remaining obligations under the “Acordos de P ~ z ” , ’ ’the
~
Lusaka ProtocolJi2”and relevant Security Council resolutions,
and demands that the Unislo Nacional para a Independdncia
Total de Angola stop its pattern of delays and linkages;

8. Takes note of the recommendations contained in
section IX of the report of the Secretary-General of 13 March
1998,’” and requests the Secretary-General to report by
17April 1998 on the status of the implementation of the peace
process, with final recommendations regarding the modalities
of the United Nations presence in Angola after 30 April 1998,
including the exit strategy and expected termination date of the
Mission and the follow-on activities by the United Nations,
after the termination of the Mission, to consolidate the peace

Calls upon the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation and in particular the Unilo Nacional para a
Independdncia Total de Angola to complete immediately their
2.

110

Ibid., Fifry-third Year, Supplement for January, February and

March 1998,document Sl19981236.
I” Ibid., para. 5.

37

At its 3876th meeting, on 29 April 1998, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Angola to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled:

process and assist in the social and economic recovery of
Angola;
9. Strongly condemns the attacks by members of the
Unilo Nacional para a Independbncia Total de Angola on
Mission personnel and On Angolan national authorities, and
demands that the Unilo Nacional para a Independhcia Total
de Angola immediately stop such attacks, cooperate fully with
the Mission and guarantee unconditionally the safety and
freedom of movement of Mission and other international
personnel;

“The situation in Angola
“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(S/1998/333)”. 134
Resolution 1164 (1998)
of 29 April 1998

10. CaZls upon the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation to continue to give priority to peaceful actions
that contribute to the successful conclusion of the peace
process and to refiain from any action, including the excessive
use of force, which might undermine the process of
normalization of State administration or lead to renewed
hostilities;

The Security Council,
Reafirming its resolution 696 (1991) of 30 May 1991
and all subsequent relevant resolutions,
Expressing its jirm commitment to preserve the unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola,

Having considered the report of the Secretary-Generalof
16 April 1998, 13’

11. Stresses the importance of strengthening the rule of
law, including the full protection of all Angolan citizens
throughout the national territory;

Welcomingthe recent steps by the Government of Unity
and National Reconciliation and the UniPo Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola toward completing the
remaining tasks of the Lusaka Protocol,128 including
promulgation of the law granting special status to the leader of
the Uniilo Nacional para a Independbncia Total de Angola, the
appointment of the remaining governors and vice-governors
nominated by the Uniiio Nacional para a Independencia Total
de Angola, agreement on a list of ambassadors nominated by
the Unilo Nacional para a Independbncia Total de Angola,
cessation of broadcasts by Radio Vorgan and the arrival in
Luanda of senior officials of the Unilo Nacional para a
Independbncia Total de Angola to prepare for the
establishment of the headquarters of the Uni3o Nacional para
a Independhcia Total de Angola in the capital,

12. Urges the Government of Unity and National

Reconciliation and in particular the Unilo Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola to cooperate fully with the
National Institute for the Removal of Unexploded Ordnance
and provide information on minefields, and urges the
international community to continue to provide assistance to
the demining programme;

13, Reiterates its belief that a meeting between the
President of the Republic of Angola and the leader of the
Uniiio Nacional para a Independhcia Total de Angola could
accelerate the process of peace and national reconciliation, and
urges the leadership of the Unilo Nacional para a
Independhcia Total de Angola to move to Luanda, as agreed
upon in the Lusaka Protocol;

1. Calls upon the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation and in particular the Unilo Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola to complete all remaining
obligations under the “Acordos de P~Z’’,’~’the Lusaka
and relevant Security Council resolutions,
including the normalization of State administration throughout
the national territory as well as disarmament of the civilian
population;

14. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General,
his Special Representative and the personnel of the Mission for
assisting the Government of Angola and the Unilo Nacional
para a Independencia Total de Angola to implement the peace
process;
15. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the
3863rd meeting.

2. Strongly reiterates its demand that the Unilo
Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola stop its pattern
of delays and linkages and cooperate immediately and without
conditions in completing the normalization of State
administration throughout the national territory, including in
particular in Andulo and Bailundo;

Decisions

On 30 March 1998, the President of the Security CoEpil
addressed the following letter to the Secretary-General:

“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 25 March 1998 concerning your intention to
appoint Major General Seth Kofi Obeng, of Ghana, as
Force Commander/Chief Military Observer of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Ang01a”~has been brought
to the attention of the members of the Security Council.
They agree with the intention expressed in your letter.”

3. Takes note of steps taken by the Unilo Nacional
para a IndependGncia Total de Angola regarding some of the
obligations set out in paragraphs 2 and 3 of
resolution 1127 (1997) of 28 August 1997, and reaffirms its
readiness to review the measures specified in paragraph 4 of
resolution 1127 (1997) or to consider the imposition of
~

154

‘32

See Official Records of the Security Council, Fi/ty-tliird Year,
Supplementfor April, May and June 1998.
13* Ibid., document S/1998/333.

S/1998/282.

‘I3 Sl1998f28 1.

38

13. Expresses its appreciation to the Chairman of the
Committee establishedpursuant to resolution 864 (1993) who
visited Angola and other interested countries and reinforced
the need for full and effective implementation of the measures
specified in paragraph 4 of resolution 1 127 (1997) in order to
achieve compliance by the UniPo Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola with its obligations under the
Lusaka Protocol and relevant Security Council resolutions;

additionalmeasures in accordance with paragraphs 8 and 9 of
resolution 1127 (1997);
4. Strongly condemns the attacks by members of the
uniao Nacional para a Independbncia Total de Angola on the
personnel of the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola,
international personnel and Angolan national authorities,
including the police, demands that the Unilo Nacional para a
IndependbnciaTotal de Angola immediately stop such attacks,
and urges the Mission to investigate promptly the recent attack
in N’gove;

14. Culls upon all Member States to implement fully
and without delay the measures specified in paragraph 4 of
resolution 1127 (1997)) reiterates its request that Member
States having information on flights and other actions
prohibited in paragraph 4 of resolution 1127 (1997) provide
this information to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 864 (1 993), and requests the Secretary-Generalto
report on those violations by the Uniio Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola and certain Member States in
the report referred to in paragraph 12 above;

5 . Calls upon the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation and in particular the Uniiio Nacional para a
Independbncia Total de Angola to guarantee unconditionally
the safety, security and freedom of movement of all United
Nations and international personnel;
6. Also calls upon the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation to refrain from any action, including
the excessive use of force, which might undermine the process
of normalization of State administration or lead to renewed
hostilities, and encourages the Government to continue to give
priority to peaceful actions that contribute to the successful
conclusion of the peace process;

15. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General,
his Special Representativeand the personnel of the Mission for
assisthg the Government of Angola and the Uniiio Nacional
para a Independdncia Total de Angola to implement the peace
process;

7. Reiterates its belief that a meeting in Angola
between the President of the Republic of Angola and the leader
of the Unifo Nacional para a IndependEncia Total de Angola
could facilitate the successful conclusion of the peace process
and accelerate the process of national reconciliation;

16, Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the
3876th meeting.

Decisions

8. Decides to extend the mandate of the Mission until
30 June 1998;

At its 3884th meeting, on 22 May 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representative of Angola to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled
“The situation in Angola”.

9. Reafiirms paragraph 6 of resolution 1157(1998) of
20 March 1998, and endorses the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to complete the withdrawal of all military
personnel, with the exception of one infantry company, the
helicopter unit, the signals and medical support units and
ninety military observers, no later than 1 July 1998, and in
accordance with paragraph 38 of his report of 16April 1998;”’

At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the Presiqgnt made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council strongly condemns the
armed attack in Angola on 19 May 1998 against
personnel from the United Nations and the Angolan
National Police, in which one person was killed and three
people were seriously injured, It demands that the
Governmentof Unity and National Reconciliation and in
particular the Uniiio Nacional para a IndependenciaTotal
de Angola guarantee unconditionally the safety and
freedom of movement of all United Nations and other
international personnel.

10. Endorses the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral in his report referred to in paragraph 9 above to
deploy eighty-three additional civilian police observers, as
authorized by resolution 1 157 (1 998), following consultations
with the Government of Unity and National Reconciliation;
11. Takes note with appreciation of the
recommendations of the Secretary-General contained in
section IX of his report regarding the beginning of the
drawdown of the military observers and civilian personnel of
the Mission and the termination of the Mission, and expresses
its intention to take a final decision by 30 June 1998 on the
mandate, size and organizational structure of the Mission or a
follow-on United Nations presence after that date, based on
progress in the peace process and in the light of the report
referred to in paragraph 12 below;

“The Council strongly deplores the failure by the
Uniiio Nacional para a IndependCnciaTotal de Angola to
completethe implementationof its remaining obligations
under the ‘Acordos de P~z’,~’’
the Lusaka Protocol”*and
relevant Council resolutions, especially its failure to
cooperate in completing the normalization of State
administration throughout the national territory,
including in particular in Andulo and Bailundo. It also
strongly condemns the confirmed attacks by members of
the Uniiio Nacional para a IndependBncia Total de
Angola on the personnel of the United Nations Observer

12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
by 17 June 1998 on the status of the peace process, with
further recommendations regarding the mandate, size and
organizational structure of the Mission or a follow-on United
Nations presence after 30 June 1998, and revised estimates of
the cost of that United Nations presence;

SlPRSTl1998l14,
39

Recognizing the steps taken by the Government of Unity
and National Reconciliation to fulfil its obligations under the
above-mentioned plan to cease the dissemination of hostile
propaganda on State-controlled media and to reduce cases of
abuse by the Angolan National Police,

Mission in Angola, internationalpersonnel and Angolan
national authorities. The Council expresses its deep
concern at the serious abuses committed by the Angolan
National Police, particularly in areas recently transferred
to State administration, as well as at the recent increase
in hostile propaganda. The lack ofprogress in completing
the remaining tasks of the peace process has led to a
serious deterioration in the military and security situation
in the country. The Council calls upon the Government
of Unity and National Reconciliation and the Unilo
Nacional para a Independhcia Total de Angola in the
strongest terms to refrain from any action which might
lead to renewed hostilities or derail the peace process.

Taking note of the statement of 2 June 1998 issued by the
Mission regarding the continuedexistence of non-demobilized
forces of the UniTio Nacional para a Independgncia Total de
Angola, 13’
A
1, Condemnsthe UnitoNacional para a Independencia
Total de Angola, and holds its leadership responsible, for its
failure to implement fully its obligations contained in the
Lusaka ProtocoI,’28relevant Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolution 1127 (1997), and the plan submitted by
the SpecialRepresentative of the Secretary-Generalto the Joint
Commission;

“The Council endorses the plan for the completion
of the remaining tasks of the Lusaka Protocol by 3 1 May
1998 that was submittedby the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to the Joint Commission on 15
May 1998.The Council demands that the Government of
Unity and National Reconciliation and in particular the
UniTio Nacional para a Independhcia Total de Angola
hlfil their obligations in accordance with this plan. In
this context, the Council reaffirms its readiness to review
the measures specified in paragraph 4 of resolution
1127 (1997) of 28 August 1997 and to consider the
imposition of additional measures in accordance with
paragraphs 8 and 9 of resolution 1127 (1997).

v

d

2. Demands that the Unilo Nacional para a
Independgncia Total de Angola fully cooperate without
conditions in the immediate extension of State administration
throughout the national territory, including in particular in
Andulo, Bailundo, Mungo and Nharea, and stop any attempts
to reverse this process;
3. Reiterates its demand that the Uniiio Nacional para
a IndependenciaTotal de Angola complete its demilitarization
and stop any attempts to restore its military capabilities;

“The Council expresses its appreciation to the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative, and the
personnel of the Mission for their efforts to assist the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation and
the Unigo Nacional para a Independencia Total de
Angola to implement their peace process obligations.

4. Demands that the Unilo Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola cooperate fully with the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola in the verification of its
demilitarization;

“The Council will remain actively seized of this
matter.”

5 . Demands also that the Unilo Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola stop any attacks by its
members on the personnel of the Mission, international
personnel, the authorities of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation, including the police, and the civilian
population;

At its 3891st meeting, on 12 June 1998, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Angola to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled T h e
situation in Angola”,
Resolution 1173 1998)
of12 June 19 8

6

6. Urges the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation to continue to refrain from any action,
including the excessive use of force, which might undermine
the process of normalization of State administration,
encourages the Government to make use of the personnel of
the Unilo Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola, as
appropriate and in accordance with the provisions of the
Lusaka Protocol, in areas to which State administration is
extended, and also encourages the Government to continue to
give priority to peaceful actions that contribute to the
successful conclusion of the peace process;

The Security Council,
Reafzming its resolution 696 (1991) of 30 May 1991
and all subsequentrelevant resolutions, in particular resolution
1127 (1997) of 28 August 1997,
Reafirming its firm commitment to preserve the unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola,
Expressing its grave concern at the critical situation in
the peace process, which is the result of the failure by the
Unifo Nacional para a Independgncia Total de Angola to
implement its obli ations under the “Acordos de Paz”,’*’the
Lusaka Protoco1,”‘relevant Security Council resolutions and
the plan for the completion by 31 May 1998 of the remaining
tasks of the Lusaka Protocol, which was submitted by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-Generalto the Joint
Commission on 15 May 1998,

7. Calls upon the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation and in particular the Uni?LoNacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola to avoid taking any action
which might lead to renewed hostilities or undermine the peace
process;

I” Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fin-third Year,
Supplement f i r April, May and June 1998, document S/1998/503,

Recalling the statement by its President of 22 May
1998,’36

annex.
40

8. Stresses the importance of strengtheningthe rule of
law, including the full protection of all Angolan citizens
houghout the national territory;
9. Calls upon the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation and in particular the Unifo Nacional para a
IndependBncia Total de Angola to guarantee unconditionally
the safety, security and freedom of movement of all United
Nations and international personnel;
10. Requesfsthe Secretary-Generalto redeploy Mission
personnel immediately and, as appropriate, to support and
facilitate the extension of State administration throughout the
national territory, including in particular in Andulo, Bailundo,
Mungo and Nharea, and calls upon the Uniio Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola to cooperate fully in this
regard;

B

using their flag vessels or aircraft, of equipmentused in mining
or mining services;
(6) To prohibit, upon notification by the Chairman of
the Committee establishedpursuant toresolution 864 (1993)of
15 September 1993 of all Member States of guidelines
approved by that Committee, the sale or supply to persons or
entities in areas of Angola to which State administrationhas
not been extended, by their nationals or from their territory, or
using their flag vessels or aircraft, of motorized vehicles or
watercraft or spare parts for such vehicles, or ground or
waterborne transportation services;

13. Decides further that the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 864 (1993) may authorize, on a case-bycase basis, upon a no-objection procedure, exemptions to the
measures specified in paragraphs 11 and 12 above for verified
medical and humanitarian purposes;
14. Decides that the measures specified in
paragraphs 11 and 12 above shall come into force without
further notice at 0001 hours eastern daylight time on 25 June
1993, unless the Security Council decides, on the basis of a
report by the Secretary-General, that the Unito Nacional para
a Independhcia Total de Angola has fully complied by
23 June 1998 with all its obligations under paragraph 2 above;

Recalling paragraph 9 of resolution 1 127 (1 997),
Determining that the current situation in Angola
constitutes a threat to international peace and security in the
region,
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations,
11, Decides that all States, except Angola, in which
there are funds and financial resources, including any fbnds
derived or generated from property of the Unigo Nacional para
a Independhcia Total de Angola as an organization or of
senior officials of the UniIIo Nacional para a Independhcia
Total de Angola or adult members of their immediate families
designatedpursuant to paragraph 11 of resolution 1127(1997),
shall require all persons and entities within their own territories
holding such funds and financial resources to freeze them and
ensure that they are not made available directly or indirectly to
or for the benefit of the Unigo Nacional para a Independencia
Total de Angola as an organization or of senior officials of the
Unilo Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola or adult
members of their immediate families designated pursuant to
paragraph 11 of resolution 1127 (1997);

12. Decides also that all States shall take the necessary
measures :

(a) To prevent all official contacts with the leadership
of the Unio Nacional para a Independsncia Total de Angola in
areas of Angola to which State administration has not been
extended, except for those by representatives of the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation, of the
United Nations and of the Observer States to the Lusaka
Protocol;

15. Expresses its readiness to review the measures
specified in paragraphs 11 and 12 above and in paragraph 4 of
resolution 1127 (1997) and terminate them, if the SecretaryGeneral reports at any time that the Unilo Nacional para a
Independhcia Total de Angola has fully complied with all its
relevant obligations;
16. Expresses its readiness also to consider the
imposition of further additional measures if the Unifo
Nacional para a Independhcia Total de Angola does not filly
,’~~
comply with its obligations under the “Acordos de P ~ Z ” the
Lusaka Protocol and relevant Security Council resolutions;
17. Calls upon all States and all international and
regional organizations to act strictly in accordance with the
provisions of the present resolution, notwithstanding the
existence of any rights or obligations conferred or imposed by
any international agreement or any contract entered into or any
licence or permit granted prior to the date of adoption of the
present resolution;
18. Also calls upon all States to implement strictly the
measures imposed in paragraphs 19 to 21 of resolution
864 (1993) and paragraph 4 of resolution 1127 (1997), as well
as to comply with paragraph 6 of resolution 1 127 (1 997);

C
19. Requests the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation to designate, and to notify to the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993), the areas of
Angola to which State administration has not been extended;

(6) To prohibit the direct or indirect import from
Angola to their territory of all diamonds that are not controlled
through the Certificate-of-Origin regime of the Government of
Unity and National Reconciliation;

20. Requests the Commii$ee established pursuant to
resolution 864 (1993):

To prohibit, upon notification by the Chairman of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993)
of 15 September 1993 of all Member States of guidelines
approved by that Committee, the sale or supply to persons or
entities in areas of Angola to which State administration has
not been extended, by their nationals or from their territory, or
(c)

(a) To draw up guidelines expeditiously for the
implementationof paragraphs 11and 12 above and to consider

41

ways and means for further strengtheningthe effectiveness of
the measures adopted by the Council in its previous
resolutions;
(b) To report to the Council by 31 July 1998 regarding
the actions taken by States to implement the measures
specified in paragraphs 11 and 12 above;
21. Requests Member States to provide to the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993), no
later than 15 July 1998, informationon the measuresthey have
adopted to implement the provisions of paragraphs 11 and 12
above;

22. Also requests Member States having information
about any violations of the provisions of the present resolution
to provide this information to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 864 (1993) for distribution to Member
States;

23. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

time on 1 July 1998, unless the Security Council decides, on
the basis of a report by the Secretary-General, that the Uniilo
Nacional para a Independbcia Total de Angola has fully
complied with all its obligations under paragraph 2 of
resolution 1173 (1998);
3. Requests the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 864 (1993), notwithstanding paragraph 20 (b) of
resolution 1173 (1998), to report to the Council by 7 August
1998 regarding the actions taken by States to implement the ’
measures specified in paragraphs 11 and 12 of resolution
1173 (1998);
4. Requests Member States, notwithstanding
paragraph 21 of resolution 1173 (1998)) to provide to the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 864 (19931, no
later than 22 July 1998,information on the measures they have
adopted to implement the provisions of paragraphs 11 and 12
of resolution 1173 (1998);

5.

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

Adopted unanimously at the
3891st meeting.

Adopted unanimously at the
3894th meeting.

Decision

Decision
At its 3894th meeting, on 24 June 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representative of Angola to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled:
“The situation in Angola

At its 3899th meeting, on 29 June 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representatives of Angola and
Mali to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item
entitled:
“The situation in Angola

“Letter dated 24 June 1998 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council ( S A 998/566)”.’34

6

Resolution 1176 1998)
of 24 June 19 8

“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(S/1998/524)”. 134

6

Resolution 1180 1998)
of 29 June 19 8

The Security Council,

The Security Council,

Reaflrming its resolution 696 (1991) of 30 May 1991
and all subsequentrelevant resolutions, in particular resolution
1173 (1998) of 12 June 1998,
Taking nore of the letter dated 24 June 1998 from the
Secretary-General to the President of the Security Counci1,l3‘
Determining that the current situation in Angola
constitutes a threat to international peace and security in the
region,

Reaftinning its resolution 696 (1991) of 30 May 1991
and all subsequentrelevant resolutions, in particular resolution
1173 (1998) of 12 June 1998 and resolution 1176 (1998) of
24 June 1998,
Reafinning its firm commitment to preserve the unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola,
Havingcguidered the report of the Secretary-Generalof
17 June 1998,

Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations,

Expressing concern in the strongest terms at the critical
situation in the peace process, which is the result of the failure
by the Uniilo Nacional para a Independencia Total de An ola
to complete its obligations under the “Acordos de Paz”,12’the
Lusaka Protocol,’28and relevant Security Council resolutions,
including in particular its obligation to cooperate fully and
without conditions in the immediate extension of State
administration throughout the national territory,

1. Demands that the Unilo Nacional para a
IndependCncia Total de Angola comply fully and
unconditionally with the obligations referred to in resolution
1173 (1998);
2. Decides that, notwithstanding paragraph 14 of
resolution 1173 (1998), the measures specified in
paragraphs 11 and 12 of resolution 1173 (1998) shall come
into force without further notice at 0001 hours eastern daylight

Expressing its grave concern at the deterioration of the
security situation in Angola as a result of the reoccupation by

’” Ibid., document S/1998/524.

Ibid., document S/1998/566,

42

the Unilo Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola of
localitieswhere State administration was recently established,
attacks by armed elements of the Uniilo Nacional para a
IndependBncia Total de Angola, new minelaying activity, and
banditry,

8. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General,
his Special Representative and the personnel of the Mission for
assisting the Governmentof Unity andNational Reconciliation
and the Unilo Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola
to implement the peace process;

Noting with deep concern cases of serious abuse by some
elements of the Angolan National Police, and stressing the
importance of strengthening the rule of law, including the full
protection of all Angolan citizens throughout the national
tenitory,
Recognizing the important role of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola at this critical stage of the peace
orocess,

9.

Adopted unanimously at the
3899th meeting.
Decisions
On 7 August 1998, the President of the Security Council
addressed the following letter to the Se~retary-General:’~’

“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 7 August 1998 concerning your intention to
appoint Mr. Issa B. Y .Diallydlof Guinea, as your Special
Representative for Angola has been brought to the
attention of the members of the Security Council. They
take note of the intention expressed in your letter.”

1, Welcomes the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral in paragraph 44 of his report of 17 June 1998,13’ and
decides to extend the mandate of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola until 15 August 1998;
2. Decides to resume the withdrawal of the military
component of the Mission in accordance with paragraph 9 of
resolution 1164 (1998) of 29 April 1998 as soon as conditions
permit;

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

At its 3916th meeting, on 13 August 1998, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Angola to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled:

3. Requests the Secretary-General to reconsider the
deployment of the additional civilian police observers
authorized under paragraph 10 of resolution 1164 (1998),
taking into account conditions on the ground and progress in
the peace process;

“The situation in Angola
“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(S/1998/723)”.14’

4. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a
report, as necessary, but no later than 7 August 1998, with
recommendations regarding the involvement of the United
Nations in Angola, taking into account the safety and freedom
of movement of Mission personnel and the status of the peace
process;
5 . Reiterutes its demand that the Unilo Nacional para
a IndependBnciaTotal de Angola immediately stop any attacks
by its members on Mission personnel, international personnel,
the authorities of the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation, including the police, and the civilian
population, and calls again upon the Government and in
particular the Unilo Nacional para a Independencia Total de
Angola to guarantee unconditionally the safety and freedom of
movement of all United Nations and international personnel;

Resolution 1190 1998)
of 13 August 1 98

’9

The Security Council,
Reaflrming its resolution 696 (1991) of 30 May 1991
and all subsequent relevant resolutions, including resolutions
864 (1993) of 15 September 1993,1127 (1997) of 28 August
1997 and 1173 (1998) of 12 June 1998,
ReaJgirming also its firm commitment to preserve the
unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola,
Strongly deploringthe deterioratingpolitical and security
situation in Angola, which is primarily the result of the failure
by the Unilo Nacional para a IndependBncia Total de An ola
to complete its obligationsunder the “Acordos de Pa~”,’~‘tht?
Lusaka Protocol’28and relevant Security Council resolutions,

6 . Demands that the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation and in particular the Unifio Nacional
para a IndependBnciaTotal de Angola cooperate fully with the
Mission in providing h l l access for its verification activities,
including the verification of the full demilitarization of the
Unilo Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola, and
reiterates its call upon the Government to notify the Mission in
a timely manner of its troop movements, in accordance with
the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol”* and established
procedures;

Taking note of recent positive steps to restore confidence
in the peace process,
Having cow/dered the report of the Secretary-General of
6 August 1998,
1, Welcomesthe decision by the Secretary-General to
dispatch a Special Envoy to assess the situation in Angola and
advise on a possible course of action, and requests the

7. Calls upon the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation and in particular the Unilo Nacional para a
IndependBncia Total de Angola to refrain from the laying of
new mines;

S/1998/731.
S/1998/730.
’Iz See Official Records of the Security Council, Fiji’y-third Year,
Supplement fir July, August and September 1998.
Ibid., document S/1998/723.
14‘

“’

43

Secretary-General to submit, no later than 31 August 1998, a
report with recommendations regarding the hture role of the
United Nations in Angola;

11. Calls upon Member States to implement fully the
relevantprovisions of resolutions 864 (1993), 1127(1997) and
1173 (1998) ;

2 . Expresses its intention to review the
recommendations referred to in paragraph 1 above and to
consider appropriate actions;

12. Welcomes the appointment of a new Special
Representativeto Angola, and urges the Governmentof Unity
and National Reconciliation and the Uniiio Nacional para a
IndependenciaTotal de Angola to cooperate fully with him in
promoting peace and national reconciliation;

3. Decides to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola until 15 September 1998,
13. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue his
and takes note of the considerations specified in paragraph 38
of the report of the Secretary-General of 6 August 1998143 personal engagement in the peace process;
regarding the deployment of the Mission throughout the
14. Expresses its appreciation to the personnel of the
country;
Mission;
4. CulZs upon the Government of Unity and National
15. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter,
Reconciliation and in particular the Unilo Nacional para a
Independtncia Total de Angola in the strongest terms to refrain
Adopted unanimously at the
from any steps which could further exacerbate the present
3916th meeting.
situation;
Decision
5 . Demands that the Uniiio Nacional para a
Independtncia Total de Angola comply immediately and
At its 3925th meeting, on 15 September 1998, the
without conditions with its obligations under the Lusaka SecurityCouncil decided to invite the representativeof Angola
Protocol”* and with relevant Security Council resolutions, in to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item
particular the complete demilitarization of its forces and full entitled:
cooperation in the immediate and unconditional extension of
“The situation in Angola
State administration throughout the national territory, in order
to prevent a further deterioration of the political and security
“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
situation;
Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(S/1998/838)”.14’
6. Demands also that the Unilo Nacional para a
IndependEncia Total de Angola cease its reoccupation of
Resolution 1195 (1998)
localities where State administration was established and stop
of 15 September 1998
attacks by its members on civilians, authorities of the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation, including
The Security Council,
the police, and United Nations and international personnel;
Reaflrrning its resolution 696 (1991) of 30 May 1991
and all subsequent relevant resolutions,

Calls upon the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation and the Uniiio Nacional para a Independhcia
Total de Angola to cease hostile propaganda, refrain from
laying new mines, stop forced conscriptionsand renew efforts
towards national reconciliation, including by implementing
confidence-building measures, such as the reactivation of the
joint mechanisms in the provinces and the disengagement of
military forces on the ground;
7.

Reaffirming its firm commitment to preserve the Unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola,

Taking note of the letter dated 10 September 1998 from
the President of the Republic of Angola to the SecretaryGeneral‘44

8. Calls upon the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation to ensure that the Angolan National Police
refrain from practices inconsistent with the Lusaka Protocol
and to respect the legal activities of the Unito Nacional para a
Independhcia Total de Angola as a political party in
accordance with the Lusaka Protocol;

Having considered the report of the Secretary-Generalof

7 September 1998,14’

9. Demands that the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation and in particular the Unilo Nacional
para a IndependBnciaTotal de Angola cooperate fully with the
Mission in providing full access for its verification activities
and guarantee unconditionally the safety and freedom of
movement of all United Nations and international personnel,
including those providing humanitarian assistance;

1. Emphasizes that the primary cause of the crisis in
Angola and of the current impasse in the peace process is the
failure by the leadership of the Uniiio Nacional para a
IndependenciaTotal de Angola to comply with its obli@ions
under the “Acordos de Paz”,I2’ the Lusaka Protocol and
relevant Security Council resolutions, and demands that the
UniIo Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola comply
immediately and without conditions with its obligations, in
particular the complete demilitarization of its forces and full
cooperation in the immediate and unconditional extension of
State administration throughout the national territory;

10. Expresses its firm belief that a meeting in Angola
between the President of the Republic of Angola and the leader
of the Unilo Nacional para a Independtncia Total de Angola
could provide momentum to the peace process;

’“ Ibid., document S/1998/847, annex.
I*’

44

Ibid., document S/1998/838.

2. Demands that the Uniiio Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola withdraw immediately from
territories it has occupied through military action;
3. Reiterates itsfullsupport for the implementation of
tlie Lusaka Protocol;
4. Demands that the Unilo Nacional para a
IndependiinciaTotal de Angola transform itself into a genuine
political party through the dismantling of its military structure,
and, in the context of the full implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol, strongly urges the Angolan authorities to reconsider
the5 decision to suspend the participation of members of the
Uniiio Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola in the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation and in the
National Assembly;
5 . Calls upon Member States to implement fully the
relevant provisions of resolutions 864 (1993) of 15 September
1993, 1127 (1997) of 28 August 1997 and 1173 (1998) of
12 June 1998;

“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(S/1998/93 1)”. ‘46

Resolution 1202 (1998)
of 15 October 1998
The Security Council,
Reuflrming its resolution 696 (1991) of 30 May 1991
and all subsequent relevant resolutions,
Reaffirming its $rm commitment to preserve the unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola,
Reiterating the validity of the “Acordos de P ~ z ” , ”the
~
Lusaka Protocol”* and relevant Security Council resolutions
as the fimdamental basis of the peace process,
Reaffirming its resolution 1196 (1998) of 16 September
1998,
Taking note of the statement by the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the three Observer States to the Lusaka Protocol and
of their letter dated 24 September 1998 to the leader of the
UniIo Nacional para a Independdncia Total de Angola,’47

6. Strongly urges the Government of Angola, the
Uni& Nacional para a Independencia TotaI de Angola and
States in the region to reject military action, to pursue dialogue
to resolve the crisis and to refrain from any steps which could
exacerbate the current situation;

Welcoming regional efforts in support of the peace
process in Angola,

7. Reiterates its support to the Secretary-General for
his personal engagement in the peace process, and urges the
Government of Angola and the Uniiio Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola to cooperate filly with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and with other
relevant initiatives by Member States to seek a peaceful
resolution of the crisis;

8. Decides to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola until 15 October 1998
and to assess the overall situation and take action on the future
role of the United Nations in Angola on the basis of a report
and recommendations to be submitted by the SecretaryGeneral no later than 8 October 1998;
9. Endorses the decision of the Secretary-General to
instruct the Mission to adjust its deployment on the ground, as
needed, to ensure the safety and security of Mission personnel,
and demands that the Government of Angola and in particular
the UniZio Nacional para a Independ&ncia Total de Angola
guarantee unconditionally the safety and freedom of
movement of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and all United Nations and international humanitarian
personnel, including those providing humanitarian assistance;

Noting the call on the international community,
particularly countries and leaders who have an influence on the
leader of the Unigo Nacional para a Independencia Total de
Angola, to persuade the rebel movement to rededicate itself to
the path of peace and reconstruction in Angola as a matter of
urgency, that was contained in the Final Communiqut of the
Summit of the Heads of State or Government of the Southern
African Development Community adopted on 14 September
1998, ‘48
Taking note of the establishment of UNITA-Renovada,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General oE
8 October 1998, 14’
1. Reiterates that the primary cause of the crisis in
Angola and of the current impasse in the peace process is the
failure by the leadership of the Uniiio Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola to comply with its ob1iFation.s
under the “Acordos de Paz”,‘*’ the Lusaka Protocol and
relevant Security Council resolutions, and demands that the
Unilo Nacional para a IndependEncia Total de Angola comply
immediately and without conditions with its obligations, in
particular the complete demilitarization of its forces and full
cooperation in the immediate and unconditional extension of
State administration throughout the national territory;

10. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

Adopted urtnnimously at the
3925th meeting.

2. Demands that the Unilo Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola withdraw immediately from
territories it has reoccupied through military action;

Decision
At its 3936th meeting, on 15 October 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representative of Angola to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled:

Ibid., SupplementJor October, November and December 1998.
Ibid., document S/1998/316, annexes I and 11.
‘“Ibid., document S/1998/915, annex I.
’” Ibid., document S/1998/93 1.

“The situation in Angola

45

3. Stresses that there can be no military solution to the
conflict in Angola, and calls upon the Government of Angola
and in particular the Unilo Nacional para a Independencia
Total de Angola to seek a political settlement;
4. Decides to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola until 3 December 1998;

5. Requesfsthe Secretary-Generalto continue to adjust
the deployment and force structure of the Mission, as needed,
in accordance with security conditions and its ability to
implement its mandate in support of the peace process, and to
prepare further contingency plans;
6. Emphasizes that the extension of the mandate of the
Mission provides the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral with an additional opportunity to revive the stalled
peace process, and strongly urges the Unilo Nacional para a
Independhcia Total de Angola to take advantage of this
period to transform itself into a genuine political party and to
secure a legitimate and constructive role in the Angolan
political process;
7. Reiterates itsfullsupport for the implementation of
the Lusaka Protocol and for the reactivation of the Joint
Commission;

14. Requests the Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993) to investigate
reports that the leader of the Unilo Nacional para a
Independsncia Total de Angola .travelled outside Angola in
violation of resolution 1127 (1997) and that forces of the
Uniilo Nacional para a Independhcia Total de Angola
received military training and assistance as well as arms from
outside Angola in violation of resolution 864 (1993);
15. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a
comprehensivereport no later than 23 November 1998 which
will enable the Security Council to consider the future role of
the United Nations in Angola and to make recommendations
regarding ways of improving the implementation of the
measures referred to in paragraph 13 above;
16. Expresses its deep concern at the crash of the
Russian civilian aircraft in the Malanje region of Angola,
which resulted in the loss of human lives, calls upon the
Government of Angola to carry out without delay a thorough
investigation of the causes of the crash, requests the Mission
to assist as appropriate, and insists that the Unilo Nacional
para a Independencia Total de Angola cooperate hlly with
these efforts;

17. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

8. Calls upon the Government of Angola and the
Uniiio Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola to
cooperate fully with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, including by facilitating his contacts with
all those key to the peace process in order to convey, inter alia,
the demands reiterated in the present resolution;

Adopted unanimously at the
3936th meeting.

Decision
At its 395 1st meeting, on 3 December 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representative of Angola to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled:

9. Encourages the Special Representative of the
Secretary-Generalto coordinate his efforts with regional and
subregional organizations in order to bring about a solution
within the framework of the Lusaka Protocol;

“The situation in Angola
“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(S/1998/1110)’r,146

10. Reiterates its concern over the safety and security
of Mission personnel, and demands that the Government of
Angola and the Unilo Nacional para a Independikcia Total de
Angola guarantee unconditionally the safety and freedom of
movement of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and all United Nations and international humanitarian
personnel, including those providing humanitarian assistance,
throughout the territory of Angola;

Resolution 1213 1998)
of 3 December 998

i

The Securiq Council,
Reaffirming its resolution 696 (1991) of 30 May 1991
and all subsequent relevant resolutions, in particular
resolutions 864 (1993) of 15 September 1993,1127 (1997) of
28 August 1997 and 1173 (1998) of 12 June 1998,

11. Stresses the importance of strengthening the rule of
law and respect for human rights, including the full protection
of all Angolan citizens throughout the national territory, in
particular representatives and members of all political parties;

Reaffirming its firm commitment to preserve the unity,
sovereignty and temtorial integrity of Angola,

12. Expresses its deep concern at the continued
deterioration of the humanitarian situation, especially the
significant increase in the number of internally displaced
persons, which now totals 1.3 million people, and the lack of
access by humanitarian organizations to vulnerable groups;

Emphasiziysthe validity of the “Acordos de Paz”,129
the
Lusaka Protocol and relevant Security Council resolutions
as the fundamentalbasis of the peace process,
Strongly condemning the failure of the Unilo Nacional
para a Independencia Total de Angola to implement the
remaining tasks of the Lusaka Protocol, in particular the
complete demilitarization of its forces and full cooperation in
the immediate and unconditional extension of State
administration throughout the national territory,

13. Calls upon Member States to implement fully the

measures imposed on the Unilo Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola contained in the relevant
provisions of resolutions 864 (1993) of 15 September 1993,
1127 (1997) of 28 August 1997 and 1173 (1998) of 12 June
1998, and expresses its readiness to consider appropriate
reinforcing steps;

Expressing its deep concern at the failure of the leader of
the Unilo Nacional para a Independhcia Total de Angola to
46

respond to the letter dated 6 October 1998 addressed to him by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, which
contained proposals for restoring the peace process, and to the
letter dated 24 September 1998 addressed to him by the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the three Observer States to
the Lusaka Protocol, which called for irreversible steps
towards peace,’”

Expressing its grave concern at the serious humanitarian
impact of the impasse in the peace process and the
deteriorating security conditions,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of
23 November 1998, 15’
1, Emphasizes that the primary cause of the crisis in
Angola and of the current impasse in the peace process is the
failure by the leadership of the Uniiio Nacional para a
IndependBncia Total de Angola in Bailundo to comply with its
obligations under the “Acordos de P~Z’*,’*~
the Lusaka
Protocol’ZBand relevant Security Council resolutions, and
demands that the Uniiio Nacional para a Independhcia Total
de Angola comply immediately and without conditions with its
obligations, in particular the complete demilitarization of its
forces and full cooperation in the immediate and unconditional
extension of State administration throughout the national
territory;

8. Urges the international community to provide
financial and other resources in order to allow the continued
delivery of emergency relief assistance to vulnerable groups in
Angola;
9. Urges all Member States to support the peace
process in Angola through fill and immediate implementation
of the measures against the UniLo Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola contained in resolutions
864 (1993), 1127 (1997) and 1173 (1998), and expresses its
readiness to consider appropriate reinforcing steps in
accordance with the recommendations contained in the report
referred to in paragraph 13 below;
10. Decides to extend the mandate of the Mission until
26 February 1999, and endorses the recommendation
contained in the report of the Secretary-General to continue to
adjust the deployment and force structure of the Mission, as
needed, in accordance with security conditions and its ability
to implement its mandate;

2. Demands that the Uniiio Nacional para a
Independhcia Total de Angola withdraw immediately from
territories it has reoccupied through military or other action;

3. Culls upon the leadership of the Uniiio Nacional
para a Independbncia Total de Angola to cooperate fully and
inunediately with the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola in the withdrawal of Mission personnel from Andulo
and Bailundo, and holds the leadership of the Uniiio Nacional
para a Independhcia Total de Angola in Bailundo responsible
for their safety and security;

11. Recognizes that the Secretary-General may revert to
the Council before 26 February 1999 with further
recommendationsregarding the Mission in the light of security
conditions on the ground;
12. Expresses its growing concern for the security and
freedom of movement throughout Angola of Mission
personnel, and calls upon the Government of Angola and in
particular the Unigo Nacional para a Independhcia Total de
Angola to ensure their safety;

4. Stresses that there can be no military solution to the
conflict in Angola, and calls upon the Government of Angola
and the Uniiio Nacional para a Independhcia Total de Angola
to cooperate fully with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, including by facilitating his contacts with
all those key to the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, to
seek a peaceful resolution of the crisis;

13. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
no later than 15 January 1999 regarding the status of the peace
process, the future role and mandate of the United Nations in
Angola and the force structure of the Mission in the light of its
ability to carry out its mandated tasks, and reiterates the
request contained in its resolution 1202 (1998) of 15 October
1998 for recommendations regarding technical and other ways
for Member States to improve the implementation of the
measures referred to in paragraph 9 above;

5 . Emphasizes the importance of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General maintaining contact
with all elements of the Uniiio Nacional para a Independencia
Total de Angola in Luanda in order to revive the stalled peace
process and encourage the transformation of the UniPo
Nacional para a Indepcndencia Total de Angola into a genuine
political party;

14. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

6 . Stresses the importance of strengthening the rule of
law and respect for human rights, including the full protection
of all Angolan citizens throughout the national territory, in
particular representatives and members of all political parties;

Is’

7. Reiterates its concern at the continued deterioration
of the humanitarian situation, especially the significant
increase in the number of internally displaced persons and the
increase in minelaying activity, andcalls upon the Government
of Angola and in particular the Uni5o Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola to guarantee unconditionally
the safety and freedom of movement of all international
humanitarian personnel, to cooperate fully with international
humanitarian organizations in the delivery of emergency relief
assistance to affected populations, to ceaseminelaying activity,
and to respect international humanitarian, refugee and human
rights law;

Adopted unanimously at the
3951st meeting.
Decisions
At its 3960th meeting, on 23 December 1998, the
Security Council decided to invite the representative of Angola
to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item
entitled “The situation in Angola”,

Ibid., documcnt S/l998/916,
annex 11.

Is’ Ibid., documcnt S/1998/1110.

47

“The Council urges the Government of Angola and
the leadership of the Unigo Nacional para a
Independdncia Total de Angola to ensure full respect for
international humanitarian, refugee and human rights
law.

At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the C~uncil:’.’~
“The Security Council deplores the serious
deterioration of the situation in Angola and calls for an
immediate cessation of hostilities. It reaffirms its f m
commitment to preserve the unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Angola.

“The Council reiterates that the primary
responsibility for the failure to achieve peace in Angola
clearly lies with the leadership of the Unilo Nacional
para a Independencia Total de Angola. The persistent
violation by the UniPo Nacional para a Independtncia
Total de Angola, under the leadership of Mr. Jonas
Savimbi, of its obligations under the “Acordos de Paz”,Iz9
the Lusaka Protocol’28and relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular those obligations related to the
complete demilitarization of its forces and the extension
of State administration throughout the national territory,
has seriously undermined the peace process.
‘The Council demands that the Uni2io Nacional para
a Independgncia Total de Angola comply immediately
and without conditions with its obligations and reiterates
that only a political settlement, on the basis of the
relevant agreements and resolutions, will bring a lasting
peace to Angola.

“The Council underscores the need for the full and
immediate implementation of the measures against the
Unilo Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola
contained in resolutions 864 (1993) of 15 September
1993, 1127 (1997) of28 August 1997 and 1173 (1998)
of 12 June 1998. It expresses deep concern at recent
reports of violations of those measures, particularly those
related to arms and diamonds, and expresses its intention
to follow up on those reports.
“The Council expresses its grave concern at reports
that aircraft were shot down over areas controlled by
Unilo Nacional para a Independtncia Total de Angola
and demands full cooperation by all concerned,
especiallythe Unit0 Nacional para a Independdncia Total
de Angola, in the investigation of those incidents,
including of the fate of the crews and passengers.
“The Council will remain actively seized of the
matter.”
At its 3962nd meeting, on 31 December 1998, the
Council decided to invite the representative of Angola to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled
“The situation in Angola”.

“The Council, in this context, urges the Government
of Angola and the Unilo Nacional para a Independencia
Total de Angola to cooperate filly with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, including by
facilitating his contacts with all those key to reviving the
stalled peace process and to implementing the Lusaka
Protocol. It expresses concern at the public statements
blaming the United Nations for the recent aggravation of
the security situation in the country. The Council
reiterates its full support for the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola, whose mandate has been extended
until 26 February 1999, and emphasizes that both the
Government, which concurred with the extension of this
mandate, and the Unilo Nacional para a Independtncia
Total de Angola have an obligation to guarantee the
safety and freedom of movement of Mission personnel,

Resolution 1219 (1998)
of 31 December 1998
The Security Council,
Reaffirming its resolution 696 (1991) of 30 May 1991
and all subsequent relevant resolutions, in particular
resolutions 1202 (1998) of 15 October 1998 and 1213 (1998)
of 3 December 1998,
Recalling the statement by its President of 23 December
1998,‘”
Expressing concern in the strongest terms at the crash of
United Nations flight 806 and at the disappearance of other
aircraft reportedly over territory controlled by the Unigo
Nacional para a Independtncia Total de Angola,

“The Council expresses its deep concern at the
worsening humanitarian situation in Angola and
emphasizes the responsibility of the Government of
Angola and the leadership of the Unilo Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola to facilitate humanitarian
assistance efforts, guarantee the safety and freedom of
movement of humanitarian workers and permit an
independent assessment of the needs of the civilian
population, to be carried out swiftly in any part of the
country as necessary. The Council also expresses concern
at the plight of those most vulnerable groups, such as
children, women, the elderly and internally displaced
persons who are particularly at risk and need special
protection.

1. Expresses its deep concern regarding the fate of the
passengers and crew of United Nations flight 806, and
deplores the incomprehensible lack of cooperation in
clariQing the circumstances of this tragedy and in permitting
the prompt dispatch of a United Nations search and rescue
mission;
2. Demands that the leader of the Unilo Nacional para
a Independencia Total de Angola, Mr. Jonas Savimbi,
immediately respond to the appeals from the United Nations
and guarantee the security and access necessary for, and assist
in, the search for and rescue of possible survivors of the abovementioned incidents in territory controlled by the Unilo
Nacional para a Independgncia Total de Angola, and calls
upon the Government of Angola to cooperate as appropriate in
fulfilment of its expressed commitment to do so;

48

3. Expresses its serious concern at the increase in
incidents involving the disappearance of aircraft reportedly
Over territory controlled by the Unilo Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola;
4. Condemns the lack of effective action to determine
b e fate of the crews and passengers of the aircraft referred to
in paragraph 3 above, calls for an immediate and objective
internationalinvestigation of those incidents, and calls upon all
concerned, especially the Unilo Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola, to facilitate such an
investigation;

action, as appropriate, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations;

6 . Reaflrms the need for compliance with the
measures against the Uniiio Nacional para a Independencia
Total de Angola contained in resolutions 864 (1993) of
15 September 1993, 1127 (1997) of 28 August 1997 and
1173 (1998) of 12 June 1998, which were imposed under
Chapter VII of the Charter;
7.

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at
the 3962nd meeting.

5. Expressar its intention to assess compliancewith the
present resolution no later than 11 January 1999 and to take

THE SITUATION IN GEORGIA
[Resolutionsor decisions on this question have been adopted by the Security Council every year since 1992.1

Decision

General to strengthen the involvement of the United Nations
in the peace process, approved a programme of action and set
up a mechanism for its implementation,

At its 3851st meeting, on 30 January 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representatives of Georgia and
Germany to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the
item entitled:

Reaflrrningthe necessity for the parties strictly to respect
human rights, expressing its support for the efforts of the
Secretary-Generalto frnd ways to improve their observanceas
an integral part of the work towards a comprehensive political
settlement, and noting developments in the work of the United
Nations Human Rights Office in hbkhazia, Georgia,

“The situation in Georgia
“Report of the Secretary-General concernin
situation in Abkhazia, Georgia (S/1998/51)”.

Resolution 1150 (1998)
of 30 January 1998

The Security Council,
Recalling all its relevant resolutions, reaffirming in
particular resolution 1124 (1997) of 31 July 1997, and
recalling the statementby its President of 6 November 1997,15‘
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of
19 January 1998,”’
Supporting the vigorous efforts to move the peace
process forward made by the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative aimed at achieving a comprehensive
political settlement of the conflict, including on the political
status ofAbkhazia within the State of Georgia, respecting fully
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia, with the
assistance of the Russian Federation as facilitator, as well as of
the Group of Friends of the Secretary-General and of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,

Deeply concerned at the continuing unsettled and tense
security situation in the Gali region, characterized by the
laying of mines, by a rising number of criminal activities,
including kidnapping and murder, and, most seriously, by
significantly increased subversive activities by armed groups
which disrupt the peace process and impede a settlement of the
conflict and the return of refugees, and at the resulting lack of
safety and security for the local population, for the refugees
and displaced persons returning to the region, for aid workers
and for the personnel of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia and of the collective peacekeeping force of the
Commonwealth of Independent States,
Welcoming in this context the contribution that the
collective peacekeeping force and the Mission have made to
stabilizing the situation in the zone of conflict, noting that the
cooperation between the Mission and the collective
peacekeeping force is good and has continued to develop, and
stressing the importance of continued close cooperation and
coordination between them in the performance of their
respective mandates,

Stressing in this context the importance of the concluding
statement adopted in Geneva on 19 November 1997 in which
both sides welcomed, inter nlia, the proposals of the Secretary-

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of
1,
19 January 1998;’55

2, Notes with satisfaction that much groundwork has
now been laid towards achieving substantive progress in the
peace process, but reiterates its deep concern that, as yet, no
significant progress has been made on the key issues in the
settlement of the conflict in Ablchazia, Georgia;

I53

See Oflcinl Records of the Security Council,Fib-third Year,
SupplementforJanuary, February and March 1998.
Is‘ SIPRSTII 997150.
Is’ Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fgy-third Year,
Supplement for January, February and March 1998, document

3, Cornmends the parties forthe constructive approach
shown at the meeting held in Geneva from 17 to 19November

SII99815 1,

49

1997, welcomes in this context the establishment and the first
meetings of the Coordinating Council and, within its
framework, of working groups, under the chairmanship of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and stresses
the importance of the effective working of these bodies in
order to help progress towards a settlement;

4. Emphasizes the fact that the primary responsibility
for reinvigorating the peace process rests upon the parties
themselves, and reminds them that the ability of the
international community to assist them depends on their
political will to resolve the conflict through dialogue and
mutual accommodation and on their taking real steps towards
bringing about a comprehensive political settlement of the
conflict through the speediest possible agreement on and
signature of the relevant documents;
5. Reafirms the particularimportanceit attachesto the
more active role for the United Nations in the peace process,
encourages the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative to continue their efforts, with the assistance of
the Russian Federation as facilitator, and with the support of
the Group of Friends of the Secretary-General and the
Organization for Securityand Cooperation in Europe, and calls
upon the parties to work constructively with them to achieve
a comprehensive settlemenc
6 . Encourages the continuation of direct dialogue
between the parties, calls upon them to intensify the search for
a peaceful solution by further expanding their contacts, and
requests the Secretary-General to make available all
appropriate support if so requested by the parties;

7. Recalls the conclusions of the Lisbon summit of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
regarding the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia,ls6reaffirms the
unacceptability of the demographic changes resulting from the
conflict and the right of all refugees and displaced persons
affected by the conflict to return to their homes in secure
conditions in accordance with international law and as set out
in the Quadripartite Agreement on the Voluntary Return of
Refugees and Displaced Persons, of 4 April 1994,’”
encourages the Secretary-General to take such steps as are
necessary, in cooperation with the parties, to ensure a prompt
and safe return of the refugees and displaced persons to their
homes, and stresses the urgent need for progress in this area,
in particular from the Abkhaz side;
8, Calls upon the parties to ensure the full
implementation of the Agreement on a Ceasefire and
Separation of Forces signed in Moscow on 24 May 1994;’”

9. Condemns the intensified activities by armed
groups, including the continued laying of mines, in the Gali
region, and calls upon the parties to honour fully their
commitments to take all measures in their power and to
coordinate their efforts to prevent such activities, and to
cooperate hily with the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia and the collective peacekeeping force of the
Ibid., Fvi-second Year, Supplementfor January, Febnrary and
March 1997, document Sl1997151, annex.
Ibid., Forty-ninth Year, SupplemenfforApril,May andJune 1994,
document Sl19941397.
Is’ Ibid., document S/1994/583.

Commonwealth of Independent States in order to ensure the
safety and the freedom of movement of all personnel of the
United Nations, the collective peacekeeping force and
international humanitarian organizations;
10. Welcomes the additional steps taken in order to
improve security conditions so as to minimize the danger to
Mission personnel and to create conditions for the effective
performance of the mandate of the Mission, and urges the
Secretary-Generalto continue to make further arrangements in
this field;
11, Decides to extend the mandate of the Mission for a
new period terminating on 3 1 July 1998, subject to a review by
the Council of the mandate of the Mission in the event of any
changes that may be made in the mandate or in the presence of
the collective peacekeeping force;
12. Encourages further contributions to address the
urgent needs of those sufferingmost from the consequences of
the conflict in Abkhazia, Georgia, in particular internally
displaced persons, including contributions to the voluntary
fund in su ort of the implementation of the Moscow
Agreement”‘ andor for humanitarian aspects, including
demining, as specified by donors, requests the SecretaryGeneral to consider the means of providing technical and
financialassistance aimed at the reconstruction ofthe economy
of Abkhazia, Georgia, following the successful outcome of the
political negotiations, and welcomes the planning of a needs
assessment mission;

13. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to keep
the Council regularly informed, to report after three months
from the date of the adoption of the present resolution on the
situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, including on the operationsof
the Mission, and to provide recommendations in that report on
the nature of the United Nations presence, and, in this context,
expresses its intention to conduct a thorough review of the
operation at the end of its current mandate;
14. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

Adopted unanimously at the
3851st meeting.

Decisions
At its 3887th meeting, on 28 May 1998, the Security
Council considered the item entitled:
“The situation in Georgia
“Report of the Secretary-General concerning the
situation in Abkhazia, Georgia (S/1998/375 and
Add. l)”.”’
At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:’6o

Ibid., Fifty-third Year. Supplementfor April, May and June 1998.

’@S/PRST/I998f 16.

“The Security Council has considered the report of
the Secretary-General of 11 My2 1998 concerning the
situation in Abkhazia, Georgia.

“I have the honour to inform you that the members
of the Security Council took note with appreciation of
your report of 10 June 1998 concerning the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia.I&1

“The Council is gravely concerned by the recent
outbreak of violence in the zone of conflict, which has
resulted in the loss of human life and a significant
outflow of refugees, and calls upon the parties to observe
strictly the Agreement on a Ceasefre and Separation of
Forces signed in Moscow on 14 May 1994Is8and also the
ceasefire protocol signed on 25 May 1998, as well as all
their obligations to refrain from the use of force and to
resolve disputed issues by peaceful means only.

“The members of the Council reiterated their call
upon the parties to display the necessary political will to
achieve substantial results within the framework of the
United Nations-led peace process and through direct
dialogue.
“The members of the Council supported the
practical measures envisaged in that report to strengthen
the security of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia.

“The Council is deeply concerned by the recent
slowing of the peace process. The Council calls upon the
parties to display the necessary political will to achieve
substantial results on the key issues of the negotiations
within the framework of the United Nations-led peace
process and through direct dialogue, with full respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia,

“The members of the Council reiterated their deep
concern regarding the security of the Mission and noted
the measures already taken to improve security
conditions to minimize the danger to Mission personnel
and to create conditions for the implementation of its
mandated tasks, while underlining the need to conhue
to make further arrangements in this field.

“The Council reaffirms the right of all refbgees and
displaced persons affected by the conflict to return to
their homes in secure conditions, calls upon both sides to
fulfil their obligations in this regard, and welcomes in
this context the efforts undertaken by the members of the
Commonwealth of Independent States, as set out in their
decision of 28 April 1998,16’ in support of the return of
refugees and of a comprehensive political settlement.

“In this context, the members of the Council look
forwardto your report pursuant toresolution 1150(1998)
of 30 January 1998.”
At its 3912th meeting, on 30 July 1998, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Georgia and Germany
to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item
entitled:

“The Council is deeply concerned that the
deterioratingsecurity situation in the Gali region gravely
impedes the work of aid workers, personnel of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia and of the
collective peacekeeping force of the Commonwealth of
Independent Stales. The Council calls upon the parties to
honour fully their commitments to take all measures in
their power to improve the security situation, including
the crcation of a joint mechanism for investigation and
prevention of acts that represent violations of the
Moscow Agreement‘” and terrorist acts in the zone of
conflict.

“The situation in Georgia
“Report of the Secretary-General concerning the
situation in Abkhazia, Georgia (S11998/647 and
Add. 1)”.165

4

Resolution 1187 1998)
of30 July 19 8
The Security Council,

Reaffirming all its relevant resolutions, in particular
resolution 1150 (1998) of 30 January 1998, recalling the
statement by its President of 28 May 1998,160and recalling also
the letter from its President to the Secretary-General dated
10 July 1998,163

“The Council requests the Secretary-General to
consult both sides on the basis of paragraphs 2 6 4 8 and
49 of his report, in particular on the concept of the selfprotection unit outlined therein, and on other options as
appropriate, in close cooperation with the Group of
Friends of the Secretary-General, bearing in mind the
need to secure the consent of both parties to his proposal.
The Council also requests the Secretary-Generalto report
to it on the outcome of those consultations as soon as
possible and no later than 12 June 1998.”

Having considered the report of the Secretary-Generalof
14 July 1998,166
Deeply concerned at the continuing tense and
confrontational situation in the Zugdidi and Gali regions and
at the risk of resumed fighting,

Deeply concernedalso at the unwillingness on the part of
On 10 July 1998, the President of the Security Council both sides to renounce violence and seriously consider
addressed the following letter to the Se~retary-General:’~~ peaceful options for the resolution of the conflict,

OBcial Records of the Security Council, Fib-third Year,
Supplement for April, May and June 1998, documents S/1998/497

161

OBcial Records of the Security Council, F$y-lhird Year,
Supplementfor April, May and June 1998, documents S/19981375
and Add. 1.
162

Ibid., document S/1998/372, annex.

16’

Sll998/633.

and Add. 1.
165 Ibid,,Supplement for July, August and September 1998.
166 Ibid., documents Sl1998I647 and Add.1.
51

Supporting the vigorous efforts made by the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative,with the assistance of
the Russian Federation in its capacity as facilitator, as well as
of the Group of Friends of the Secretary-General and of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, to
prevent the resumption of hostilities and to give a new impetus
to the negotiations within the United Nations-led peace
process, and welcoming in this context the adoption by the
parties of the concluding statement of the meeting held in
Geneva from 23 to 25 July 1998 and the accompanyin
statement of the Group of Friends of the Secretary-General,18
Reaflrming the necessity for the parties strictly to respect
human rights, expressing its support for the efforts of the
Secretary-Generalto find ways to improve their observanceas
an integralpart of the work towards a comprehensive political
settlement,and noting developments in the work of the United
Nations Human Rights Office in Abkhazia, Georgia,
Welcoming the role of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia and of the collective peacekeeping force of
the Commonwealthof Independent States as stabilizing factors
in the zone of conflict, noting that the cooperationbetween the
Mission and the collective peacekeeping force is good, and
stressing the importance of continued close cooperation and
coordination between them in the performance of their
respective mandates,

serious negative impact recent developments have had on
international humanitarian efforts in the Gali region;
7. Reiteraies that the primary responsibility for
achieving peace rests upon the parties themselves, and reminds
them that the continued commitment of the international
community to assist them depends on their progress in this
regard;
8. Calls upon the parties to display without delay the
necessary political will to achieve substantial results on the key
issues of the negotiations, with full respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Georgia, within the framework of
the United Nations-led peace process and through direct
dialogue, and to cooperate fully with the efforts made by the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, with the
assistance of the Russian Federation as facilitator,as well as of
the Group of Friends of the Secretary-General and of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe;

9. Welcomes the meeting of the parties held in Geneva
from 23 to 25 July 1998, and calls upon them to continue and
increasetheir active engagement in thisprocess initiatedby the
Secretary-General aimed at achieving a comprehensive
political settlement;
10. Reminds the parties of their commitments to take all
measures in their power and to coordinate their efforts to
ensure the security and safety of international personnel, and
calls upon them to implement fully and without delay those
commitments, including the creation of a joint mechanism for
investigationand prevention of acts that represent violations of
the Moscow Agreement”’ and terrorist acts in the zone of
conflict;

1. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of
14 July 1998;’&
2. Reiterates its grave concern at the resumption of
hostilities in May 1998, and calls upon the parties to observe
strictlythe Agreement on a Ceasefire and Separation of Forces
signed in Moscow on 14 May 1994”” and also the ceasefire
protocol signed on 25 May 1998, as well as all their
obligations to refrain from the use of force and to resolve
disputed issues by peacefiil means only;

11. Condemnsthe acts ofviolence against the personnel
of the United Nations Observer Mission ih Georgia, the
renewed laying of mines in the Gali region and also the attacks
by armed groups, operating in the Gali region from the
Georgian side of the Inguri River, against the collective
peacekeeping force of the Commonwealth of Independent
States, and demands that the parties, in particular the Georgian
authorities, take determinedmeasures to put a stop to such acts
which subvert the peace process;

3. Expresses its deep concern at the significantoutflow
of refugees resulting from the recent hostilities, reaffms the
right of all refugees and displaced persons to return to their
homes in secure conditions in accordance with international
law and as set out in the Quadripartite Agreement on the
Voluntary Return of Refugees and Displaced Persons of
4 April 1994,”’ calls upon both sides to fulfil their obligations
in this regard, and demands in particular that the Abkhaz side
allow the unconditional and immediate return of all persons
displaced since the resumption of hostilities in May 1998;

12. Reiterates its deep concernregarding the securityof
the Mission, welcomes the measures already taken to improve
security conditions to minimize the danger to Mission
personnel and to create conditions for the implementation of
the mandated tasks of the Mission, underlines the need to
continue to make further arrangements in this field, welcomes
also the instruction of the Secretary-General that the security
of the Mission be kept under constant review, and calls upon
the two parties to facilitate the implementation of practical
measures resulting from that review;

4.
Condemns the deliberate destruction of houses by
Abkhaz forces, with the apparent motive of expelling people
fiom their home areas;

5. Recalls the conclusions of the Lisbon summit of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
regarding the situation in Abkhazia, Ge~rgia,”~
and reaffirms
the unacceptability of the demographic changesresulting from
the conflict;

13. Expresses its concern at the mass media campaign
launched in Abkhazia, Georgia, and the acts of harassment
against the Mission, and calls upon the Abkhaz side to cease
those acts;

6 . Expresses its deep concern at the extremely difficult
humanitarian situation of the displaced persons from the Gali
region as well as of those who remained in that area, and at the

14. Decides to extend the mandate of the Mission for a
new period terminating on 31 January 1999, subject to a
review by the Council of the mandate of the Mission in the
event of any changes that may be made in the mandate or in
the presence of the collective peacekeeping force;

“’Ibid., document S/1998/647lAdd.1.
52

15. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to keep
h e council regularly informed, to report three months after the
date of the adoption of the present resolution on the situation
in Abkhazia, Georgia, including on the operations of the
Mission, and expresses its intention to conduct a review ofthe
Mission in the light of the report of the Secretary-General,
taking into account in particular the progress made by the two
parties in creating secure conditions in which the Mission can
fulfil its existing mandate, and in establishing a political
settlement;

“The Council welcomes the reinvigoration of the
negotiationswithin the United Nations-led peace process.
It particularly welcomes the meeting of the two sides on
confidence-building measures held in Athens from 16 to
18 October 1998, the largest and most representative
meeting of the parties since the military confrontation of
1993, and the increased bilateral contacts between the
two sides. The Council strongly urges the two sides to
build on this momentum to widen their commitment to
the United Nations-led peace process, to continue to
intensify their discussion, in particular within the
Coordinating Council, and to expand their relations at all
levels. The Council also strongly encourages the parties
to work together in order to convene a meeting between
the President of Georgia and Mr. Vladislav Ardzinba and
to reach agreements, in particular on the return of
refugees and measures for the economic rehabilitation of
Abkhazia, Georgia, as a concrete step towards easing
tensions and leading to improvement in the security
environment. The Council reiterates its call to both sides
to display without delay the necessary will to achieve
substantial results on the key issues of the negotiations,
and calls upon them to implement promptly and in good
faith their undertakings, so that living conditions for the
population on both sides can be improved by practical
confidence-building measures.

16. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the
3912th meeting.

Decisions
On 10 November 1998, the President of the Security
Council addressed the following letter to the Security

I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 6 November 1998 concerning your intention to
appoint Major General Tariq Waseem Ghazi, of
Pakistan, as the Chief Military Observer of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia’69has been brought
to the attention of the members of the Security Council.
They take note of the intention expressed in your letter.”

‘The Council strongly condemns the deliberate acts
of violence against the personnel of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia and of the collective
peacekeeping force of the Commonwealth of
Independent States, including the continued laying of
mines, which also endangers the civilian population and
impedes the work of the humanitarian organizations. The
Council demands that both sides take determined and
prompt measures to put a stop to such acts, which subvert
the peace process, and to ensure that the security
environment of all international personnel improves
significantly.

At its 3948th meeting, on 25 November 1998, the
Council considered the item entitled:
“The situation in Georgia
“Report of the Secretary-General concerning the
situation in Abkhazia, Georgia (S/1998/1012 and
Add. l)’r.170
At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Co~ncil:’~’

“The Council welcomes the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral aimed at improving the security of the Mission,
approves his proposal to increase the number of
internationallyrecruited lightly-armed security personnel
and additional local security personnel to provide internal
security to the installations of the Mission, and requests
the Secretary-General to keep the security of the Mission
under constant review, taking into account the
observations contained in his report.

“The Security Council has considered the report of
the Secretary-General of 29 October 1998 concerning the
situation in Abkhazia, Georgia,I7’
“The Council remains deeply concerned at the
continuing tense and unstable situation in the Gali and
Zugdidi regions and at the threat of resumption of serious
hostilities. The Council demands that both sides observe
strictly all their obligations to refrain from the use of
force and to resolve disputed issues by peaceful means
only.

16*

Sl199811053.

ld9

Sl1998f1052.

“The Council reminds both sides that the continued
commitment of the international community to assist
them depends on their progress in achieving peacefilly
a comprehensive political settlement.”

I70

See OJicial Records of the Security Council, Ffly-third Year,
Supplemetri for October, Noveniber and December 1998.
SIPRSTI 1998134.
172
Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fi/ly-third Year,
Supplementfor October, Noveniber and December 1998, dacuments
S/1998/1012 and Add.1.

”‘

53

THE SITUATION IN THE MIDDLE EAST
[Resolutionsor decisions on this question have been adopted by the Securify Council every year since 1967.1

6. Encourages further efficiencyand savingsprovided
they do not affect the operational capacity of the Force;

Decision
At its 3852nd meeting, on 30 January 1998, the Security
Council considered the item entitled:

“The situation in the Middle East
“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/1998/53)”.’73

7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue
consultations with the Government of Lebanon and other
parties directly concerned with the implementation of the
present resolution and to report to the Security Council
thereon.
Adopted unanimously at the
3852nd meeting.

Resolution 1151 (1998)
of 30 January 1998

Decisions

The Security Council,

At the 3852nd meeting also, following consultations
among members of the Security Council, the President made
the following statement on behalf of the Council:’77

Recalling its resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978) of
19 March 1978,501 (1982) of25 February 1982,508 (1982)
of 5 June 1982,509 (1982) of 6 June 1982 and 520 (1982) of
17 September 1982, as well as all its resolutions on the
situation in Lebanon,

“The Security Council has noted with appreciation
the report of the Secretary-General of 20 January 1998
on the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon,
submitted in conformity with resolution 1122 (1 997) of
29 July 1997.’74

Having studied the report of the Secretary-General of
20 Januay 1998 on the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon,’ and taking note of the observations expressed and
the commitments mentioned therein,

“The Council r e a f f i its commitment to the full
sovereignty, political independence, territorial integrity
and national unity of Lebanon within its internationally
recognized boundaries. In this context, the Council
asserts that all States shall refrain from the threat or use
of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State, or in any other manner
inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations.

Taking note of the letter dated 6 January 1998 from the
Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General,”’
Responding to the request of the Government of
Lebanon,

1. Decides to extend the present mandate of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon for a further period of six
months, that is until 31 July 1998;

3. Re-emphasizes the terms of reference and general
guidelines of the Force as stated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 19 March 1978, approved by resolution
426 (1978),’76
and callsupon all parties concerned to cooperate
idly with the Force for the full implementation of its mandate;

“As the Council extends the mandate of the Force
for a further interim period on the basis of resolution
425 (1978), it again stresses the urgent need for the
implementation of that resolution in all its aspects. It
reiterates its full support for the Taif Agreement of
22 October 1989 and for the continued efforts of the
Lebanese Government to consolidate peace, national
unity and security in the country, while successfully
carrying out the reconstruction process. The Council
commends the Lebanese Government for its successful
effort to extend its authority in the south of the country
in full coordination with the Force.

4. Condemns all acts of violence committed in
particular against the Force, and urges the parties to put an end
to them;

“The Council expresses its concern over the
continuing violence in southern Lebanon, regrets the loss
of civilian life, and urges all parties to exercise restraint.

5. Reiterates that the Force should filly implement its
mandate as defined in resolutions 425 (1978); 426 (1978) and
all other relevant resolutions;

“The Council takes this opportunity to express its
appreciation for the continuing efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and his staff in this regard. The Council notes
with deep concern the high level of casualties the Force
has suffered and pays a special tribute to all those who
gave their lives while serving in the Force. It commends
the troops of the Force and troop-contributing countries
for their sacrifices and commitment to the cause of
international peace and security under difficult
circumstances.”

2. Reiterates its strong support for the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon
within its internationallyrecognized boundaries;

See Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fifty-third Year,
Supplementfor January, February and March 1998.
‘74

Ibid., document S/1998/53.

”’Ibid., document S/1998/7.

., Thirty-third Year, Supplementfor January, February and

’” S/PRST/I 99812.

1978, document SA261 1.
54

On 2 March 1998, the President of the Security Council

Decisions

the following letter to the Se~retary-General:’~~

At the 3885th meeting also, following consultations
among members of the Security Council, the President made
the following statement on behalf of the Council:’84

“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 25 February 1998 regarding your intention to
appoint Major General Timothy Roger Ford, of
Australia, to succeed Major General Rufus Kupolati, of
Nigeria, as Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organi~ation’~~
has been brought to the
attention of the members of the Security Council, They
agree with the intention expressed in the letter.”

“In connection with the resolution just adopted on
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, I have been authorized
to make the following complementary statement on
behalf of the Security Council:

“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 28 April 1998 concerning your proposal to add
Slovakia to the list of Member States providing troo s to
the United Nations Disengagement ObserverForcel’has
been brought to the attention of the members of the
Security Council. They agree with the proposal contained
in your letter.”

‘As is known, the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Disengagement
ObserverForce states, in paragraph 10: “Despite
the present quiet in the Israeli-Syrian sector, the
situation in the Middle East continues to be
potentially dangerous and is likely to remain so,
unless and until a comprehensive settlement
covering all aspects of the Middle East problem can
be reached.” That statement of the SecretaryGeneralreflects the view of the Security Council.’ ”

At its 3885th meeting, on 27 May 1998, the Council
considered the item entitled:

On 22 July 1998, the President of the Security Council
addressed the following letter to the Secreta~y-General:’~~

On 1 May 1998, the President of the Security Council
addressed the following letter to the Secretary-General:Ia0

“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 17 July 1998 concerning your proposal to add
Slovakia and Slovenia to the list of Member States
providing military observers to the United Nations Truce
Supervision OrganizationlE6has been brought to the
attention of the members of the Security Council. They
agree with the proposal contained in your letter.”

“The situation in the Middle East
“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(S/1 998/35)1)”.

6

Resolution 1169 1998)
of 27 May 19 8

At its 3913th meeting, on 30 July 1998, the Council
considered the item entitled:

The Security Council,

Having considered the report of the Secretary-Generalof
14 MaxJ998 on the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force,

“The situation in the Middle East
“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
NationsInterimForce in Lebanon (S/1 998/652)”.’87

Decides:

6

Resolution 1188 1998)
of 30 July 19 8

(a) To call upon the parties concerned to implement
immediately Security Council resolution 338 (1973) of
22 October 1973;

The Security Council,

(b) To renew the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for another period of six
months, that is, until 30 November 1998;

Recalling its resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978) of
19 March 1978,501 (1982) of 25 February 1982,508 (1982)
of 5 June 1982,509 (1982) of 6 June 1982 and 520 (1982) of
17 September 1982, as well as all its resolutions on the
situation in Lebanon,

(c) To request the Secretary-General to submit, at the
end of this period, a report on the development in the situation
and the measures taken to implement resolution 338 (1973).

Adopted unanimously at the
3885th meeting.

Having studied the report of the Secretary-General of
16 July 1998 on the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon,”*and taking note of the observations expressed and
the commitments mentioned therein,

S11998/183.
S/1998/364.
S/1998/363.
I82
See Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fifiv-third Year,
Supplementfar April, May and June 1998.
I*’ Ibid., document S/1998/391.

S/PRST/I998/15.
S/1998/680.
S A 998/679.
Ig7 See Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fiffy-third Year,
Supplementfor Jub, August and September 1998.
I*’ Ibid., document S/1998/652.

’ I 8 S/1998/184.
I*‘

17’

IBS

55

“As the Council extends the mandate of the Force
for a further interim period on the basis of resolution
425 (1978), it again stresses the urgent need for the
implementation of that resolution in all its aspects. it
reiterates its full support for the Taif Agreement of
22 October 1989 and for the continued efforts of the
Lebanese Government to consolidate peace, national
unity and security in the country, while successfblly
carrying out the reconstruction process. The Council
cornmends the Lebanese Government for its successfid
effort to extend its authority in the south of the country
in full coordination with the Force.

Taking note of the letter dated 26 June 1998 from the
Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the Secreta~y-General,’~~
Responding to the request of the Government of
Lebanon,
1. Decides to extend the present mandate of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon for a further period of six
months, that is, until 3 1 January 1999;

2. Reiterates ifs strong support for the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and politicaI independence of Lebanon
within its internationally recognized boundaries;

“The Council expresses its concern over the
continuing violence in southern Lebanon, regrets the loss
of civilian life, and urges all parties to exercise restraint.

3. Re-emphasizes the terms of reference and general
guidelines of the Force as stated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 19 March 1978, approved by resolution
426 (1978),’76and calls uponall parties concernedto cooperate
fully with the Force for the fill implementation of its mandate;

“The Council takes this opportunity to express its
appreciation for the continuing efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and his staff in this regard. The Council notes
with deep concern the high level of casualties the Force
has suffered and pays a special tribute to all those who
gave their life while serving in the Force. It cornmends
the troops of the Force and troop-contributing countries
for their sacrifices and commitment to the cause of
international peace and security under difficult
circumstances.”

4. Condemns all acts of violence committed in
particular against the Force, and urges the parties to put an end
to them;

5 . Reiterates that the Force should fully implement its
mandate as defined in resolutions 425 (1978), 426 (1978) and
all other relevant resolutions;

On 21 September 1998, the President of the Security
Council addressed the following letter to the SecretaryGenera1:l9’

6 . Encourages hrther efficiency and savingsprovided
they do not affect the operational capacity of the Force;
7, Requests the Secretary-General to continue
consultations with the Government of Lebanon and other
parties directly concerned with the implementation of the
present resolution and to report to the Security Council
thereon.

“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 14 September 1998 regarding your intention to
appoint Brigadier General Cameron ROSS,of Canada, to
succeed Major General David Stapleton, of Ireland, as
Force Commander of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Forcelg2has been brought to the attention of the
members of the Security Council. They take note of the
intention expressed in the letter.”

Adopted unanimously at the
3913th meeting.
Decisions

On 20 October 1998, the President of the Security
Council addressed the following letter to the SecretaryGeneral:

At the 3913th meeting also, following consultations
among members of the Security Council, the President made
the following statement on behalf of the Council:Iw

“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 16 October 1998 concerning your proposal to add
India to the list of Member States providing military
personnel to the United Nations Interim Force in
LebanonIg4has been brought to the attention of the
members of the Security Council. They
- agree
- with the
proposal contained in your letter.”

“The Security Council has noted with appreciation
the report of the Secretary-General of 16 July 1998 on
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, submitted
in conformity with resolution 1151 (1998) of 30 January
1998.“’
“The Council r e a f f m its commitment to the full
sovereignty, political independence, territorial integrity
and national unity of Lebanon within its internationally
recoenized boundaries. In this context. the Council
asse& that all States shall refrain from the threat or use
of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State, or in any other manner
inconsistent with the purposes o f the United Nations.

At its 3947th meeting, on 25 November 1998, the
Council considered the item entitled:
“The situation in the Middle East

19’

SI19981874.

s119981873.
19’ S119981976.
S119981975.

Ibid., Supplement for April, May and June 1998, document
S/1998/584.
I9O SPRSTII 998123.

19’

56

“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations DheZFagement Observer Force
(S/1998/1073) .

Decision

At the 3947th meeting also, following consultations
among members of the Security Council, the President made
the following statement on behalf of the Co~ncil:‘~’

Resolution 1211 (1998)
of 25 November 1998

“In connection with the resolution just adopted on
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, I have been authorized
to make the following complementary statement on
behalf of the Security Council:

The Securily Corincil,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-Generalof
14 November 1&98 on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force,

‘As is known, the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force 19‘ states, in paragraph 8: “Despite
the present quiet in the Israeli-Syrian sector, the
situation in the Middle East continues to be
potentially dangerous and is likdly to remain so,
unless and until a comprehensive settlement
covering all aspects of the Middle East problem can
be reached.” That statement of the SecretaryGeneralreflects the view ofthe Security Council.’ ”

Decides:
(a) To call upon the parties concerned to implement
immediately Security Council resolution 338 (1973) of
22 October 1973;

(b) To renew the .mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for another period of six
months, that is, until 3 1 May 1999;
(c) To request the Secretary-General to submit, at the
end of this period, a report on the development in the situation
and the measures taken to implement resolution 338 (1973).
Adopted unanimously at the
3947th meeting.

19’ See Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fijiy-third Year,
Supplement$or October, November and December 1998.
196 Ibid., document S/1998/1073.

197

SPRSTII 998/33.

THE SITUATION IN THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
[Resolutions or decisiorts on this question were also adopted by tire Securiq Council in 1997.1

Taking note of the third report to the Security Council by
the International Committee for the follow-up of the Bangui
Agreements,lW

Decision

At its 3853rd meeting, on 5 February 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representative of the Central
African Republic to participate, without vote, in the discussion
of the item entitled:

Taking note also of the letter dated 23 January 1998from
the President of the Central African Republic to the President
of the Security Council2wand the letter dated 4 February 1998
from the President of Gabon, on behalf of the members of the
International Committee for the follow-up of the Bangui
Agreements, to the President of the Security Council,’”

“The situation in the Central African Republic
“Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolution 1136 (1997) concerning the situation in
the Central African Republic (SA998/61)”.’98

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of
23 January 1998, submitted to the Council in accordance with
resolution 1136 (1997),202

Resolution 1152 (1998)
of 5 February 1998

Expressing ifs appreciation for the neutral and impartial
way in which the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the

The Security Council,
Reaffirmingits resolutions 1125 (1997) of (iAugust 1997
and 1136 (1 997) of 6 November 1997,

Ibid., document Sl1998186, annex.
Ibid., document S/1998/88.
201 Ibid., document S11998197.
*02 Ibid., document S/I 998161.
*O0

191

See Oflcial Records of the Security Couticil, Fifiy-third Year,
SupplementJor January, February and March 1998.
57

Implementation of the Bangui Agreements has carried out its
mandate, in close cooperation with the Central African
authorities, and noting with satisfaction that the Inter-African
Mission has contributed to stabilizing the situation in the
Central AfricanRepublic, in particular through the supervision
of the surrendering of arms,
Noting that the States participating in the Inter-African
Mission and the Central African Republic have decided to
extend its mandate203in order for it to complete its mission
with the prospect of the United Nations establishing a
peacekeeping operation,

5 . Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, authorizes the Member States participating in
the Inter-AfricanMission and those States providing logistical
support to ensure security and freedom of movement of their
personnel;

6. Decides that the authorization referred to in
paragraph 5 above will be initially extended until 16 March
1998;

7. Recalls that the expenses and logistical support for
the Inter-African Mission will be borne on a voluntary basis in
accordance with article 11 of the mandate of the Mission,203
and encouragesMember States to contribute to the Trust Fund
for the Central African Republic;

Stressing the importance of regional stability, and in this
context fully supporting the effortsmade by the Member States
participating in the International Mediation Committee
established by the Nineteenth Summit of the Heads of State,
G o v e m e n t and Delegation of France and Africa, held at
Ouagadougou from 4 to 6 December 1996, and by the
members of the International Committee for the follow-up of
the Bangui Agreements,

8, Welcomesthe intention ofthe Secretary-General,as
expressed in his report of 23 January 1998?02 to appoint a
Special Representative to the Central African Republic, and
expresses its belief that the prompt appointment of such a
representative could assist the parties in the implementation of
the Bangui Agreements and provide support to other activities
of the United Nations in the country;

Stressin aZso the need for all signatories of the Bangui
Agreernerd‘to continue to cooperate fully in respecting and
implementing the Agreements in order to help to foster the
conditions for long-term stability in the Central African
Republic,

9. Reiterates its cull to all States, international
organizationsand financial institutions to assist in post-conflict
development in the Central African Republic;
10. Requests the Member States participating in the
Inter-African Mission to provide a report to the Security
Council through the Secretary-General before the end of the
period referred to in paragraph 6 above;

Determining that the situation in the Central Afi.ican
Republic continues to constitute a threat to internationalpeace
and security in the region,
1.
Welcomes the efforts made by the Member States
participating in the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements and by those States
providing support to them, and their readiness to maintain
these efforts;

11, Requests the Secretary-Generalto submit a report
for its consideration, no later than 23 February 1998, on the
situation in the Central African Republic, with
recommendations regarding the establishment of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation, including the structure,
specific goals and financial implications of such an operation,
and with information on the implementation of the Bangui
Agreements and on the commitments expressed in the letter
dated 8 January 1998 from the President of the Central African
Republic to the Secretary-General;

2. Welcomes also the support provided by the United
Nations Development Programme to the International
Committee for the follow-up of the Bangui Agreements, and
encourages the United Nations Development Programme to
continue this support;

3. C d s upon the parties in the Central African
Republic to complete the implementation without delay of the
provisions of the Bangui agreement^,"^ and also calls for the
fulfilment of the commitments expressed in the letter dated
8 January 1998 from the President of the Central African
Republic to the Se~retary-General;~~~

12. Expresses its intention to take a decision by
16 March 1998 on the establishment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation in the Central African Republic on the
basis of the report referred to in paragraph 11 above;

4. Approves the continued conduct by Member States
participating in the Inter-African Mission of the operation in a
neutral and impartial way to achieve its objective as set out in
paragraph 2 of resolution 1125 (1997);

Adopted unanimously at the
3853rd meeting.

13. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

Decision

At its 3860th meeting, on 16 March 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representative of the Central
African Republic to participate, without vote, in the discussion
of the item entitled:
“The situation in the Central African Republic
Ibid., Fgy-second Year, Supplement for July, August and
September 1997, document S119971561, appendix I.
203

“Report of the Secretarv-General Dursuant to
resdlution 1152 (1998) coicerning t h i situation in
the Central African Republic (S/1998/148 and
Add. 1)”.

Ibid., appendices 111-VI.
Ibid., Fijsy-third Year, Supplement for January, February and
March 1998, document S/1998/61, annex.
204
’OS

58

Resolution 1155 1998)
o f 16 March 1 98

6

2. Urges the Government of the Central African
Republic to continue to fulfil the commitments expressed in
the letter dated 8 January 1998 from the President of the
and calls
Central African Republic to the Se~retary-General,~’~
upon the parties in the Central African Republic to complete
the implementation of the provisions of the Bangui
Agreementszo4and to implement the conclusions of the
National Reconciliation Conference;2’o

The Security Council,
Renffirming its resolutions 1 I25 (1997) of 6 August
1997, 1136 (1997) of G November 1997 and 1152 (1998) of
5 February 1998,

Taking note of the report of 10 March 1998 of the
International Cormnittee for the follow-up of the Bangui
Agreements, submitted to the Security Council pursuant to
resolution 1152 (1998),2”h

3, Approves the continued conduct by Member States
participating in the Inter-African Mission of the operation in a
neutral and impartial way to achieve its objective as set out in
paragraph 2 af resolution 1I25 (1997);

Taking note also of the letter dated 11 March 1998 from
he President of the Central African Republic to the President
of the Security Councilzo7and of the letter dated 13 March
1998 from the President of Gabon, on behalf of the members
of the International Committee for the follow-up of the Bangui
Agreements, to thc President of the Security Council,zoE

4. Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, authorizes the Member States participating in
the Inter-African Mission and those States providing logistical
support to ensure security and freedom of movement of their
personnel;
5. Decides that the authorization referred to in
paragraph 4 above shall be extended until 27 March 1998;

Having considered the report of the Secretary-Generalof
23 February 1998, submitted to the Council inaccordance with
resolution 1152 ( 1998),’”’

6 , Recalls that the expenses and logistical support for
the Inter-African Mission will be borne on a voluntary basis in
accordance with article 11 of the mandate of the Mission, and
encourages Member States to contribute to the Trust Fund for
the Central African Republic;

Expressing its nppreciatiovi for the neutral and impartial
way in which the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the I3angui Agreements has carried out its
mandate, in close coopcration with the Central African
authorities, and noting with satisfaction that the Inter-African
Mission has contributed significantly to stabilizing the
situation in the Central African Republic, in particular through
the supervision o f the surrendering of arms,

7. Aflirms that it will take a decision by 27 March
1998 on the establishment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in the Central African Republic on the basis of the
report of the Secretary-General of 23 February 1998;

Noting that the States participating in the Inter-African
Mission and the Central African Republic have decided to
extend the mandate of the Mission until 15 April 1998 in order
to ensure a sniooth transition to the prospective deployment of
a United Nations peacekeeping operation,fo7

8.

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter,

Adopted unanimously at the
3860th meeting,
Decision

Stressing the importance of regional stability, and in this
context hilly supporting the efforts of the International
Mediation Committee established by the Nineteenth Summit
of the Heads of State, Government and Delegation of France
and Africa and by the members of the International Committee
for the follow-up of the Bangui Agreements,

At its 3867th meeting, on 27 March 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representatives of the Central
African Republic and the Sudan to participate, without vote, in
the discussion of the item entitled:
“The situation in the Central African Republic

Stressin also the need for all signatories to the Bangui
Agreements2‘to continue to cooperate fully in respecting and
implementing the Agrccrnents,

“Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolution 1152 (1998) concerning the situation in
the Central African Republic (S/1998/148 and
Add. l)”.i98

Defermining that the situation in the Central African
Republic continues to constitute a threat to international peace
and security in the region,

4

Resolution 1159 1998)
of 27 March 1 98

1. WeZcornes the efforts made by the Member States
participating in the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements and by those States
providing support to them, and their readiness to maintain
these efforts;

Reaflrming its resolutions 1125 (1997) of 6 August
1997, 1136 (1997) of 6 November 1997, 1152 (1998) of
5 February 1998 and 1155 (1998) of 16March 1998,

206

Recalling the report of 10 March 1998 of the
International Committee for the follow-up of the Bangui

Ibid., document S/1998/221, annex.
Ibid., document S/1998/219, annex.
208
Ibid, document Sl19981233, anncx.
209
Ibid., docurncnts SII 998lI 48 and Add.]

The Security Council,

207

Ibid., document S/t998/219, appendix.

+

59

2. Urges the Government of the Central African
Republic to continue to fulfil the commitments expressed in
the letter dated 8 January 1998 from the President of the
Central African Republic to the Secretary-General,"$ and calls
upon the parties in the Central African Republic to complete
the implementation of the provisions of the Bangui
Agreementszo4and to implement the National Reconciliation

Agreements, submitted to the Security Council pursuant to
resolution 1152 (1998),'06
Recalling also the letter dated 11 March 1998 from the
President of the Central African Republic to the President of
the Security Council207and the letter dated 13 March 1998
from the President of Gabon, on behalf of the members of the
International Committee for the follow-up of the Bangui
Agreements, to the President of the Security Council?"

3 , Reiterates its call to all States, international
organizationsand financial institutions to assist in post-conflict
development in the Central African Republic;

Having further considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 23 February 1998, submitted to the Council in
accordance with resolution 1152 (1998),209

B

Reiterating its appreciation for the neutral and impartial
way in which the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements has carried out its
mandate, in close cooperation with the Central African
authorities, and noting with satisfaction that the Inter-African
Mission has contributed significantly to stabilizing the
situation in the Central African Republic, in particular through
the supervision of the surrendering of arms,

4. Welcomes the efforts made by the Member States
participating in the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementationof the Bangui Agreements and by those States
providing support to them, and their readiness to maintain
these efforts;
5. Approves the continued conduct by the Member
States participating in the Inter-African Mission of the
operation in a neutral and impartial way to achieve its
objective as set out in Ejaragraph 2 of resolution 1125 (1997);

Recognizing that the States Participating in the InterAfrican Mission and the CentralAfrican Republic extended the
mandate of the Mission until 15 April 1998 in order to ensure
a smooth transition to the deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation,

6. Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, authorizes the Member States participating in
the Inter-African Mission and those States providing logistical
support to ensure security and freedom of movement of their
personnel;

Stressing the importance of regional stability and the
need to consolidate the progress achieved by the Inter-African
Mission, and in particular to assist the people of the Central
African Republic to consolidate the process of national
reconciliation and help to sustain a secure and stable
environment conducive to the holding of fiee and fair
elections,

7 . Decides that the authorization referred to in
paragraph 6 above will end on 15 April 1998;
8. Recalls that the expenses and logistical support for
the Inter-African Mission will be borne on a voluntary basis in
accordance with article 11 of the mandate of the Mission, and
encourages Member States to contribute to the Trust Fund for
the Central African Republic;

Stressin also the need for all signatories to the Bangui
Agreements" to continue to implement the Agreements and
for the authorities of the Central African Republic to take
concrete steps to implement political, economic, social and
security reforms as referred to in the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 23 February 1998, including the establishment of
an electoral code and preparations for legislative elections
scheduled for August/September 1998,

C
9. Decides to establish the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic with effect from 15 April 1998,
and decides also that the military component of the Mission
shall not exceed 1,350 personnel;

Recognizing the link between peace and development and
that a sustained commitment by the international community
to assist and support the economic, social and institutional
development of the Central African Republic is indispensable
for long-term peace and stability in the country, and in that
regard welcoming the cooperationbetween the Governmentof
the Central African Republic and the international financial
institutions in developing an economic reform programme,

10. Decides that, taking into account the
recommendations of the Secretary-General.in his report of
23 February 1998,20gthe Mission shall have the following
initial mandate:
(a) To assist in maintaining and enhancing security and
stability, including freedom of movement, in Bangui and the
immediate vicinity of the city;

Determining that the situation in the Central African
Republic continues to constitute a threat to internationalpeace
and security in the region,

(b) To assist the national security forces in maintaining
law and order and inprotecting key installations in Bangui;

A

(c) To supervise, control storage and monitor the final
disposition of all weapons retrieved in the course of the
disarmament exercise;

1. Welcomes the progress made by the Central African
authorities and parties towards the achievement of national
reconciliation and sustainable stability in the Central African
Republic;

(d) To ensure security and freedom of movement of
United Nations personnel and the safety and security of United
Nations property;
60

(e) TOassist in coordination with other international
efforts in a short-term police trainers program and in other
capacity-buildingefforts of the national police, and to provide
advice on the restructuring of the national police and special
police forces;

v> To provide advice and technical support to
national electoral bodies regarding the electoral code and plans
for the conduct of the legislative elections scheduled for
AugustISepternber 1998;
11. Authorizes the Secretary-General to take the
measures necessary to ensure that the United Nations Mission
is fully deployed by 15 April 1998 in order to carry out its
mandate, and to secure a smooth transition between the InterAfrican Mission and the United Nations Mission;
12. Decides that the United Nations Mission is
established for an initial period of three months until 15 July
1998, and expresses its intention to decide on the extension of
the Mission on the basis of the report to be submitted by the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 15 below;
13. Asjiynnu that the Mission may be required to take
action to ensure the security and freedom of movement of its
personnel in the discharge of its mandate;
14. Welcomes the appointment by the SecretaryGeneral, within the Mission, of his Special Representative in
the Central African Republic:
(a) To assist in the promotion of the reforms necessary
to achieve national reconciliation, security and stability in the

Secreta~y-General~~~
and on the implementation of the Bay:;
Agreements204 and the National Reconciliation Pact,
including on commitments related to ensuring the economic
recovery of the country;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide
information in his report referred to in paragraph 15 above on
the progress by the Government of the Central African
Republic to adopt an electoral code, set a date for the
legislative elections,and develop specific plans for the conduct
of the legislative elections, and to make recommendations on
the hture role of the United Nations in the legislative elections
process;

17. Urges Member States to respond positively to the
request made to them by the Secretary-General to contribute
personnel, equipment and other resources to the Mission in
order to facilitate its early deployment;2‘

’

18. Approves the intention of the Secretary-General to
establish a trust h n d to enable Member States to make
voluntary contributions to support the activities of the Mission
and to assist in the financing of the Mission, and urges
Member States to contribute to it;
19. RequeIts the Government of the Central African
Republic to conclude a status-of-forces agreement with the
Secretary-General before 25 April 1998, and recalls that
pending the conclusion of such an agreement, the model
status-of-forces agreement dated 9 October 1990212should
apply provisionally;
20. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

country;

Adopted unanimously at the
3867th meeting.

( 6 ) To head the Mission;
(c) To have overall authority over all United Nations
activities in the Central African Republic, in support of the
mandate of the Mission;

(4 To provide good offices and mediation between the

Decisions
On 3 April 1998, the President of the Security Council
addressed the following letter to the Secretary-General:*”

Government and political parties;

“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 31 March 1998 concerning your intention to
appoint Mr. Oluyemi Adeniji, of Nigeria, as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic and Head of the United Nations
Mission in the Central African R e p u b l i ~ ”has
~ been
brought to the attention of the members of thc Security
Council. They agree with the intention expressed in your
letter.”

(e) To provide advice and facilitate technical assistance
in the areas of good governance and the rule of law;
v) To coaperate with other international partners,
including international financial institutions, with the objective
of supporting activities aimed at establishing the foundations
for lasting peace, national reconstruction and development;
(g) To encourage the United Nations agencies and
programmes to provide assistance to the Central African
Republic, in particular in the areas referred to in the report of
the Secretary-General;

15. Requests the Sccretary-General to keep the Security
Council regularly informed and to submit a report to the
Council by 20 June 1998 on the implementation of the
mandate of the Mission, on developments in the Central
African Republic, on progress towards the implementation of
the commitments expressed in the letter dated 8 January 1998
from the President of the Central African Republic to the

On 14 April 1998, the President o f the Security Council
addressed the following letter to the Secretary-Generak2’’

“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 8 April 1998 concerning your intention to appoint
Brigadier General Barthtlhmy Ratanga, of Gabon, as
*I‘ Ibid., document S11998/148.

A/45/594.
‘I’

5/1998/298.

2‘4

St 1998f297.

‘I5

S/1998/321.

2. Calls upon the Government of the Central African
Republic to adopt, as soon as possible, a plan for the effective
restructuring of the armed forces of the Central African
Republic based on the proposals submittedby the Commission
on the Restructuring of the Defence and Security Forces;

Force Commander of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African
has been brought to the
attention of the members of the Security Council. They
agree with the intention expressed in your letter.”
At its 3905th meeting, on 14 July 1998, the Council
decided to invite the representative of the Central African
Republic to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the
item entitled

3. Urges the international community to lend its
support to the restructuring of the securityforces of the Central
AfricanRepublic, including the gendarmerie, through bilateral
and multilateral assistance programmes, and recognizes the
role of the Mission of providing advice and technical
assistance for the initial steps in restructuring those security
forces and, in this connection, coordinating and channeling
international support to this end;

“The situation in the Central African Republic
“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic
(S/ 1998/540)”.2’7

4. Recognizes that the Mission, in implementing its
mandate, may conduct xeconnaissance missions of limited
duration outside Bangui, and other tasks involving the security
of United Nations personnel in accordance with paragraph 10
of resolution 1159 (1998);

Resolution 1182 1998)
of14July19 8

5

The Security Council,
ReuBrming its resolutions 1125 (1997) of 6 August
1997, 1136 (1997) of 6 November 1997, 1152 (1998) of
5 February 1998, 1155 (1998) of 16 March 1998 and
1159 (1998) of27 March 1998,

5. Calls upon the authorities of the Central African
Republic to adopt rapidly an operational plan for the
organization of the legislative elections and so enable the
United Nations and international organizations to make
arrangements for the provision of the necessary assistance;

Welcomingthe report of the Secretary-Generalof 19June
1998:’* and noting the recommendations contained therein,

6. Encourages the Mission to conthue to consult with
the United Nations Development Programme regarding the
provision of advice and technical assistance to all relevant
electoral bodies, and urges the Secretary-General to provide,
as soon as possible, recommendations for United Nations
assistance for the legislative election process;

Noting with satisfaction the rapid and effective
deployment of the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic,
Stressing the importance of regional stability and the
need to consolidate the progress achieved so far and, in
particular, to assist the people of the Central African Republic
to consolidate the process of national reconciliation and to help
to sustain a secure and stable environment conducive to the
holding of free and fair elections,

7. Urges Member States to provide the required
technical, financial and logistical assistance for the
organization of fiee and fair elections;

8. Also urges Member States to support the efforts of
the authorities of the Central African Republic in the economic
and social development of the country, and, in particular,
encourages international financial institutions to cooperate
with the Central African Republic in this regard;

Welcomingthe inaugurationof the Electoral Commission
with a neutral and independent Chairman, and stressinkthe
need for all signatories to the Bangui Agreements to
cooperate to ensure the effective functioning of the
Commission,

9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
to the Security Council by 25 September 1998 on the
implementation of the mandate of the Mission, on
developments in the Central African Republic, on progress
towards the implementation of the commitments expressed in
the letter dated 8 January 1998 from the President of the
Central African Republic to the Secretary-Genera1205and on
the implementation of the Bangui Agreements’” and the
National Reconciliation Pact?’’ including on commitments
related to ensuring the economic recovery of the country;

Reiterating the need for the authorities of the Central
African Republic to continue to take concrete steps to
implement political, economic, social and security reforms as
referred to in the report of the Secretary-General of
23 February 1998209and to fulfil the commitments expressed
in the letter dated 8 January 1998 from the President of the
Central African Republic to the Secretary-General,*05including
continued cooperation with the international financial
institutions,

1. Decides to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic until
25 October 1998;

10. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter,

Adopted unanimously at the
3905th meeting.
Decision
At its 3935th meeting, on 15 October 1998,the Security
Council decided to invite the representative of the Central
African Republic to participate, without vote, in the discussion
of the item entitled:

S/1998/320.
See Oflcial Records of the Security Council, FiSty-third Year,
Supplementfor Jub, August and September 1998.
Ibid., document S/1998/540.
2‘6

”’

62

Isfie situatioii in the Central African Republic

(a) The transport of electoral materials and equipment
to selected sites and to the sous-prtfectures, as well as the
transport of United Nations electoral observers to and from
electoral sites;

"Second report Of the
On the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic (S/1998/783 and Add. l)''.2'7

(6) The conduct of a limited but reliable international
observation of the first and second rounds of the legislative
elections;

Resolution 1201 (1998)
of 15 October 1998

The Security Cauncil,

(c) Ensuring the security of electoral materials and
equipment during their transport to and at the selected sites, as
well as the security of the international electoral observers;

ReaSfinning its resolutions I125 (1997) of 6 August

1997, 1136 (1997) of 6 November 1997, 1152 (1998) of
~February1998,1155 (1998)of 16March 1998,1159(1998)
of27 March 1998 arid 1182 (1998) of 14 July 1998,

3, Approves the recommendation contained in
paragraph 25 of the report of the Secretary-General2"
regarding the provision of security during the legislative
election process, taking into account the need to ensure the
stability and security of Bangui and in accordance with the
cost estimate associated with this recommendation contained
in the addendum to that report;

Welcorning the report of the Secretary-General of
21 August 1998,2'"andnotingthe recommendations contained
therein,

Stressin that the complete implementation of the Ban ui
Agreements" and of the National Reconciliation Pac?' P is
essential to peace and national reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, and recognizing the significant progress
made by the Government of the Central African Republic in
implementing the Bangui Agreements and initiating major
political and cconomic refomis,

4.
Welcomes the establishment of ajoint committee of
the Government of the Central Afiican Republic and the
Mission to address the restructuring of the Cenhal African
Armed Forces, and reiterates its call upon the Government of
the Central African Republic to adopt as soon as possible a
plan for the effective restructuring of the Armed Forces;

Recallirig the importance of regional stability and the
need to consolidate
Progress achieved so far and, in
particular, to assist the people ofthe Central African Republic
to consolidnte the process of national reconciliation and to help
to sustain a secure and stable environment conducive to the
holding of free and fdir elcctions,

5. Welcornesthedeploymentofupto 150 troops ofthe
to the selected sites, operating
cenba1 African Armed F~~~~~
of engagement applicable to the
under United Nations
Mission;

6. Calls upon the Central African authorities to
provide the necessary assistance, including the security
that
enable the Central African Republic
and the mixed and independent Electoral Commission to
legislative elections;
prepare adequately and freely for

Emlphasizirtg that the authorities of the Central African
Republic and the mixed and independent Electoral
Commission are responsible for the organization and conduct
of the legislative elections,
Y

7. Urges all parties in the Central African Republic to
assume fully their responsibilities in the legislative elections
and to participate in them in a manner that will strengthen the
democratic process and contribute to national reconciliation;

Noting with salisfoction the adoption of an operational
plan for the Organization of the legislative elections by the
Central African Republic and the mixed and independent
Electoral Commission, and welcoming donor pledges made in
support of the electoral process,

8. Urges Member States to provide the required
technical, fmancial and logistical assistance for the
organization of free and fair legislative elections;

Recognizirig the importance of the support already given
by the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic to the
mixed and indcpendent Electoral Commission in the
preparations for the elections,

9.

Decides to extend the mandate of the Mission until

28 February 1999;

10. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Security
Council regularly informed and to submit by 20 December
1998 the report called for in resolution 1182 (1998) on the
implementation of the mandate of the Mission, on
developments in the Central African Republic, on progress
towards the implementation of the commitments expressed in
2. Decides that the mandate of the United Nations the letter dated 8 January 1998 from the President of the
Mission in the Central African Republic shall include support Central African Republic to the Secretary-General"' and on
for the conduct of legislative elections as described in section the implementation of the Bangui Agreementszo4and the
111of the report ofthe Secretary-Ceneral of 21 August 1998220 National Reconciliation Pact:"
including on commitments
and, in particular:
related to ensuring the economic recovery of the country and
the restructuring of the security forces;

Wdcotnm the announcement by the authorities of
the Central African Rep\hlic and the mixed and independent
Electoral Commission of the holding of legislative elections
on 22 November and 13 December 1998;
1.

219

120

11, Expresses its intention to terminate the Mission no
later than 28 February 1999, with its drawdown beginning no
later than 15 January 1999, andrequests the Secretary-General

Ibid., documcnts S/I998/783 and Add. 1 ,
Ibid., document S/I W8/783.
63

13. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

to make recommendations on this basis in his reDort referred
to in paragraph 10 above;

Adopted unanimously at the
3935th meeting.

12. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General,
his Special Representative and the personnel of the Mission for
their efforts to promote peace and nationalreconciliationin the
Central African Republic;

THE SITUATION IN TAJIKISTAN AND ALONG THE TAJIK-AFGHAN BORDER
[Resohiions or decisions on ihis question have been adopted by the Security Council every year since 1993.1

and encourages them to continue assisting the parties in
the implementation of the General Agreement. It
welcomes the results of the international donor
conference in support of peace and reconciliation in
Tajikistan convened by the Secretary-General in Vienna
on 24 and 25 November 1997,226and looks forward to
the contribution of those results to consolidating the
peace process in Tajikistan.

Decisions
At its 3856thmeeting, on 24February 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representative of Tajikistan to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled:
“The situation in Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan
border
“Progress report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Tajikistan (S/1998/113).22’

“The Council reiterates its concern that the security
situation in some parts of Tajikistan remains precarious.
It reminds both parties that the international community
is ready to continue assisting in the implementationof the
General Agreement as well as in humanitarian and
rehabilitation programmes, but that its ability to do so
and also the ability of the Mission to carry out its tasks
more effectively is linked to improvements in security
conditions.

At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:22z
“The Security Council has considered the progress
report of the Secretary-General of 10 February 1998 on
the situation in Tajikistan, submitted pursuant to
paragraph 12 of its resolution 1138 (1997) of
14 November 1997.223

“The Council firmly condemns the hostage-taking
of relief workers that took place in November 1997 and
urges the parties to cooperate further in ensuring the
security and freedom of movement of the personnel of
the United Nations, the collectivepeacekeeping forces of
the Commonwealth of Independent States and other
international personnel, and to take practical steps in this
respect, such as those mentioned in paragraph 7 of the
report of the Secretary-General.

“The Council regrets that during the last three
months work on the implementation of the General
Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and National
Accord in Tajikistan’” and the relevant activities of the
Commission on National Reconciliation have proceeded
very slowly. It welcomes recent efforts made by the
parties in order to fulfil their obligations. The Council
calls upon them to intensify their efforts to implement
fully the General Agreement, including the protocol on
military issues.22sIt also encourages the Commission on
National Reconciliation to continue its efforts aimed at
the institution of a broad dialogue among the various
political forces, as foreseen in the General Agreement.

“The Council welcomes the presidential decree
establishing a joint security unit with the task of
providing security, including armed escorts, for Mission
personnel and calls upon the parties to make the unit
operational as soon as possible. It also welcomes the
readiness of the collectivepeacekeeping forces to arrange
for the guarding of United Nations premises in
Dushanbe, as mentioned in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, and encourages the Mission and the collective
peacekeeping forces to make the relevant detailed
arrangements.

“The Council commendsthe Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the personnel of the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan for their work

’”Sec Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fi$y--third Year,

Supplementfor January, February and March 1998.
SIPRST/1998/4.
Ojficial Records o j the Security Council, Filly-third Year,
Supplement for January, February and March 1998, document
S/1998/113.
214 Ibid., Fifty-second Year, Supplement for April, May and June
1997, document S/1997/510, annex I.
Ibid., Supplement for January, February and March 1997,
document S/1997/209, annex 11.

“The Council encourages the Secretary-General to
continue the expansion of the Mission to the strength
authorized by its resolution 1138 (1997) as soon as the
Secretary-General deems conditions appropriate.”

’’’

’16 Ibid., FiJy-third Year, Supplement for January, February and
March i998, document S/1998/113, para.2.

64

peacekeeping forces of the Commonwealth of Independent
States, the Russian border forces and the mission in Tajikistan
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,

On 27 March 1998,the President of the Security Council
addressed the following letter to the Secretary-General:*”

“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 23 March 1998 concerning your intention to
appoint Brigadier General Tengku Ariffin Bin Tengku
Mohammed, of Malaysia, as the next Chief Military
Observer of the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan228has been brought to the attention of the
members of the Security Council. They agree with the
intention expressed in your letter.”

Welcoming also the contribution ofthe Contact Group of
Guarantor States and hternational Organizations to the peace
process,

1. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of
6 May 1998;230

2 . Condemns renewed fighting in violation of the
ceasefie resulting fkom attacks initiated by some local United
Tajik Oppositioncommanders, and calls upon all concernedto
refrain from acts of violence;

At its 3879th meeting, on 14 May ,1998, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Tajikistan to participate,
without vote, in the presentationdiscussion of the item entitled:

3. Calls upon the parties to undertake vigorous efforts
to implement fully the General Agreement on the
Establishment of Peace and National Accord in Tajiki~tan?’~
including the protocol on military issues,225and to create
conditions for the holding of elections at the earliest possible
time;

“The situation in Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan
border
“Report of the Secretary-Generalon the situation in
Tajikistan (S/ I 99 8/374)”.229
Resolution 1167 1998)
of14May19 8

6

4. Also calls upon the parties, with the involvementof
the United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan and the
Contact Group of Guarantor States and International
Organizations,to implement the timetable ofmeasures adopted
by the Commission on National Reconciliation on 29 April
1998, notably, and as a matter of priority, the implementation
of the protocol on military issues and the appointment of
United Tajik Opposition representatives to the remaining
government positions allocated to them, as well as the
implementation of the amnesty law;

The Security Council,
Recalling all its relevant resolutions and the statements
by its President,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-Generalof
6 May 1998 on the situation in Tajiki~tan;~~

Reafirming its commitment to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Tajikistan and to the
inviolability of its borders,

5. Notes with appreciation the work of the retiring
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, cornmends
the efforts of all the personnel of the Mission, and encourages
them to continue assisting the parties in the implementation of
the General Agreement;

Expressing regret that during the past three months
progress in the peace process has been very slow,
Expressing concern at the precarious security situation in
some parts of Tajikistan,

6 . Calls upon the parties to intensify their efforts to
bring into operation as soon as possible a joint security unit
tasked with providing security for Mission personnel, and to
cooperate hrther in ensuring the safety and freedom of
movement of the personnel of the United Nations, the
collective peacekeeping forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States, and other international personnel;

Expressingfurther concern at violations of the ceasefue
in Tajikistan,
Welcoming the intensified contacts between the
leadership of the Government of Tajikistan and the leadership
of the United Tajik Opposition, which helped to contain the
crises in the period covered by the report of the SecretaryGeneral and confirmed the commitment of both parties to the
peace process,

7. Encourages the Mission and the collective
peacekeeping forces to continue discussion of options for
improving security cooperation;

8. Calls upon Member States and others concernedto
respond promptly and generously to the consolidated appeal
for Tajlkistan for 1998 launched in Geneva in March 1998,
and expresses the hope that the meeting of the Consultative
Group to be held by the World Bank on 20 May 1998 will
bring positive results;

Recognizing that comprehensive international support
remains essentialfor the intensificationof the peace process in
Tajikistan,
Welcoming the maintenance of close contact by the
United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan with the
parties, as well as its cooperative liaison with the collective

9. Decides to extend the mandate of the Mission for a
period of six months until 15 November 1998;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Council
informed of all significant developments, in particular
regarding the security situation, and also requests him to report
within three months of the adoption of the present resolution
on its implementation;

Sf1998l214.
22a S/1998/273.
ln

’19 See Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fvty-third Year,
Supplement for April, May and June 1998.
Ibid., document St19981374.

65

of the ceasefire between the Government of Tajikistan and the
United Tajik Opposition, and noting that there remain
alifficulties to be resolved in this regard,

11. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

Adopted unanimously at the
3879th meeting.
Decisions

Welcoming also the intensified regular contacts between
the leadership of the Government of Tajikistan and of the
United Tajik Oppositionwhich helped to contain the crises in
the period covered by the report of the Secretary-General,
confirmed the commitment of both parties to the peace process
and contributed to the implementation of the General
Agreement,

On 19 May 1998, the President of the Security Council
addressed the following letter to the Se~retary-General:~”

“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 15 May 1998 concerning your intention to appoint
Mr. JBn KubiS, of Slovakia, as your Special
Representative for TajikistanZ3’has been brought to the
attention of the members of the Security Council. They
agree with the intention expressed in your letter.”

Welcomingfurther the maintenance of close contact by
the UnitedNationsMission of Observers in Tajikistan with the
parties, as well as its cooperative liaison with the collective
peacekeeping forces of the Cornonwealth of Independent
States, the Russian border forces and the mission in Tajikistan
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,

On 28 August 1998, the President of the Security Council
addressed the following letter to the Secretary-General:2”
“I have the honour to inform you that your interim
report of 13 August 1998 on the situation in Tajikistan
and the addendum
have been considered by the
members of the Security Council. The members of the
Council take note of the information contained in
paragraph 23 of the report as well as the information
contained in the addendum to the report in that regard.”

Welcoming the contribution of the Contact Group of
Guarantor States and International Organizationsto the peace
process,
Expressing concern at the precarious security situation in
some parts of Tajikistan,
Deeply concerned that there has not been sufficient
progress in establishing all relevant facts concerning the
murder of four members of the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan in July 1998,

At its 3943rd meeting, on 12 November 1998, the
Council decided to invite the representative of Tajikistan to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled:
‘The situation in Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan
border

1. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of
3 November 1998;236

“Report of the Secretaryfexgral on the situation in
Tajikistan (S/1998/1029) ,

2. Strongly condemns the recent fighting in the
Leninabad area initiated by forces trying to hinder the peace
process in Tajikistan, and calls upon all concerned to refrain
from the use of force;

Resolution 1206 (1998)
of 12 November 1998

3. Calls upon the parties to undertake vigorous efforts
to implement fully the General Agreement on the
Establishment of Peace and National Accord in Tajiki~tan,2~‘
including the protocol on military issues,22sand to create
conditions for the holding of elections at the earliest possible
time in 1999;

The Security Council,
Recalling all its relevant resolutions and the statements
by its President,
Having considered the report of the Secretar-General of
3 November 1998 on the situation in Tajikistan,’

4. Notes with appreciation the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General,commendsthe efforts
of all the personnel of the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajkistan, and encourages them to continue
assisting the parties in the implementation of the General
Agreement;

Reaftinning its commitment to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Tajikistan and to the
inviolability of its borders,
Welcomingthe movement towards the implementationof
the General Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and
andthe effective maintenance
National Accord in Tajiki~tan”~

7.1‘

5. Welcomes the continued contribution made by the
collective peacekeeping forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States in assisting the parties in the
implementationof the GeneralAgreement in coordination with
all concerned;

S/1998/408.

”’Sf 19981407.

6. Strongly condemns the murder of four members of
the Mission, recognizes that the completion of the
investigation into this case is important for the resumption of
the field activities of the Mission, urges the Government of
Tajikistan to complete the investigation expeditiously and to
bring to justice all those found to be responsible for the crime,
and also urges the United Tajik Opposition leaders to continue
to cooperate fully with these efforts;

S/1998/818.
OflciaI Records of the Security Council, F$y-third Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1998, documents
Sl1998l754 and Add.1.
233
Ibid., Supplement for October, November and December 1998.
‘I6 Ibid., document S/1998/1029.
”I

234

66

7 . Acknowledges the efforts of the Government of
Tajikistan to enhance the protection of internationalpersonnel,
and calls upon the parties to cooperate firther in ensuring the
safety and freedom of movement of the personnel of the
United Nations, the collective peacekeeping forces and other
international personnel;
8. Notes with satisfaction the meeting of the
Consultative Group held by the World Bank on 20 May 1998,
and calls upon Member States and others concerned to respond
promptly and generously to the consolidated appeal for
Tajikistan for 1998 launched in Geneva in March 1998;

9. Recognizes that comprehensive international
support remains essential for the intensification of the peace
process in Tajikistan, and reminds both parties that the ability
of the international community to mobilize and to continue
assistance for Tajikistan is linked to the security of the

personnel of the Mission and international organizations, and
of humanitarian workers;
10. Decides to extend the mandate of the Mission for a
period of six months until 15 May 1999;

11. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Council
informed of all significant developments, in particular
regarding the security situation and measures taken to enhance
the security of the Mission, and also requests him to report
within three months of the adoption of the present resolution
on its implementation;
12. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

Adopted unanimously at the
3943rd meeting.

THE SITUATION IN SIERRA LEONE
[Resolutions or decisions on this question have been adopted by the Security Council every year since 1995.1

Decisions
At its 3857thmeeting, on 26 February 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representativeof Sierra Leone to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled
“The situation in Sierra Leone”.
At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the
“The Security Council recalls its resolution
1132 (1997) of 8 October 1997, and the statementsby
President of 27 May,23B11 Julyz3’and 6 August 1997,
following the military coup d‘dtat in Sierra Leone on
25 May 1997. It expresses its deep regret at the violence,
loss of life and property and immense suffering
undergone by the people of Sierra Leone since the coup.
It remains gravely concerned at the continued violence in
the country and calls for an urgent end to the fighting.

!$

“The Council welcomes the fact that the rule of the
military junta has been brought to an end, and stresses
the imperative need for the immediate restoration of the
democratically elected Governmentof PresidentAhmad
Tejan Kabbah and a return to constitutional order, in
accordance with paragraph 1 of its resolution
1132 (1997).
“The Council encouragesthe earliestpossiblereturn
to Freetown by President Kabbah and looks forward to
his re-establishing a functioning and autonomous
government in the country.

“The Council expresses its readiness to terminate
the measures imposed by paragraphs 5 and 6 of its
resolution 1132 (1 997) as soon as the conditions referred
to in paragraph 1 of that resolution have been fulfilled.
“The Council commends the important role that the
Economic Community of West African States has
continued to play towards the peacehl resolution of this
crisis. The Council encourages the Monitoring Group of
the Economic Community of West African States to
proceed in its efforts to foster peace and stability in
Sierra Leone, in accordance with relevant provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations. It underlines the need
for close cooperationbetween the legitimate Government
of Sierra Leone, the Economic Community of West
African States, and in particular its Committee of Five
Ministers for Foreign Affairs on Sierra Leone, the
commanders ofthe Monitoring Group, the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General and his staff, United Nations
agencies and relevant international organizations in their
work, and specifically in the development of a plan for
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration into
civilian life of all combatants in Sierra Leone. In this
context, it supports the intention of the SecretaryGeneral, subject to security conditions on the ground, to
take rapid steps towards the reopening of the United
Nations Liaison Office in Freetown in order to support
the activities of his Special Envoy, and in particular to
assist national reconciliation and political dialogue.
“The Council expresses the view that the Conakry
Agreemed4’ and the Abidjan Agreemed4’ provide
important elements for a framework for peace, stability

’” Oflcia1 Records of the Security Council, Fifty-second Year.

’”S/PRST/1998/5.

Supplementfor October, November and December 1997, document
S/1997/824, annexes I and 11.
242 Ibid., FvV-Jrst Year, Supplement for October, November and
December 1996, document S/1996/1034,annex,

SIPRSTI1997f29.
239 S/PRSTf 1997136.
240 SIPRST/1997/42.

23a

67

Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations,

and national reconciliation in Sierra Leone. It calls upon
all parties in Sierra Leone to work towards these
objectives through peaceful means and political dialogue.
In this regard, it condemns all reprisal killings and related
violence in Siena Leone and calls for an immediate end
to such acts.

1. Welcomes the return to Sierra Leone of its
democraticallyelected President on 10 March 1998;
2. Decides to terminate, with immediate effect, the
prohibitionsOn the sale Of Supply to Sierra Leone Ofpetroleum
and petroleumproducts referred to in paragraph 6 ofresolution
1132 (1997);

“The Council looks forward to detailed proposals
by the Secretary-General concerning fie role of the
United Nations and its future presence in Sierra Leone. It
requests the Secretary-General to establish a trust h n d to
Member states
such activities and
to make early contributions to it.

3. Welcomes the intention of the Secretary-Generalto
make proposa]s concerningthe role of the United Nations and
its future presence in Sierra Leone;

“The Council welcomes the interim report of the
inter-agency assessment mission to Sierra Leone of
1998243
those Member States
and international organizations which have provided
urgent humanitarian assistance to Sierra Leone. It
remains deeply concerned about the serious and fragile
humanitarian situation in the country, and calls upon all
States and international or8anizations to provide further
urgent assistance to Sierra Leone and neighbouring
countries affected by the crisis. It calls upon the
Monitoring Group and all those concerned to ensure safe
and unrestricted access to those in need.

4. Decides to review the other prohibitions referred to
in resolution 1132 (1997) in accordance with paragraph 17 of
that resolution and in the light of developments and further
discussion with the Government of Sierra Leone;
5.

Decides also to remain seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the
3861st meeting.
Decision

At its 3872nd meeting, on 17 April 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representative of Sierra Leone to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled

“The Council expresses its concern about the safety
of all humanitarian personnel in Sierra Leone and
condemns the taking of hostages by former members of
the deposed junta. It calls for the immediate release of all
international personnel and others who have been
detained or held hostage. It commends the Monitoring
Group for its efforts to liberate those individuals being
held against their will.

“The situation in Sierra Leone
“Fourth report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Sierra Leone (S/1998/249)”.2”
Resolution 1162 (1998)
of 17 April 1998

“The Council will remain seized of this matter.”

The Security Council,

At its 3861st meeting, on 16 March 1998, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Sierra Leone to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled:

Recalling its resolutions 1132 (1997) of 8 October 1997
and 1156 (1998) of 16 March 1998 and the statement by its
President of 26 February 1998,2”

“The situation in Sierra Leone

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General of
“Letter dated 9 March 1998 from the Charge 18 March 1998,146
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Sierra
Leone to the United Nations addressed to the
1. Wekornes the efforts made by the democratically
President of the Security Council (S/1998/215)”.244 elected President of Sierra Leone since his return on 10March
1998 and by the Government of Sierra Leone to restore
Resolution 1156 1998)
peaceful and secure conditions in the country, to re-establish
of 16 March 1!
l
98
effective administration and the democratic process and to
embark on the task of reconstruction and rehabilitation;
The Security Council,
2 . Commends the Economic Community of West
Recalling its resolution 1132 (1997) of 8 October 1997
African
States and its Monitoring Group, deployed in Sierra
and the relevant statements by its President,
Leone, on the important role they are playing in support of the
Taking note of the letter dated 9 March 1998 from the objectives related to the restoration of peace and security set
ChargC d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Sierra out in paragraph 1 above;
Leone to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
3, Emphasizes the need to promote national
Security Counci1,24’
reconciliationin Sierra Leone, and encourages all parties in the
country to work together towards this objective;
243 Ibid., Fifty-third Year, Supplenient for January, February and
March 1998, document S/1998/155, annex.
Ibid., Supplementfor January, February and March 1998.
24s Ibid., document W9981215.
244

246

68

Ibid., documents S/I9981249 and Add. 1.

4. Notes with satisfaction the steps taken by the
Secretary-Generalto strengthenthe office of his Special Envoy
in Freetown with necessary civilian and military personnel
with the aims proposed in his report of 18 March 1998?46

At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:247
“The Security Council condemns as gross violations
of international humanitarian law the recent atrocities
camed out against the civilian population of Sierra
Leone, particularly women and children, by members of
the RevolutionaryUnited Front and the deposed military
junta, including widespread rape, mutilation, and
slaughter. It calls for an immediate end to all violence
against civilians. The Council, in this regard, expresses
grave concern about reports of military support being
provided to the rebels. It calls upon all States to observe
strictly the provisions of resolution 1132 (1 997) and to
avoid any action that might firther destabilize the
situation in Sierra Leone.

Authorizes the deployment, with immediate effect,
of up to ten United Nations military liaison and security
advisory personnel, in accordance with paragraph 44 of the
report of the Secretary-General,to Sierra Leone for a period of
up to ninety days, to work under the authority of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General,to coordinate closely with the
Government of Sierra Leone and the Monitoring Group, to
report on the military situation in the country, to ascertain the
state of and to assist in the finalization of planning by the
Monitoring Group for future tasks, such as the identificationof
the former combatant elements to be disarmed and the design
of a disarmament plan, as well as to perform other related
security tasks as identified in paragraphs 42,45 and 46 of the
report of the Secretary-General;
5.

“The Council deplores the continued resistance to
the authority of the legitimate Government of Sierra
Leone and calls upon all rebels to cease their resistance,
lay down their arms, and surrender to forces the
Monitoring Group of the Economic Community of West
Afican States immediately, It again commends the
Economic Community of West Afiican States and the
Monitoring Group for the important role they are playing
to restore peace and security in Sierra Leone. The
Council reiterates its call for States to provide technical
and logistical support to assist the Monitoring Group to
continue to enhance its ability to cany out its
peacekeeping role and contribute to bringing an end to
the atrocities being committed against the people of
Sierra Leone.

6 . Welcomesthe discussionstaking place between the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, the Govemment of
Sierra Leone and the Monitoring Group on the further
elaboration and implementationof the concept of operations of
the Monitoring Group, and the intention of the SecretaryGeneral to revert to the Council with further recommendations
on the possible deployment in this regard of United Nations
military personnel, and expresses its intention to consider such
recommendations and take a decision thereon expeditiously;
7 , Urges all States and international organizations to
provide urgent humanitarian assistance to Sierra Leone, in
response to the consolidated inter-agency appeal launched on
3 March 1998;

“The Council expresses deep concern for the plight
of all those affected by the continuing insecurity,
includingthe tens of thousands of refugees and displaced
persons. It urges all those concerned to continue
humanitarian assistance and underscores the importance
of a comprehensiveresponse by United Nations agencies
in coordinationwith the Government of Sierra Leone and
with the support of the Monitoring Group. The Council
also recognizes the important role played by the
international community, including the Organization of
African Unity and relevant non-governmental
organizations, to provide humanitarian assistance to
civilians in dire need in Sierra Leone. The Council
commends the Governments of neighbouring countries
for their reception of refugees and calls upon all States
and relevant international organizations to help them in
responding to the refugee crisis.

8 . Encourages all States and international
organizations to assist and participate in the longer term tasks
of reconstruction and economic and social recovery and
development in Sierra Leone;
9. Urges all States to make contributions to the trust
fund which has been established to support peacekeeping and
related activities in Sierra Leone, and to provide technical and.
logistical support to assist the Monitoring Group to continueto
carry out its peacekeeping role;

10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Council periodically, including on the activities of the military
liaison and securityadvisory personnel referred to in paragraph
5 above and on the work of the office of his Special Envoy in
Sierra Leone, within the reporting time-frame in paragraph 16
of resolution 1132 (1997);

Decisions

“The Council expresses concern for the safety of all
humanitarianpersonnel working in Sierra Leone, It calls
upon all parties concerned to facilitate the work of
humanitarian agencies. The Council urges the parties to
protect displaced persons seeking refuge, as well as
United Nations and humanitarian aid workers.

At its 3882nd meeting, on 20 May 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representativeof Sierra Leone to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled
“The situation in Sierra Leone”.

“The Council welcomes the efforts made by the
democratically elected Government since its return on
10 March 1998 to restore peace and stability and to
reestablish effective administration and the democratic

11. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

Adopted unanimously at the
3872nd meeting.

’‘’S/PRST/1998/13.
69

process in Sierra Leone. It encourages the Economic
Community of West African States to renew its political
efforts to foster peace and stability and urges all parties
in the country to embark on the tasks of national
reconstruction, rehabilitation and reconciliation. The
Council urges all parties concerned to respect fully
international law, including human rights and
humanitarian law.

“The Council urges States and other parties
concerned to contribute to the trust fund to support
peacekeeping and related activities in Sierra Leone, and
to humanitarian assistance efforts.
“The Council requests the Secretary-General to
keep it advised on the situation in Sierra Leone.
T h e Council will remain seized of this matter.”

On 26 May 1998, the President of the Council addressed
the following letter to the Se~retary-General:~~’
“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 20 May 1998 concerning your proposal to include
India, Kenya, the Russian Federation, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
Zambia in the list of countries contributing military
personnel to the United Nations liaison team in Sierra
Leone249has been brought to the attention of the
members of the Security Council. They agree with the
proposal contained in your letter.”

At its 3889th meeting, on 5 June 1998, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Sierra Leone to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled
“The situation in Sierra Leone”.
Resolution 1171 (1998)
of 5 June 1998

3. Further decides that the restrictions referred to in
paragraph 2 above shall not apply to the sale or supply of a m
and related mntiriel for the sole use in Sierra Leone of the
Monitoring Group of the Economic Community of West
African States or the United Nations;

Decides that States shall notify all exports from
4.
their territories of arms or related matkriel to Sierra Leone to
the Committee established by resolution 1132 (1997), that the
Governmentof Sierra Leone shall mark, register and notify to
the Committee all imports made by it of arms and related
maikriel, and that the Committee shall report regularly to the
Council on notifications so received;
5. Also decides that all States shall prevent the entry
into or transit through their territories of leading members of
the former military junta and of the Revolutionary United
Front, as designated by the Committee established by
resolution 1132 (1997), provided that the entry into or transit
through a particular State of any such person may be
authorized by the same Committee, and provided that nothing
in the present paragraph shall oblige a State to refuse its own
nationals entry to its territory;

6. Further decides that the Committee established by
resolution 1132 (1997) shall continue to undertake the tasks
referred to in subparagraphs 10 (a), (b), (c), (d), v) and (h) of
paragraph 10 of that resolution in relation to paragraphs 2 and
5 above;

The Security Council,
&ecaZZing its resolutions 1132 (1997) of 8 October 1997,
1156 (1998) of 16 March 1998 and 1162 (1998) of 17 April
and
1998 and the statements by its President of 26 February237
20 May 1998,247

7. Expresses its readiness to terminate the measures
referred to in paragraphs 2,4 and 5 above once the control of
the Government of Sierra Leone has been fully re-estabIished
over all its territory, and when all non-governmental forces
have been disarmed and demobilized;

Welcoming the efforts of the Government of Sierra Leone
to restore peaceful and secure conditions in the country, to reestablish effective administration and the democratic process,
and to promote national reconciliation,

8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Council within three months of the date of adoption of the
present resolution, and again within six months, regarding, in
particular, the export of arms and related matkriel referred to
in paragraph 2 above, and on progress made towards the
objectives referred to in paragraph 7 above;

Deploring the continued resistance to the authority of the
legitimate Government of Sierra Leone, and stressing the
urgency for all rebels to put an end to the atrocities, cease their
resistance and lay down their arms,
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations,

9.

Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the
3889th meeting.

Decides to terminate the remaining prohibitions
imposed by paragraphs 5 and 6 of resolution 1132 (1997);
1.

Decision
At its 3902nd meeting, on 13 July 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representatives of Austria,
Nigeria and Sierra Leone to participate, without vote, in the
discussion of the item entitled:

‘‘’S/1998/429.
249

2. Also decides, with a view to prohibiting the sale and
supply of arms and related matkriel to non-governmental
forces in Sierra Leone, that all States shall prevent the sale or
supply, by their nationals or from their territories, or using
their flag vessels or aircraft, of a m and related matdriel of all
types, including weapons and ammunition, military vehicles
and equipment,paramilitary equipment and spare parts for the
aforementioned,to Sierra Leone other than to the Government
of Sierra Leone through named points of entry on a list to be
supplied by that Government to the Secretary-General, who
shallpromptly notify all States Members of the United Nations
of the list;

S/1998/428.
70

“The situation in Sierra Leone
“Fifth report of the Secretary-General on the
situation * in Sierra Leone -(9/1998/486 and
Add. l)~r.250

6

Resolution 1181 1998)
of 13 July 19 8

6 . Decides to establish the United Nations Observer
Mission in Sierra Leone for an initial period of six months
until 13 January 1999, and firther decides that it shall include
up to seventy military observers as well as a small medical
unit, with the necessary equipment and civilian support staff,
with the following mandate:

The Securily Council,
Recalling its previous relevant resolutions and the
statements by its President,
Welcoming the continued efforts of the Government of
Sierra Leone to restore peaceful and secure conditions in the
country, to re-establish effective administration and the
democratic process and to embark on the task of national
reconciliation, reconstruction and rehabilitation,

(a) To monitor the military and security situationin the
country as a whole, as security conditions permit, and to
provide the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
with regular information thereon, in particular with a view to
determining when conditions are sufficiently secure to allow
subsequent deployments of military observers beyond the first
phase described in paragraph 7 below;

Recognizing the important contribution of the Economic
Community of West African States in support of these
objectives,

(6) To monitor the disarmament and demobilizationof
former combatants concentrated in secure areas of the country,
including monitoring of the role of the Monitoring Group in
the provision of security and in the collection and destruction
of arms in those secure areas;

Having considered the report o f the Secretary-Generalof
9 June 1998,25’
Noting the objectives set by the Economic Community of
West African States for its Monitoring Group, as described in
paragraph 17 of the report of Secretary-General,

(c) To assist in monitoring respect for international
humanitarian law, including at disarmament and
demobilization sites, where security conditions permit;

Gravely concerned at the loss of life and immense
suffering undergone by the people of Sierra Leone, including
refugees and displaced persons, as a result of the continuing
rebel attacks, and in particular at the plight of children affected
by the conflict,

(4 To monitor the voluntary disarmament and
demobilization of members of the Civil Defence Forces, as
security conditions permit;
7 , Decides also that the elements of the Mission
referred to in paragraph 6 above shall be deployed as outlined
in the report of the Secretary-General, with approximately
forty military observers deployed in the fxstphase to the areas
secured by the Monitoring Group, and that subsequent
deployments shall take place as soon as security conditions
permit, and subject to progress on the implementation of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration plan and the
availability of the necessary equipment and resources;

1. Condemns the continued resistance of remnants of
the ousted junta and members of the Revolutionary United
Front to the authority of the legitimate government and the
violence they are perpetrating against the civilian population
of Sierra Leone, and demands that they lay down their arms
immediately;

2. Emphasizes the need to promote national
reconciliation in Sierra Leone, encourages all parties in the
country to work together towards this objective, and welcomes
the assistance of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy
in that regard;

8. Decidesfurther that the Mission shall be led by the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, who will be
designated Special Representative for Sierra Leone, that the
Mission shall subsume the office of the Special Envoy and its
civilian staff, and that the augmented civilian staff, as
recommended by the Secretary-General in paragraphs 74 and
75 of his report, shall perform, inter alia, the following tasks:
+

3 . Welcomes the proposal in the report of the
Secretary-General of 9 June 1998”’ on the establishment of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone;
4. Notes that the Government of Sierra Leone has
adopted a disarmament, demobilization and reintegrationplan
agreed upon with the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development, the United Nations Development
Programme and other donors;

(a) To advise, in coordination with other international
efforts, the Government of Sierra Leone and local police
officials on police practice, training, re-equipment and
recruitment,in particular on the need to respect internationally
accepted standards of policing in democratic societies, to
advise on the planning o f the reform and restructuring o f the
Sierra Leone police force, and to monitor progress in that
regard;

5 . Commends the positive role of the Economic
Community of West African States and its Monitoring Group
in their efforts to restore peace, security and stability
See Oflcial Records of the Securiq Council, F&-third
Supplement for July, August and September 1998.
25’ Ibid., documents SA9981486 and Add.1.

throughout the country at the request of the Government of
Sierra Leone, and notes the role of the Monitoring Group in
assisting the implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration plan adopted by the
Government, including the provision of security and
responsibility for arms collection and destruction;

(6) To report on violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights in Sierra Leone and, in

Year,

71

17. Urges all States and international organizations to
provide urgent humanitarian assistance to Sierra Leone, in
response to the consolidated inter-agency appeal launched on
24 June 1998;

consultation with the relevant United Nations agencies, to
assist the Government of Sierra Leone in its efforts to address
the country’s human rights needs;
9. Welcomes the commitmentof the Monitoring Group
to ensure the security of United Nations personnel, and in this
regard welcomes also the intention of the Secretary-Generalto
establish security arrangements for United Nations personnel
with the Chairman of the Economic Community of West
African States and to conclude a status-of-mission agreement
with the Government of Sierra Leone;

18. Encourages all States and international
organizationsto assist and participate in the longer term tasks
of reconstruction and economic and social recovery and
development in Sierra Leone;

10. Decides that the elements of the Mission referred to
in paragraph 6 above shall be deployed when the SecretaryGeneral informs the Council that security arrangements and
the status-of-mission agreement have been concluded, and
further decides to keep the deployment of the Mission under
review in the light of the prevailing security conditions;

11. Stresses the need for full cooperation and close
coordination between the Mission and the Monitoring Group
in their respective operational activities;

19. Requests the Secretary-General to submit an initial
report to the Council within thirty days of the adoption of
resolution and every sixty days thereafter on the deployment
of the Mission and on its progress in carrying out its mandate,
and also to inform the Council on plans for the later phases of
the deployment of the Mission when security conditionspermit
these to be implemented;
20. Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the
3902nd meeting.
Decisions

12. Demands that all factions and forces in Sierra Leone
strictly respect the status of Mission personnel, as well as
organizations and agencies delivering humanitarianassistance
throughout Sierra Leone, and that they respect human rights
and abide by applicable rules of international humanitarian
law;

On 21 July 1998, the President of the Security CounciI
addressed the following letter to the Se~retary-General:~~~

“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 16 July 1998 concerning your proposal to include
China, Egypt, India, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, New Zealand,
Pakistan, the Russian Federation,the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Zambia in the list
of countries contributingmilitary personnel to the United
Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone2” has been
brought to the attention of the members of the Security
Council. They agree with the proposal contained in your
letter. The members of the Council also take note that
Brigadier General Subhash C. Joshi, of India, will be the
Chief Military Observer of the Mission.”

13, Expresses its serious concern at the reports of crossborder arms flows and support to the rebels in Sierra Leone,
welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General, as indicated
in his report, to pursue with all parties concerned steps to
eliminate these activities, and in that regard reaffirms the
obligation of all States to comply strictly with the terms of the
embargo on the sale or supply of arms and related matiriel to
Sierra Leone imposed by resolution 1171 (1998) of 5 June
1998, and to bring all instances of violations of the a m
embargo before the Committee established by resolution
1132 (1997) of 8 October 1997;

On 5 August 1998, the President of the Security Council
addressed the following letter to the Se~retary-General:~~~

14. Welcomes the efforts of the Government of Sierra
Leone to coordinate an effective national responseto the needs
of children affected by armed conflict, and the
recommendation of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict that Sierra
Leone be made one of the pilot projects for a more concerted
and effective response to the needs of children in the context
of post-conflict peace-building;

“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 3 August 1998 concerning the establishment of
security arrangementsfor United Nations personnel with
the Chairman of the Economic Community of West
African States and the conclusionof the status-of-mission
agreement with the Government of Sierra Leone25shas
been brought to the attention of the members of the
Security Council. They take note of the information
regarding the implementation of paragraphs 9 and 10 of
resolution 1181(1 998) contained in your letter.”

15. Welcomes also the decision of the SecretaryGeneral to convene a high-level conference to mobilize
assistance for peacekeeping activities, emergency and
humanitarian needs and reconstruction and rehabilitation in
Sierra Leone;
16. Reiterates its urgent appeal to States to make
contributions to the trust fund which has been established to
support peacekeeping and related activities in Sierra Leone, to
provide technical and logistical support to assist the
Monitoring Group to carry out its peacekeeping role, and to
help to facilitate the provision by other States members of the
Economic Conmunity of West African States of additional
t~oopsto strengthen the deployment of the Monitoring Group
in Sierra Leone;
72

At its 3957thmeeting, on 18December 1998,the Council
considered the item entitled
“The situation in Sierra Leone

At the same meeting, the Council decided to extend an
invitation, under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure,
to the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

“Third progress report of the Secretary-Generalon
the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra
Leone (S/1998/ 1176)’?

236 See Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fifty-third Year,
Supplement $or October, November and December 1998.

EXCHANGE OF LETTERS BETWEEN THE SECRETARY-GENERAL AND THE PRESIDENT OF THE
SECURITY COUNCIL CONCERNING THE INDIA-PAKISTAN QUESTION
Chile, as the next Chief Military Observer of the United
Nations Military Observer Group in India andPakistanZs8
has been brought to the attention of the members of the
Security Council. They agree with the intention
expressed in your letter.”

Decision
On 9 March 1998, the President of the Security Council
addressed the following letter to the Se~retary-General:~~’

“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 3 March 1998concerningyour intention to appoint
Brigadier General Sergio Hernan Espinosa Davies, of

LETTERS DATED 20 AND 23 DECEMBER 1991, FROM ERANCE, THE UNITED
KINGDOM
_ - -~ - OF
-~ GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND AND
THEUNITEDSTATES OF AMERICA
[Resolutions or decisions on this question have been adopted by the Security Council every year since I 9 9 4

Decisions

At the same meeting, the Council decided, at the request
of the representative of Indonesia,260
to extend an invitation to
Mr. Mahamadou Abou, Deputy Permanent Observer of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to the United Nations,
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Council.

At its 3864th meeting, on 20 March 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representatives of Algeria,
Colombia, Cuba, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Egypt, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, India, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tunisia, Uganda, the United Arab Emirates, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Yemen and
Zimbabwe to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the
item entitled “Letters dated 20 and 23 December 1991, from
France, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America (S123306, S123307,
S/23308, SJ23309 and S/23317)”.2s9

Also at the same meeting, the Council decided, at the
request of the representative of Bahrain?’ to extend an
invitationtoMr. Hussein A. Hassouna,Permanent Observer of
the League of Arab States to the United Nations, under rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure.

Document S/1998/251, incorporated in the record of the 3864th
meeting.
Document S/1998/252, incorporated in the record of the 3864th
meeting.

259
See Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Forpshth Year,
Supplement for October, November and December 1991.

73

1. Demands once again that the Libyan Government
immediately comply with the above-mentioned resolutions;

Also at the same meeting, the Council decided, at the
request of the representative of Gabon,”’ to extend an
invitation to Mr. Amadou Kebe, Permanent Observer of the
Organization of African Unity to the United Nations, under
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.

2. Welcomes the initiative for the trial of the two
persons charged with the bombing of Pan Am flight 103 (“the
two accused”) before a Scottish court sitting in the
Netherlands, as contained in the letter dated 24 August 1998
fiom the Acting Permanent Representatives of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of the
United States of America (“the initiative”)*” and the
attachmentsthereto, and the willingness of the Government of
the Netherlands to cooperate in the implementation of the
initiative;

At its 3920th meeting, on 27 August 1998, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and the Netherlands to participate, without vote, in
the discussion of the item entitled:
“Letters dated 20 and 23 December 1991, from France,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America (Sl23306,
Sl23307, Si23308, Sj23309 and Sl233 17)‘j9

3. Calls upon the Government of the Netherlands and
the Government of the United Kingdom to take such steps as
are necessary to implement the initiative, including the
conclusion of arrangementswith a view to enabling the court
described in paragraph 2 above to exercise jurisdiction in the
terms of the intended agreement between the two
Governments,attached to the said letter dated 24 August 1998;

“Letter dated 24 August 1998 from the Acting
Permanent Representatives of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northem Ireland and the
United States of America to the United Nations
a d d r e s s e d t o t h e Secretary-General
(SiI99 8/795)”.263

4. Decides that all States shall cooperate to this end
and, in particular, that the Libyan Government shall ensure the
appearance in the Netherlands of the two accused for the
purpose of trial by the court described in paragraph 2 above,
and that the Libyan Government shall ensure that any evidence
or witnesses in Libya are, upon the request of the court,
promptly made available at the court in the Netherlands for the
purpose of the trial;

Resolution 1192 1998)
of 27 August 1 98

6

The Security Council,
Recalling its resolutions 73 1 (1992) of 21 January 1992,
748 (1992) of 31 March 1992 and 883 (1993) of 11November
1993,
Taking note of the report of the independent experts
appointed by the Secretary-General,2“
Having regard to the contents of the letter dated
24 August 1998 from the Acting Permanent Representatives of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
of the United States of America to the Secretary-General,265

Noting, in the light of the above-mentioned resolutions,
the communications of the Organization of African Unity, tRe
League of Arab States, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and the Islamic Conference266as referred to in the
letter dated 24 August 1998,

5 . Requests the Secretary-General, after consultation
with the Government of the Netherlands, to assist the Libyan
Government with the physical arrangements for the safe
transfer of the two accused fiom Libya direct to the
Netherlands;

6 . Invites the Secretary-General to nominate
international observers to attend the trial;

7. Decides that, on the arrival of the two accused in the
Netherlands, the Government of the Netherlands shaIl detain
the two accused pending their transfer for the purpose of trial
before the court described in paragraph 2 above;
8. ReafJirms that the measures set forth in its
resolutions 748 (1992) and 883 (1993) remain in effect and
binding on all Member States, and in this context reaffirms the
provisions of paragraph 16 of resolution 883 (1993), and
decides that the aforementionedmeasures shall be suspended
immediately if the Secretary-General reports to the Council
that the two accused have arrived in the Netherlands for the
purpose of trial before the court described in paragraph 2
above or have appeared for trial before an appropriate court in
the United Kingdom or the United States, and that the Libyan
Government has satisfied the French judicial authorities with
regard to the bombing of UTA 772;

Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations,
~

*‘‘Document S/1998/253, incorporated in the record of the 3864th
meeting.
*‘’See Official Records of the Security Council, F$i-third Year,
Supplementfor July, August and September 1998.
Ibid., Fiffy-second Year, Supplement for October, November and
December 1997, document S/1997/991, annex.
265 Ibid., FiJi-third Year, SupplementforJuly, August and September
1998, document S/1998/795.
266
Ibid., Forty-ninth Year, Supplement for January, February and
March 1994, document S/1994/373; ibid., Fflieth Year, Supplement
for October, November and December 199S, document S A 995/834;
ibid., Fyy-second Year, Supplemeni for January, February and
March 1997, document S/1997/35;ibid., SupplementforApri1, May
and June 1997, documents S/1997/273 and Sl19971497; and ibid.,
Supplement Jor JuIy, Aicgust nnd September 1997, documents
S/1997/406 and Add. 1 and S/I 997/529.

9. Expresses its intention to consider additional
measures if the two accused have not arrived or appeared for
trial promptly in accordance with paragraph 8 above;
10. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

Adopted unanimously at the
3920th meeting.

74

THE QUESTION CONCERNING HAITI
[Resolutions or decisions on this question have been adopted by the Security Council every year since 1993.1

community through the specialized agencies and
programmes of the UnitedNations system, through other
international organizations and regional organizations
and by interested Member States.

Decisions
At its 3866th meeting, on 25 March 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representative of Haiti to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled:

“The Council r e a f f m also that the people and
Government of Haiti bear the ultimate responsibility for
national reconciliation, the maintenance of a secure and
stable environment, the administration of justice and the
reconstruction of their country. It emphasizes the
importance of Haiti’s continuing to settle its contentious
issues peacefully and democratically. It expresses the
view that a prompt solution of these issues in Haiti will
facilitate economic development and the provision of
international assistance. It filly supports the appeal ofthe
Secretary-General to Haitian authorities and political
leaders to resolve Haiti’s political impasse so that the
country can move forward and welcomes current efforts
undertaken to this end.

“The question concerning Haiti

“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti
( 9 1998/144)”.267
At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:26R
“The Security Council recalls its resolution
1141 (1997) of 28 November 1997 and welcomes the
report of the Secretary-Generalof 20 February 1998 on
the United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti.269

“The Council stresses that it is of the utmost
importance that the next parliamentary and local
elections in Haiti be conducted in a fi-ee, fair and
transparent manner in order to allow the broadest
possible voter participation, consistent with Haitian law.
It notes that a substantial effort will be required to e n m e
the success of these vitally important elections. The
Council looks forward to the steps taken by the
Government of Haiti in this regard and urges the
international community to be ready to provide electoral
assistance as may be requested.

“The Council commends the achievements of the
Representative of the Secretary-General in Haiti, United
Nations staff and the civilian police officers of the
Mission in Haiti. It notes with appreciationthe important
contributions made by the United Nations Development
Programme and the International Civilian Mission in
Haiti.
“The Council welcomes the progress made by the
Haitian people towards the establishment of a durable
democratic and constitutional system. It also welcomes
the sustained improvement in security and stability in
Haiti. The Council agrees with the Secretary-Generalin
his assessment of the Haitian National Police, as
expressed in his recent rep~rt.”~
It also welcomes the
significant progress made by the Haitian NationalPolice,
as mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General,and
expresses confidence that activities of the Civilian Police
Mission will continue to build on the achievements of
previous United Nations missions in Haiti and to hrther
the professional development of the Haitian National
Police. The Council expresses the hope that
achievements of the Haitian National Police will be
matched by progress in other areas, including the
development of a functioningjudicial system, and in this
regard recognizes the importance of judicial reform.

“The Council recognizes that economic
rehabilitation and reconstmction constitute the major
tasks facing the Haitian Government and people and
stresses that a sustained commitment by the international
community and the international financial institutions, as
well as the relevant United Nations bodies, to assist and
support economic, social and institutional development
in Haiti is indispensable for long-term sustainable
development in the country. It commends the efforts of
those organizations and countries currently involved in
meeting these needs and encourages them to coordinate
their activities.
“The Council will remain seized of this matter.”
At its 3949th meeting, on 25 November 1998, the
Council decided to invite the representatives of Argentina,
Canada, Chile, Haiti and Venezuela to participate, without
vote, in the discussion of the item entitled

“The Council reaffirms that further assistanceto the
Haitian National Police, should it be needed, should be
provided with the full support of the international

“The question concerning Haiti
“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti
(SA998/796)270

See Official Records of the Security Council, F$y-third Year,
Supplement for January, February and March 1998.
S/PRST/1998/8.
269 Oficial Records of the Security Council, Fifly-fhird Year,
Supplement for Januuty, February and March 1998, document
5/1998/144.

O
’‘

75

Ibid, Supplementfor July, August and September 1998.

Expressing its deep regret that this political stalemate has
not yet made possible the transfer of the activities of the
Civilian Police Mission to other forms of international
assistance,

“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti
{S/ 1998/1064)”. 27’
Resolution 1212 (1998)
of 25 November 1998

Recognizing that the people and the Government of Haiti
bear the ultimate responsibility for national reconciliation, the
maintenance of a secure and stable environment, the
administration of justice, and the reconstruction of their
country,

The Security Council,
Recalling all its relevant resolutions, in particular
resolution 1141 (1997) of 28 November 1997, and those
adopted by the General Assembly,

1. Reaffirms the importance of a professional, selfsustaining,
hlly functioning national police of adequate size
Taking note of the request of 22 October 1998 from the and structure,
to conduct the full spectrum of police
President of the Republic of Haiti to the Se~retary-General,~’~functions, for able
the consolidation of democracy and the
Taking note also of the reports of the Secretary-General revitalization of Haiti’s system of justice, and encourages Haiti
~ ~ 11 November 1998,274 and the to pursue actively its plans in these respects;
of 24 A u g ~ s ? and
recommendations contained therein,
2. Decides, further to paragraph 1 above, and at the
Cornmending the role of the United Nations Civilian request of the President of the Republic of Haiti, to extend
Police Mission inHaiti in assisting the Government ofHaiti by until 30 November 1999 the present mandate, including the
supporting and contributing to the professionalization of the concept of operation, of the United Nations Civilian Police
Haitian National Police, and expressing its appreciation to all Mission in Haiti, in order to continue to assist the Government
Member States which have contributed to the Civilian Police of Haiti by supporting and conqibuting to the
professionalization of the Haitian National Police in
Mission,
accordance with the arrangements set out in paragraph 32 of
Cornmending also the role of the Representative of the the report of the Secretary-General of 11 November 1998,274
Secretary-General in Haiti in the coordination of activities by including monitoring the field performance of the Haitian
the United Nations system to promote institution-building, National Police and strengthening the capability of the central
directorate of the police force to manage aid provided to it
national reconciliation and economic rehabilitation in Haiti,
from bilateral and multilateral sources;
Noting the key role played to date by the United Nations
3. Ajb-ms that future international assistance to the
civilian police, the International Civilian Mission in Haiti and
the technical assistance of the United Nations Development Haitian National Police should be considered through
Programme, as well as bilateral programmes, in helping to specialized agencies and programmes of the United Nations
establish a fully functioning Haitian National Police Force of system, in particular the United Nations Development
adequate size and structure as an integral element of the Programme, and through other international and regional
consolidation of democracy and the revitalization of Haiti’s organizations and by Member States;
system of justice, and in this context, stressing the importance
4. Requests Member States to provide appropriate
of the reform of Haiti’s system of justice for the successful
development of the Haitian National Police, and welcoming support for the actions undertaken by the United Nations and
continued progress towards the professionalization of the by Member States pursuant to the present and other relevant
Haitian National Police and towards fulfilment of the May resolutions in order to carry out the provisions of the mandate
1997 “Haitian National Police development plan for referred to in paragraph 2 above;
1997-200 1”,
5. Underlines the importance of full coordination
Stressing the link between peace and development, among multilateraland bilateral contributors in order to assure
noting that significant international assistance is indispensable the effective allocation of international assistance provided to
for sustainable development in Haiti, and stressing that a the Haitian National Police, and requests the Representative of
sustained commitment by the international community and the the Secretary-General in Haiti to work closely with Member
international financial institutions to assist and support the States to ensure that bilateral and multilateral efforts are
economic, social and institutional development in Haiti is complementary;
indispensable for long-term peace and security in the country,
6. Strongly urges the Haitian authorities and political
Expressing deep concern over the prolonged political leaders to fulfil their responsibilities and to negotiate urgently
stalemate, which presents considerable risks for peace and an end to the crisis in a spirit of tolerance and compromise;
development,
7. Calls upon the Haitian authorities to pursue the
reform and strengthening of Haiti’s system of justice, in
211
particular its penal institutions;
Ibid., Supplement for October, November and December 1998.
17’ Ibid., document S/1998/1003,annex.
8. Emphasizes that economic rehabilitation and
reconstruction constitute the major tasks facing the Haitian
213 Ibid., SupplemenfforJuly,August andSeptember 1998,document
Government and people and that significant international
SII 9981796.
assistance is indispensable for sustainable development in
274 Ibid., Supplement for October, November and December 1998,
Haiti, stressesthe commitment of the international community
document Sll99811064.
76

to a long-term programme of support for Haiti, and invites
United Nations bodies and agencies, especially the Economic
and Social Council, to contribute to the designing of such a
programme;

11. Expresses its intention not to extend the Civilian
Police Mission beyond 30 November 1999, and requests the
Secretary-General to make recommendations on a viable
transition to other forms of international assistance in his
second report referred to in paragraph 10 above, for the
consideration of the Security Council, taking into account the
need to preserve the progress made in the reform of the Haitian
National Police and to strengthen further United Nations
support for the consolidation of democracy, respect for human
rights and the maintenance of law and order in Haiti;

9. Requests all States to make voluntary contributions
to the trust fund established pursuant to resolution 975 (1995)
of 30 January 1995 for the Haitian National Police, in
particular for the recruitment and deployment by the United
Nations Development Programme of police advisers to assist
the Inspector General, Directorate General and department
headquarters of the Haitian National Police;

12. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council on the implementation of the present
resolution every three months from the date of its adoption
until the mandate of the Civilian Police Mission expires on
30 November 1999:

Adopted at the 3949th meeting
by 13 votes to none, with 2 abstentions
(China and Russian Federation).

THE SITUATION I N AFGHANISTAN
[Resolutions or decisions on this question were also adopted by the Security Council in 1994. 1996 and 1997.1

political settlement of the conflict, which has no military
solution, and the formation of a broad-based and hlly
representative government.

Decisions
At its 3869th meeting, on 6 April 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representative of Afghanistanto
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled
‘The situation in Afghanistan
“Report of the Secretary-General ( S A998/222)”.275

“The Council reaffirms its strong commitment to
the sovereignty, independence, temtorial integrity and
national unity of Afghanistan, and respect for its cultural
and historical heritage.
“The Council deplores the fact that foreign
interference in Afghanistan continues unabated in the
form of the supply of war-making materials to the
factions. It also deplores the active political and military
support from outside Afghanistan to the factions, thereby
reinforcingthe reluctance of faction leaders to engage in
serious political dialogue with one another. The Council
reiterates its call to all States to stop such interference
immediately.

At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:276
“The Security Council has considered the report of
the Secretary-General of 17 March 1998 concerning the
situation in Afghani~tan.~’~
“The Council expresses its grave concern at the
continued Afghan war, which is a serious threat to
regional and international security and causes extensive
human suffering, further destruction, refugee flows and
other forcible displacement of large numbers of people.

“The Council notes withconcern that all the Afghan
parties have been actively engaged in arms replenishment
throughout the last months, warns the conflictingparties
that the resumption of large-scale fighting will seriously
undermine the attempts of the international community
to assist them in frnding a political solution to the conflict
and urges them to live up to their declared desire for such
a solution.

“The Council is concerned by the increasingly
ethnic nature of the conflict, by reports of persecution
based on ethnic origin, and by the threat this poses to the
unity of the Afghan State.

“The Council reiterates its position that the United
Nations, as a universally recognized intermediary, must
continue to play its central and impartial role in
international efforts towards a peaceful resolution of the
Afghan conflict and extends its full support for the
activities of the United Nations Special Mission to
Afghanistan and those of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, particularly in his
current mission in the region.

“The Council urges all Afghan parties to stop the
fighting, to agree immediately on a ceasefire, and to
engage without preconditions in a political dialogue
aimed at achieving national reconciliation, a lasting

215 See Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fi&-third Year,
Supplement for Januaty, February and March 1998.
SIPRSTI199819.
2770fficialRecords ofsecurity Council,F$y-third Year,Supplemen!
for January, February and March 1998, document SI19981222.

’’‘

“The Council cornmends the consolidation of the
process, initiated by the Special Envoy with the
convening of the ‘sixplus two’ group, and calls upon all
77

“The Council reaffirms its strong commitment to
the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
national unity of Afghanistan, and respect for its cultural
and historical heritage. It reiterates its concern at the
increasingly ethnic nature of the conflict, and at the
continuing threat this poses to the unity of the Afghan
State.

countries involved in it to continue to participate in its
work in good faith, including in the discussion to devise
effective and impartial ways to curb the flow of arms and
other war-making materials into Afghanistan. The
Security Council welcomes the support of other Member
States for this process.
T h e Council is deeply concerned by the
detesiorating security conditions for United Nations and
humanitarian personnel and calls upon all Afghan
factions, in particular the Taliban, to take necessary steps
to assure their safety.

“The Council expresses its grave concern at the
continued Afghan conflict, which is a serious threat to
regional and internationalsecurity, and causes extensive
human suffering, further destruction, refugee flows and
other forcible displacement of large numbers of people,

“The Council remains deeply concerned at the
continuing discrimination against girls and women and
other violations of human rights as well as violations of
international humanitarian law in Afghanistan.

“The Council deploresthe fact that military support,
including the supply of arms and other related matiriel,
from outside Afghanistan to the warring factions
continuesunabated, despite repeated pleas to halt it made
by the Council, the GeneralAssembly and the SecretaryGeneral. It reiterates its call to all States, in particular
those in the region, to cease such interference
immediately.

“The Council supports the steps of the SecretaryGeneral to launch investigations into alleged mass
killings of prisoners of war and civilians in Afghanistan,
the outcome of which will be submitted to the General
Assembly and the Security Council as soon as it becomes
available.

“The Council considers it necessary that more
active efforts be undertaken under the aegis of the United
Nations and with the participation of interested countries
aimed at a peaceful settlement of the Afghan conflict,
taking into account the interests of all ethnic and
religious groups and political forces involved therein.

“The Council is also concerned with the sharp
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in several
areas in central and northern Afghanistan, which is
caused by the Taliban-imposed blockade of the Bamyan
region remaining in place despite appeals by the United
Nations and several of its Member States to lift it, as well
as by the lack of supplies coming in from the northern
route owing to insecurity and looting. The Council
strongly urges the Taliban to let the humanitarian
agencies attend to the needs of the population.

“The Council deplores the breakdown of the intraAfghan talks in Islarnabad and calls upon the parties to
respect the wishes of the overwhelming majority of
Afghans, to stop the fighting, to return without delay and
preconditions to the negotiating table and to engage in a
political dialogue aimed at achieving national
reconciliation, a lasting political settlement of the
conflict, which has no military solution, and the
formation of a broad-based and fully representative
government. As an initial step towards that goal, the
Council calls upon the parties to agree immediately on a
ceasefire, an exchange of prisoners, and the lifting of all
restrictions on the shipments of humanitarian supplies
throughout the country.

“The Council reiterates that the continuation of the
conflict in Afghanistan provides a fertile ground for
terrorism and illegal drug production and trafficking,
which destabilize the region and beyond, and calls upon
the leaders of the Afghan parties to halt such activities.
“The Council will remain seized of the matter and
requests the Secretary-General to continue to keep it
regularly informed of the situation in Afghanistan.”

“The Council reiterates its position that the United
Nations, as a universally recognized intermediary, must
continue to play its central and impartial role in
international efforts towards a peaceful resolution of the
Afghan conflict, and extends its full support for the
activities of the United Nations Special Mission to
Afghanistan and those of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan.

At its 3906th meeting, on 14 July 1998, the Council
considered the item entitled:
“The situation in Afghanistan
“Report ofthe Secretary-General (S/1998/532)”.278
At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:279

“The Council takes note of the assessment of the
Secretary-Generalthat Zoyajirgah, as an informal, timehonoured Afghan method of settling disputes, advocated
by some leaders of non-warring Afghan factions,
continues to deserve attention, and encourages the
Special Mission to continue to maintain useful contacts
with them.

“The Security Council has considered the report of the
Secretary-General of 19 June 1998 concerning the
situation in

‘’’ Ibid., Supplementfor April. May and June 1998.

“The Council commends the work of the ‘six plus
two’ group and calls upon all countries involved in the
group to continue to participate in good faith with the
aim of elaborating, on the basis of the agreed talking

S/PRST/I 998/22.
280 Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fifty-third Year,
Supplementfor April, May and June 1998,document S/1998/532.
279

78

points, a coherent approach to the peacemaking efforts in
Afghanistan, including the problem of curbing the flow
of arms and other related matiriel into Afghanistan in an
effective and even-handed manner. It welcomes and
encourages the additional support of other Member
States for this process.

At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:28’
“The Security Council expresses its grave concern
at the new sharp escalation of the military confrontation
in Afghanistan, which is a growing threat to regional and
international peace and security, and demands an urgent
and unconditional ceasefire leading to fmal end to the
hostilities.

“The Council urges all Afghan factions to cooperate
fully with the Special Mission and international
humanitarian organizations and calls upon them, in
particular the Taliban, to take all necessary steps to
assure the safety and freedom of movement of such
personnel.

“The Council reiterates that the Afghan crisis can
be settled only by peaceful means, through direct
negotiations between the Afghan factions under United
Nations auspices, aimed at achieving mutually acceptable
solutions accommodating the rights and interests of all
ethnic, religious and political groups of Afghan society.

“The Council acknowledges the signing of the
memorandum of understanding between the United
Nations and the Taliban on humanitarian issues and
stresses the importance of its full implementation,
including full respect for immunities of United Nations
staff and for the assistance of the United Nations in
health and education. Noting that some of the obstacles
to the provision of assistance to Hazarajat have been
overcome, it nevertheless remains concerned at the
continuing use by the Taliban of United Nations
humanitarian aid as a weapon against the Hazara and
demands that this practice cease immediately. The
Council also remains concerned at the lack of supplies
coming from the northern route due to insecurity and
looting. It calls upon all Afghan factions to lift
unconditionally any blockade of humanitarian relief
supplies.

“The Council calls upon all Afghan parties to return
to the negotiating table without delay and preconditions
and to cooperate with the aim of creating a broad-based
and fully representative government, which would
protect the rights of all Afghans and observe the
international obligations of Afghanistan. The Council
calls upon all States neighbouring Afghanistan and other
States with influence in Afghanistan to intensify their
efforts under the aegis of the United Nations to bring the
parties to a negotiated settlement.
T h e Council demands that the Afghan parties and
those countries concerned observe fully the provisions of
the relevant resolutions on Afghanistan adopted by the
General Assembly and the Council.

“The Council is Concerned at recent reports of
harassment of humanitarian organizations and at the
unilateral decision by the Taliban to relocate
humanitarian organizations’ offices in Kabul. It calls
upon all factions to facilitate the work of humanitarian
agencies to the greatest extent possible.

“The Council calls upon all States to refrain from
any outside interference in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan, including the involvement of foreign
military personnel. It reiterates that any such interference
from abroad should cease immediately and calls upon all
States to end the supply of arms and ammunition to all
parties to the conflict and to take resolute measures to
prohibit their military personnel from plaving and
participating in combat operations in Afghanistan.

“The Council remains deeply concerned at the
continuing discrimination against girls and women and
other violations of human rights as well as violations of
international humanitarian law in Afghanistan.

“The Council is deeply concerned at the serious
humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan. It calls upon all
Afghan parties and, in particular, the Taliban, to take the
necessary steps to secure the uninterrupted supply of
humanitarian aid to all in need of it and in this
connection not to create impediments to the activities of
the United Nations humanitarian agencies and
international humanitarian organizations. The Council
condemns the killing of the two Afghan staffmembers of
the World Food Programme and the Office of the United
Nations Nigh Commissioner for Refugees in Jalalabad.

“The Council supports the steps of the SecretaryGeneral to launch investigations into alleged mass
killings of prisoners of war and civilians in Afghanistan,
the outcome of which will be submitted to the General
Assembly and the Council as soon as it becomes
available.
“The Council reiterates that the continuation of the
conflict in Afghanistan provides a fertile ground for
terrorism and illegal drug production and trafficking
which destabilize the region and beyond, and calls upon
the leaders of the Afghan parties to halt such activities.

“The Council once again urges all Afghan factions
to cooperate fully with the United Nations Special
Mission to Afghanistan and international humanitarian
organizations and calls upon them, in particular the
Taliban, to take the necessary steps to assure the safety
and freedom of movement of such personnel. The
Council deplores the measures taken by the Taliban,

“The Council will remain seized of the matter and
requests the Secretary-General to continue to keep it
regularly informed of the situation in Afghanistan,”
At its 3914th meeting, on 6 August 1998, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Afghanistan to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled
T h e situation in Afghanistan”.

*” SIPRSTII 998124.
79

which have made it impossible for nearly all international
humanitarian organizations to continue their work in
Kabul. It supports the efforts of the office of the
coordinator for humanitarian affairs in its current talks
with the Taliban in order to ensure adequate conditions
for the delivery of aid by humanitarian organizations.

Deeply concerned at the serious humanitarian crisis in
Afghanistan, and deploring in this regard the measures taken
by the Taliban which resulted in the evacuation of the United
Nations humanitarian personnel from Afghanistan, and
expressing hope for their early return under conditions of
security,

“The Council remains deeply concerned at the
continuing discrimination against girls and women and
other violations of human rights as well as violations of
international humanitarian law in Afghanistan.

Expressing its grave concern at the capture by the
Taliban of the Consulate-General of the Islamic Republic of
Iran in Mazar-e-Sharif and at the fate of the personnel of the
Consulate-General and of other Iranian nationals missing in
Afghanistan,

“The Council calls upon all parties to respect
international conventions regarding the treatment of
prisoners of war and the rights of non-combatants.

Deeply disturbed by the deterioratingsecurity conditions
for United Nations and other international and humanitarian
personnel,

“The Council will remain seized of the matter.”

Deeply concerned at the continuing presence of terrorists
in the territory of Afghanistan and at the production and
trafficking of drugs,

At its 3921st meeting, on 28 August 1998, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Austria,
India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Pakistan, Tajikistan, Turkey and Uzbekistan to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled “The
situation in Afghanistan”.

Remaining deeply concerned at the continuing
discriminationagainst girls and women and at other violations
of human rights and of international humanitarian law in
Afghanistan,

b

Resolution 1193 1998)
of28 August 1 98

1. Reiterates that the Afghan crisis can be settled only
by peaceful means, through direct negotiations between the
Afghan factions under United Nations auspices, aimed at
achieving a solution accommodating the rights and interests of
all Afghans, and stressesthat territorial gains through military
operations will neither lead to a durable peace in Afghanistan,
nor contribute to a comprehensivesettlement of the conflict in
this multicultural and multi-ethnic country;

The Securiq Council,
Having considered the situation in Afghanistan,
Recalling its resolution 1076 (1996) of 22 October 1996
and the statements by the President of the Security Council on
the situation in Afghanistan,

2. Demands that all Afghan factions stop fighting,
resume negotiations without delay and preconditions, and
cooperate with the aim of creating a broad-based and fully
representative government, which would protect the rights of
all Afghans and would observe the international obligations of
Afghanistan;

Recalling also General Assembly resolutions 52/2 11 A
and B of 19 December 1997,
Expressing its grave concern at the continued Afghan
conflict which has recently escalated sharply as a result of the
offensive by the Taliban forces in the northern parts of the
country, causing a serious and growing threat to regional and
international peace and security, as well as extensive human
suffering, further destruction, refugee flows and other forcible
displacement of large numbers of people,

3 . Reiterates once again that any outside interference
in the internal affairs of Afghanistan should cease
immediately, and calls upon all States to take resolute
measures to prohibit their military personnel from planning
and participating in military operations in Afghanistan and
immediately to end the supply of arms and ammunition to all
parties to the conflict;

Concerned by the increasingly ethnic nature of the
conflict, by reports of ethnic and religion-based persecution,
particularly against the Shiites, and by the threat this poses to
the unity of the Afghan State,

4. Calls upon all StatesneighbouringAfghanistan and
other States with influence in the country to intensify their
efforts under the aegis of the United Nations to bring the
parties to a negotiated settlement;

Reafirming its strong commiiment to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan, and its respect for its cultural and historical
heritage,

5 . Reaftirms its full support for the efforts of the
United Nations, in particular the activities of the United
Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan and those of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, in
facilitating the political process towards the goals of national
reconciliation and a lasting political settlement with the
participation of all parties to the conflict and all segments of
Afghan society;

Deploring the fact that despite repeated pleas by the
Council, the General Assembly and the Secretary-General to
halt foreign interference in Afghanistan, including the
involvement of foreign military personnel and the supply of
arms and ammunition to all parties in the conflict, such
interference continues unabated,
Reiterating its view that the United Nations must continue
to play its central and impartial role in international efforts
towards a peaceful resolution of the Afghan conflict,

6 . Condemns the attacks on the United Nations
personnel in the Taliban-held territories of Afghanistan,

so

including the killing of the two Afghan staff members of the
World Food Programme and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees in Jalalabad, and of the
Military Adviser to the Special Mission in Kabul, and calls
upon the Taliban to investigate urgently these heinous crimes
and to keep the United Nations informed about the results of
the investigation;

16. Reminds all parties of the obligation to abide strictly
by the decisions of the Council, and expresses its finn
intention, in accordance with its responsibility under the
Charter of theUnitedNations, to consider such further steps as
may be required for the implementation of the present
resolution;

Demands that all Afghan factions and, in particular,
the Taliban, do everything possible to assure the safety and
freedom of movement of the personnel of the United Nations
and other international and humanitarian personnel;

18. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

7.

Condemns the capture of the Consulate-General of
the Islamic Republic of Iran in Mazar-e-Sharif, and demands
that all parties and, in particular, the Taliban, do everything
possible to ensure safe and dignified passage out of
Afghanistan of the personnel of the Consulate-General and
other Iranian nationals missing in Afghanistan;
8.

9. Urges all Afghan factions and, in particular, the
Taliban, to facilitatethe work of the internationalhumanitarian
organizations and to ensure unimpeded access and adequate
conditions for the delivery of aid by such organizations to all
in need of it;

Adopted unanimously at the
3921st meeting.
Decisions
At its 3926th meeting, on 15 September 1998, the
Security Council considered the item entitled “The situation in
Afghanistan”.
At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:283
“The Security Council strongly condemns the
murder of Iranian diplomats in Afghanistan by Taliban
combatants. This was a crime committed in flagrant
violation of international law and despite repeated
assurancesby the Taliban leaders guaranteeing the safety
and security of the personnel of foreign missions in
Mazar-e-Sharif. The killing of Iranian diplomats by
Taliban combatants has seriously increased tension in the
region.

10. Appeals to all States,organizationsand programmes
of the United Nations system, specialized agencies and other
international organizations to resume the provision of
humanitarian assistance to all in need of it in Afghanistan as
soon as the situation on the ground permits;
I 1. Expresses its readiness to call, on a priority basis,
for all possible financial, technical and material assistance for
the reconstruction of Afghanistan once the conditions are
established by the achievement of a lasting peaceful solution
of the Afghan conflict, and for the voluntary, safe and secure
return of refugees and internally displaced persons;

“The Council expresses its deepest condolences to
the families of the Iranian diplomats and to the
Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran. It believes
that this criminal act should be fully investigated with the
participation of the United Nations with a view to
prosecuting those responsible, The Council demandsthat
the Taliban release other Iranians detained in Afghanistan
and ensure their safe and dignified passage out of
Afghanistan without further delay.

12. Reaflrms that all parties to the conflict are bound to
comply with their obligationsunder internationalhumanitarian
law and, in particular, the Geneva Conventions of 12 August
1949,282andthat persons who commit or order the commission
of grave breaches of the Conventions are individually
responsible in respect of such breaches;

“The Council recalls its condemnation of the
murders of members of the United Nations Special
Mission to Afghanistan and the personnel of
humanitarian agencies in areas controlled by the Taliban
and demands that these crimes be investigated and the
Taliban ensure the safety and security of all international
personnel.

13. Requests the Secretary-General to continue
investigations into alleged mass killings of prisoners of war
and civilians as well as the forced displacementof large groups
of the population based on their ethnic origin and other forms
of mass persecution in Afghanistan, and to submit the reports
to the General Assembly and the Council as soon as they
become available;

“The Council expresses its deep concern at the
escalating military operations in the Bamyan province
and at reports of mass killings of civilians in northern
Afghanistan. It demands that the Taliban fully respect
international humanitarian law and human rights.

14. Urges the Afghan factions to put an end to the
discrimination against girls and women and to other violations
of human rights, as well as violations of international
humanitarian law, and to adhere to the internationallyaccepted
norms and standards in this sphere;

“The Council calls upon all concerned to exercise
maximum restraint, It also calls upon the parties, in
particular the Taliban, to take action in response to the
strong concerns expressed by the international
community, to stop fighting and resume negotiations

15. Demands that the Afghan factions refrain from
harbouring and training terrorists and their organizations and
halt illegal drug activities;

282

17. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to keep
it regularly informed of the situation in Afghanistan;

United Nations, Treaty Series,vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
81

Reaffirming itsfull support for the efforts of the United
Nations, in particular the activities of the United Nations
SpecialMission to Afghanistan and those of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, in facilitating the
political process towards the goals of national reconciliation
and a lasting political settlement with the participation of all
parties to the conflict and all segments of Afghan society, and
reiterating its position that the United Nations must continue
to play its central and impartial role in international efforts
towards a peaceful resolution of the Afghan conflict,

aimed at achieving a peaceful settlement of the conflict
on the basis of the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and of the Council.
“The Council will keep the situation under close
review and is prepared to consider urgently further
action.”
At its 3952ndmeeting, on 8 December 1998, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of the Islamic Republic of
Iran and Pakistanto participate, without vote, in the discussion
of the item entitled

Welcoming the work of the “six plus two” group, and
supporting in this regard the “points of common
“The situation in Afghanistan
understanding”adopted at its meeting at the level of Ministers
“Report of the Secretary-General (S/1998/1109)284 for Foreign Affairs, convened and chaired by the SecretaryGeneral on 21 September 1998,28s
“Letter dated 23 November 1998 from the
Deeply concerned at the serious and rapidly deteriorating
Secretary-Generaladdressed to the President of the
humanitarian
crisis in Afghanistan, deploring in this regard the
Security Council (S/1998/1 139)”.284
measures taken by the Talibanwhich resulted in the evacuation
of the United Nations humanitarian personnel from
Resolution 1214 1998)
Afghanistan, and underlining the urgent need for the prompt
of 8 December 998
implementationof the necessary security requirements to allow
The Security Council,
their early return,

I

Having considered the situation in Afghanistan,

Reaflrming that all parties to the conflict are bound to
comply with their obligationsunder international humanitarian
law and, in particular, under the Geneva Conventions of
12 August 1949,282
and that persons who commit or order the
commission of breaches of the Conventions are individually
responsible in respect of such breaches,

Reaftinning its previous resolutions, in particular
resolutions 1189 (1998) of 13 August 1998 and 1193 (1998)
of 28 August 1998, and the statements by its President on the
situation in Afghanistan,
Recalling General Assembly resolutions 521211 A and B
of 19 December 1997,

Deeply disturbed by the continuing use of Afghan
territory, especially areas controlled by the Taliban, for the
shelteringand training of terrorists and the planning of terrorist
acts, and reiterating that the suppression of international
terrorismis essentialfor the maintenance of international peace
and security,

Expressing its grave concern at the continued Afghan
conflict, which has recently escalated sharply as a result of the
offensive by the Taliban forces, which is continuing despite
the repeated pleas by the Security Council to cease the
fighting, and is causing a serious and growing threat to
regional and international peace and security, as well as
extensive human suffering, further destruction, rehgee flows
and other forcible displacement of large numbers of people,

Deeply disturbed also by the growing cultivation,
production and trafficking of drugs in Afghanistan, especially
in areas controlled by the Taliban,
Reiterating its deep concern at the continuing
discriminationagainst girls and women and at other violations
of human rights and of international humanitarian law in
Afghanistan,

Deploringthe fact that despite the readiness of the United
Front of Afghanistan to conclude a durable ceasefire and to
enter into a political dialogue with the Taliban, fighting
continues on both sides,

1, Demands that the Taliban, as well as other Afghan
factions, stop fighting, conclude a ceasefire and resume
negotiations without delay and preconditions under the
auspices of the United Nations, and cooperate with the aim of
creating a broad-based and fully representative government,
which would protect the rights of all Afghans and observe the
international obligations of Afghanistan;

Concerned by the increasingly ethnic nature of the
conflict, by reports of ethnic and religion-based persecution,
particularly against the Shiites, and by the threat this poses to
the unity of the Afghan State,
Reafinning its strong commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan, and its respect for its cultural and historical
heritage,

2. Welcomes the progress made by the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan in his efforts based
on resolution 1193 (1998) and its relevant preceding
resolutions to reduce tensions in the region and towards
improving the human rights and humanitarian situation in

Reiterating that any outside interference in the internal
affairs of Afghanistan, including the involvement of foreign
military personnel and the supply of arms and ammunition to
all parties to the conflict, should cease immediately,

See Oflcial Records of the Security Council, FiSty-third Year,
Supplementfor October, November and December 1998.

284

285

Ibid., Supplementfor July,August and September 1998, document

s m a m , annex.
82

Afghanistan, and calls upon all concerned to implement fully
the commitments they have already entered into;

8. Encourages the initiatives of the “six plus two”
group to facilitate the peace process in Afghanistan;

3, Reiterates its very stroiig support and appreciation
for the continuing efforts of the Special Envoy to secure the
full implementation of its resolutions, and demands that all
parties, in particular the Taliban, cooperate in good faith with
these efforts;

9. Also encourages the additional support of other
Member States for the peace process in Afghanistan;
10. Reiterates its call upon all States to take resolute
measures to prohibit their military personnel from planning
and participating in military operations in Afghanistan and
immediately to end the supply of arms and ammunition to all
parties to the conflict;

4. Reiterates its strong callupon the Talibanto inform
the United Nations without further delay about the results of
the investigation into the killing of the two Afghan staff
members of the World Food Programme and of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in
Jalalabad, and of the Military Adviser to the United Nations
Special Mission to Afghanistan in Kabul;

11. Urges all Afghan factions and, in particular, the
Taliban, to demonstratetheir full commitment to the safety and
security of all international and humanitarian personnel, which
is a prerequisite for their activities in Afghanistan, to facilitate
their work and to ensure unimpeded access and adequate
conditions for the delivery of aid to all in need of it;

5.
Condemns the capture by the Taliban of the
Consulate-General of the Islamic Republic of Iran and the
murder of the Iranian diplomats and a journalist in Mazar-eSharif, stresses that these acts constitute flagrant violations of
international law, and calls upon the Taliban to cooperate with
the UnitedNations in investigatingthese crimes with a view to
prosecuting those responsible;

12. Demands that the Afghan factions put an end to
discriminationagainst girls and women and other violations of
human rights, as well as violations af international
humanitarian law, and adhere to the international norms and
standards in this sphere;
13. Demands also that the Taliban stop providing
sanctuary and training for international terrorists and their
organizations, and that all Afghan factions cooperate with
efforts to bring indicted terrorists to justice;

6. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to dispatch a mission to Afghanistan to investigate
numerous reports of grave breaches and serious violations of
international humanitarian law in that country, in particular
mass killings and mass graves of prisoners of war and civilians
and the destruction of religious sites, and urges all parties,
especially the Taliban, to cooperate with this mission and, in
particular, to assure the safety and freedom of movement of its
personnel;

14. Demands further that the Taliban, as well as others,
halt the cultivation,production and trafficking of illegal drugs;

15. Deplores the failure of the leadership of the Taliban,
in particular, to take measures to comply with the demands
made in its previous resolutions, especially to conclude a
ceasefire and to resume negotiations, and in this context
expresses its readiness to consider the imposition ofmeasures,
in accordance with its responsibility under the Charter of the
United Nations, with the aim of achieving the full
implementation of its relevant resolutions;

7. Supports the proposal of the Secretary-General, as
contained in his letter dated 23 November 1998 to the
President of the Security
to establish within the
Special Mission, without prejudice to its mandate and taking
into account security conditions, a civil affairs unit with the
primary objective of monitoring the situation, promoting
respect for minimum humanitarian standards and deterring
massive and systematic violations of human rights and
humanitarian law in the future, and to send an assessment
mission to Afghanistan, as soon as security conditionspermit,
in order to determine the exact mandate, composition and
location of the civilian monitors;

16. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

Adopted unanimously at the
3952nd meeting.

286

Ibid., Supplement jbr October, November and December 1998,
document S/1998/1139.

83

ITEMS RELATING TO THE SITUATION IN RWANDA

The situation concerning Rwanda
[Resolutions or decisions on this question were also adopted by the Security Council in 1993, 1994, 1995 and 1996.1
1. Requests the Secretary-General to reactivate the
International Cornmission of Inquiry, with the following
mandate:

Decision
At its 3870th meeting, on 9 April 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representatives of Belgium and
Germany to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the
item entitled “The situation concerning Rwanda”.

(a) To collect information and investigate reports
relating to the sale, supply and shipment of arms and related
madriel to former Rwandan government forces and militias in
the Great Lakes region of central Africa, in violation of
Security Council resolutions 918 (1994), 997 (1995) and
1011 (1995);

4

Resalution 1161 1998)
of 9 April 19 8
The Security Council,

(b) To identify parties aiding and abetting the illegal
sale to or acquisition of arms by former Rwandan government
forces and militias, contrary to the resolutions referred to
above;

RecalZing all its previous resolutions on the situation in
Rwanda, in particular resolutions 918 (1994) of 17 May 1994,
997 (1995) of 9 June 1995, 1011 (1995) of 16 August 1995,
1013 (1 995) of 7 September 1995 and 1053 (1 996) of 23 April
1996,

(c) To make recommendations relating to the illegal
flow of a m in the Great Lakes region;

Condemning the continuing violence in Rwanda,
including the massacre of civilians, including refugees, at
Mudende in December 1997, and similar acts of violence
observed in the Great Lakes region, including in Burundi,

2. CuZls upon all States, relevant United Nations
bodies, including the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 918 (1994) and, as appropriate, other organizations
and interestedparties, to collate informationin their possession
relating to the mandate of the Commission, and to make this
information available to the Commission as soon as possible;

Expressing grave concern at reports of the sale and
supply of arms and related matiriel to the former Rwandan
government forces and militias, in violation of the embargo
imposed under its resolutions 918 (1994), 997 (1995) and
1011 (1995), and underlining the need for Governments to
take action to ensure the effective implementation of the
embargo,

3.
Calls upon the Governments of the States
concerned in which the Commissionwill carry out its mandate
to cooperate fully with the Commission in the fulfilment of its
mandate, including by responding positively to requests from
the Commissionfor security, assistanceand access in pursuing
investigations, as specified in paragraph 5 of resolution
1013 (1995);

Cornmending the members of the International
Commission of Inquiry established by resolution 1013(1995)
on the investigation they conducted and, in particular on their
final repor?’ and the addendum thereto;”

4. Calls upon all States in the Great Lakes region to
ensure that their territory is not used as a base for armed
groups to launch incursions or attacks against any other State
in violation of the Charter of the United Nations and other
provisions of international law;

Noting that widespread violence in the eastern region of
the former Zaire in October 1996 caused the suspension of
effective follow-up to the work of the Commission, but
recognizing the need for a renewed investigation of the illegal
flow of arms to Rwanda, which is fuelling violence and could
lead to further acts of genocide, with specific
recommendations to the Security Council for action,

5 . Urges all States and relevant organizations to
cooperate in countering radio broadcasts and publications that
incite acts of genocide, hatred and violence in the region;

ReaBrming the need for a long-term solution to the
refugee and related problems in the territories of States of the
Great Lakes region,

6. Encourages States to make voluntary contributions
to the United Nations Trust Fund for Rwanda to provide the
financing for the work of the Commission and to contribute
equipment and services to the Commission;

Reaffirming also the importance of countering radio
broadcasts and pamphlets which spread hate and fear in the
region, and emphasizing the need for States to assist countries
in the region to counter such broadcasts and publications,

as soon as possible, requests the Secretary-General to report to

7.

Recommends that the Commission resume its work

the Council on the reactivation of the Commission, and further
requests him to submit an interim report to the Council on the
initial conclusions of the Commission within three months of
its reactivation, to be followed by a final report containing its
recommendations three months later;

207 Uficial Records of the Security Council, Fifty-second Year,
Supplemeni for October, November and December 1997,document
S/1997/10f 0, annex.
Ibid., Ff2-third Year, Supplement f o r January, February and
March 1998, document Sl1998163, annex.

8. Reiterates its concern that the uncontrolled illegal
flows of arms and related matkriel in violation of its abovementioned resolutions pose a threat to peace and stability in
the Great Lakes region, and declares its willingness to consider
84

1. Decides to establish a third Trial Chamber of the
International Tribunal for Rwanda, and to this end decides to
amend articles 10, 11 and 12 of the statute of the TribunallZw
replacing those articles with the text set out in the annex to the
present resolution;

further other measures in this regard, including the
recommendations referred to in paragraph 1 (c) above, and any
other related recommendations offered by the Commission;
9.

Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the
3870th meeting.

2. Decides that the elections for the judges of the three
Trial Chambers shall be held together, for a term of office to
expire on 24 May 2003;

Decision

3. Also decides that, as an exceptional measure to
enable the third Trial Chamber to begin to function at the
earliest possible date and without prejudice to article 12,
paragraph 5 , of the statute of the International Tribunal for
Rwanda, three newly elected judges, designated by the
Secretary-General in consultation with the President of the
Tribunal, shall commence their term of office as soon as
possible following the elections;

At its 3877th meeting, on 30 April 1998, the Security
Council considered the item entitled:
“The situation concerning Rwanda
“Establishment of an international tribunal for the
prosecution of persons responsible for serious
violations of international humanitarian law
Committed in the territoryof Rwanda and Rwandan
citizens responsible for such violations committed
in the territory of neighbouring States”.

4. Urges all States to cooperate fully with the
InternationalTribunal for Rwanda and its organs in accordance
with resolution 955 (1994), and welcomes the cooperation
already extended to the Tribunal in the fulfilment of its
mandate;

Resolution 1165 1998)
of 30 April 19 8

6

The Security Council,

5. Urges the organs of the International Tribunal for
Rwanda actively to continue their efforts to increase further the
efficiency of the work of the Tribunal in their respective areas,
and in this connection further calls upon them to consider how
their procedures and methods of work can be enhanced, taking
into account relevant recommendations in this regard;

Reuflrming its resolution 955 (1994) of 8 November
1994,
Recalling its decision in that resolution to consider
increasing the number of judges and TnaE Chambers of the
International Tribunal for Rwanda if it becomes necessary,

6 . Requests the Secretary-General to make practical
arrangementsfor the elections mentioned in paragraph 2 above
and for enhancingthe effective functioning of the International
Tribunal for Rwanda, including the timely provision of
personnel and facilities, in particular for the third Trial
Chamber and related offices of the Prosecutor, and further
requests him to keep the Security Council closely informed of
progress in this regard;

Remaining convinced that in the particular circumstances
of Rwanda, the prosecution of persons responsible for serious
violations of international humanitarian law will contribute to
the process of national reconciliationand to the restoration and
maintenance of peace in Rwanda and in the region,
Stressing the need for international cooperation to
strengthen the courts and judicial system of Rwanda, having
regard in particular to the necessity for those courts to deal
with a large number of accused awaiting trial,

7.

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the
3877th meeting.

Having considered the letter from the President of the
International Tribunal for Rwanda, transmitted by identical
letters dated 15 October 1997 from the Secretary-Generalto
the Presidents of the Security Council and the General
Assembly,289

ANNEX
Amendments to the statute of the International Tribunal
for Rwanda
Replace articles 10, 11 and 12 by the following:

Convinced of the need to increase the number of judges
and Trial Chambers, in order to enable the International
Tribunal for Rwanda to try without delay the large number of
accused awaiting trial,

Article I0
Organization ofthe International Tribunal for Rwanda

Noting the progress being made in improving the
efficient functioning of the International Tribunal for Rwanda,
and convinced of the need for its organs to continue their
efforts to further such progress,

The International Tribunal for Rwanda shall consist of
the following organs:
( a ) The Chambers, Comprising three Trial Chambers
and an Appeals Chamber;

Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations,

(b) The Prosecutor;

289 Ibid., Fifiy-second Year, Supplementfor October, November and
December 1997, document Sl19971812.

‘90 Resolution 955 (1994),

85

annex.

UnitedNations andnon-memberStatesmaintaining permanent
observer missions at United Nations Headquarters;

(c) A Registry.

Article 11
Cornposition of the Chambers
The Chambers shall be composed of fourteen
independent judges, no two of whom may be nationals of the
same State, who shall serve as follows:
(a) Three judges shall serve in each of the Trial
Chambers;

(b) Five judges shall serve in the Appeals Chamber.
Article 12
Qualification and election ofjudges
1. The judges shall be persons of high moral character,
impartiality and integrity who possess the qualifications
required in their respective countries for appointment to the
highest judicial offices. In the overall composition of the
Chambers due account shall be taken of the experience of the
judges in criminal law, international law, including
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
2. The members of the Appeals Chamber of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991 (hereinafter referred to as “the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia”) shall also
serve as the members of the Appeals Chamber of the
International Tribunal for Rwanda.

3. The judges of the Trial Chambers of the International
Tribunal for Rwanda shall be elected by the General Assembly
from a list submitted by the Security Council, in the following
manner:
(a) The Secretary-General shall invite nominations for
judges of the Trial Chambers from States Members of the

(b) Within thirty days of the date of the invitation of the
Secretary-General, each State may nominate up to two
candidates meeting the qualifications set out in paragraph 1
above, no two of whom shall be of the same nationality and
neither of whom shall be of the same nationality as any judge
on the Appeals Chamber;
(c) The Secretary-General shall forward the
nominations received to the Security Council. From the
nominations received, the Security Council shall establish a list
of no less than eighteen and not more than twenty-seven
candidates, taking due account of adequate representation on
the International Tribunal for Rwanda of the principal legal
systems of the world;

(d) The President of the SecurityCouncil shall transmit
the list of candidatesto the President of the General Assembly.
From that list, the General Assemblyshall elect the nine judges
of the Trial Chambers. The candidateswho receive an absolute
majority of the votes of the States Members of the United
Nations and of the non-member States maintaining permanent
observer missions at United Nations Headquarters shall be
declared elected. Should two candidates of the same
nationality obtain the required majority vote, the one who
received the higher number of votes shall be considered
elected.
4. In the event of a vacancy in the Trial Chambers, after
consultation with the Presidents of the Security Council and
the General Assembly, the Secretary-General shall appoint a
person meeting the qualificationsset out in paragraph 1 above,
for the remainder of the tern of office concerned.
5 . The judges of the Trial Chambers shall be elected for a
term of four years. The terms and conditions of service shall be
those of the judges ofthe International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. They shall be eligible for re-election.

International Tribunalfor the Prosecution o Persons Responsiblefor Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the erritory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible
for Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States

i

Decislons

“Letter dated 8 July 1998 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1998/640)”.29’

At its 3908th meeting, on 15 July 1998, the Security
Council considered the item entitled:
“International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States

On 15 July 1998, the President of the Security Council
addressed the following letter to the Se~retary-General:~’~
‘‘I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 8 July I998 concerning the list of candidates for
judges to the InternationalTribunal for Rwanda and your

29’ See OJficial Records of the Security Council, Fifty-third Year,
Supplement for July,August and September 1998.
292

Sl1998lG46.

Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
ResponsibIe for Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States

suggestion to extend the deadline for nominations
to the Tribunal until 4 August 1998295has been
brought to the attention of the Security Council. The
Council noted the information contained in the letter and
agreed with the proposal contained therein,”

“Establishment of the list of candidates for
judges of the International Tribunal for
Rwanda”.

At its 3917th meeting, on 18 August 1998, the Council
considered the item entitled:

Resolution 1200 (1998)
of 30 September 1998

“International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States

Recallingitsresolutions955 (1994)of 8 November 1994,
989 (1995) of 24 April 1995 and 1165 (1998) of 30 April
1998,

“Letter dated 7 August 1998 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (SI 1998/760)”.29’

Having considered the nominations for judges of the.
International Tribunal for Rwanda received by the SecretaryGeneral,

The Security Council,

On 18 August 1998, the President of the Security CounciI
addressed the following letter to the Se~retary-General:’~~

Forwards the following nominations to the General
Assembly in accordance with paragraph 3 (6) of article 12 of
the statute of the International Tribunal for Rwanda:

“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 7 August 1998 by which you forwarded to the
Security Council the fourteen nominations of judges for
the Trial Chambers of the International Tribunal for
Rwanda received from States Members of the United
Nations within the period specified in ?Fagraph 3 (b) of
article 12 of the statute of the Tribunal, as extended b7
the Council in the decision taken at its 3908thmeeting:
has been brought to the attention of the Council. The
Council noted the information contained therein and
decided to extend the deadline for the nominations of
judges for the Tribunal until 14 September 1998.

Ms. Eugtnie Liliane Arivony (Madagascar)
Mr. Pave1 Dolenc (Slovenia)
Mr. Salifou Fomba Mali)
Mr. Willy C.Gaa (P ilippines)
Mr. Asoka de Z, Gunawardena (Sri Lanka)
Mr. Mehmet Giine (Turkey)
Mr. Aka Edoukou Skan-BaptisteKablan (C6te
d’Ivoire)

(h

“I should be grateful if you would inform States
Members of the United Nations and non-member States
maintaining permanent observer missions at United
Nations Headquarters accordingly.”
At its 3934th meeting, on 30 September 1998, the
Council considered the item entitled:

and Nevis)

‘The situation concerning Rwanda

Adopted unanimously at the
3934th meeting.

“International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the

293

Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Ffi-third Year.
Supplement for July, August and September 1998, document
S/1998/640.

”‘ Sf1998/761.
295 Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Ftlly-third Year,
Supplement f i r July, Augusi and Sepiember 1998. document

Sf1998f760.

87

THE SITUATION IN CYPRUS
[Resolutions or decisions on this question have been adopted by the Security Council every year since 1963.1

Resolution 1178 1998)
of 29 June 19 8

6

Decisions
On 14 April 1998, the President of the Security Council
addressed the following letter to the Secretaxy-GenerakzM

The Security Council,
Welcomingthe report of the Secretary-Generalof 10June
1998 on the United Nations operation in C y p r u ~ , 3 ~ ~

“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 8 April 1998 concerning your intention to add the
Netherlands to the list of Member States contributing
military personnel to the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in
has been brought to the attention of
the members of the Security Council. They agree with
the intention expressed in your letter.” ,

Noting that the Government of Cyprus has agreed that in
view of the prevailing conditions on the island it is necessary
to keep the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
beyond 30 June 1998,
Reaflrming all its earlier resolutions on Cyprus,

On 13 May 1998, the President of the Security Council
addressed the following letter to the Se~retary-General:‘~’

Noting with concern that tensions along the ceasefire
lines and restrictions to the fkeedom of movement of the Force
continue,

“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 8 May 1998 concerning your intention to appoint
Ms. Ann Hercus, of New Zealand, as Deputy Sgecial
Representative and Chief of Mission in Cyprus has
been brought to the attention of the members of the
Security Council. They agree with the intention
expressed in your letter.”

1. Decides to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus for a further period
ending on 3 1 December 1998;

2. Reminds both sides of their obligations to prevent
any violence directed against Force personnel, to cooperate
fully with the Force and to ensure its complete freedom of
movement;

On 19 May 1998, the President of the Security Council
addressed the following letter to the Se~retary-General:’~
”I have the honour to inform you that the members
of the Security Council have taken note of your letter
dated 20 April 199830’and reiterate their strong support
for your mission of good offices in Cyprus and for the
efforts of your Special Adviser on Cyprus, Mr. Diego
Cordovez, on the basis of the relevant Council
resolutions.”

3. Calls upon the military authorities on both sides to
refrain from any action, particularly in the vicinity of the
buffer zone, which would exacerbate tensions;
4. Underlinesthe importance of early agreementto the
reciprocal measures for the reduction of tension along the
ceasefire lines proposed and subsequently adapted by the
Force, notes the fact that only one side has so far accepted this
package, calls for early agreementto and rapid implementation
of reciprocal measures, and encourages the Force to continue
its efforts towards that end;

At its 3898th meeting, on 29 June 1998, the Council
considered the item entitled:
“The situation in Cyprus

5. Reiterates its grave concern at the continuing
excessive and increasing levels of military forces and
armaments in the Republic of Cyprus and the rate at which
they are being expanded, upgraded and modernized, including
by the introduction of sophisticatedweaponry, and the lack of
progress towards any significant reduction in the number of
foreign troops in the Republic of Cyprus, which threaten to
raise tensions both on the island and in the region and
complicate efforts to negotiate an overall political settlement;

“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/1998/488 and
Add.l)302
“Report of the Secretary-General on his mission of
good offices in Cyprus (S/1998/518)”.’0z

6. Calls upon a 1 concerned to commit themselves to
a reduction in defence spending and a reduction in the number
of foreign troops in the Republic of Cyprus to help to restore
confidence between the parties and as a first step towards the
withdrawal of non-Cypriot forces as described in the set of
ideas,304
stresses the importance of eventual demilitarization of
the Republic of Cyprus as an objective in the context of an

SI1998f323.
291 SI1998f322.
298 Sf1998f389.
299 Sl1998f388.
Sl1998l411.
Uflcia f Records of the Security Council, Fa&-third Year,
Supplement for April, May and June 1998, document Sl19981410.
’02 Ibid, Supplement for April, May and June 1998.
296

’O’

Ibid., documents S/1998f488 and Add. I.

3M Ibid., Forty-seventh

Year, Supplement for July, August and
September 1992, document S124472 .
88

overall comprehensive Settlement, and encourages the
Secretary-General to continue to promote efforts in this
direction;

1. Reaflirms that the status quo is unacceptable and
that negotiations on a final political solution of the Cyprus
problem have been at an impasse for too long;

7. Calls upon the leaders of the two communities to
resume the discussions on security issues begun on
26 September 1997;

2. Reuflrms its position that a Cyprus settlement must
be based on a State of Cyprus with a single sovereignty and
international personality and a single citizenship, with its
independence and territorial integrity safeguarded, and
comprising two politically equal communities as described in
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in a bicornmunal and
bi-zonal federation, and that such a settlement must exclude
union in whole or in part with any other country or any form
of partition or secession;

Welcomes the ongoing efforts by the Force to
8.
implement its humanitarian mandate in respect of Greek
Cypriots and Maronites living in the northern part of the
island, and Turkish Cypriots living in the southern part, and
welcomes also the progress in the implementation of
recommendations arising out of the humanitarian review
undertaken by the Forckfn 1995, as mentioned in the report of
the Secretary-General;

3. Stresses itsfull support for the Secretary-General’s
mission of good offices and for the efforts of his Special
Adviser on Cyprus to resume a sustained process of direct
negotiations aimed at achieving a comprehensivesettlementon
the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions, and
stresses also the importance of concerted efforts to work with
the Secretary-General to that end;

9. Welcomes also the appointment of the new third
member of the Committee on Missing Persons, and calls for
implementation without delay of the agreement on missing
persons of 3 1 July 1997;
10. Reiterutes its support for the efforts of the United
Nations and others concerned to promote the holding of bicommunal events so as to build cooperation, trust and mutual
respect between the two communities, regrets the suspension
of such activity by the Turkish Cypriot leadership, and urges
both sides, and in particular the Turkish Cypriot side, to
facilitate arrangements within which bicommunal contactscan
take place uninterrupted and without formalities;

4. Welcomesthe intention ofthe Secretary-Generalto
continue to explore possibilities that may lead to a new
momentum in that process of negotiations;
5. Calls once again upon the leaders of the two
comunities, in particular the Turkish Cypriot side, to c o d t
themselves to this process of negotiations, to cooperate
actively and constructively with the Secretary-General and his
Special Adviser and to resume the direct dialogue without
hrther delay, and urges all States to lend their fill support to
these efforts;

11. Requests the Secretary-Generalto submit a report
by 10 December 1998 on the implementation of the present
resolution;

6 . Calls upon, in this context, all parties concerned to
create a climate for reconciliation and genuine mutual
confidence on both sides, and to avoid any actions which
might increase tension, including through further expansion of
military forces and armaments;

12. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

Adopted unanimousi) at the
3898th meeting.

6

Resolution 1179 1998)
of 29 June19 8

7, Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
by 10 December 1998 on the implementation of the present
resolution;

The Security Council,

8.

Welcomingthe report ofthe Secretary-Generalof 16 June
1998 on his mission of good offices in C y p r ~ s , 3 ~ ~

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the
3898th meeting.

Reafirming all its earlier resolutions on Cyprus,

Decision

Galling once more upon all States to respect the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Cyprus, and requesting them, along with the
parties concerned, to refrain from any action which might
prejudice that sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity, as well as from any attempt of partition of the island
or its unification with any other country,

At its 3959th meeting, on 22 December 1998, the
Security Council considered the item entitled:
“The situation in Cyprus
“Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/l998/1149 and
Add. 1)’06

Reiterating its growing concern that negotiations on a
comprehensive political solution have yet to make progress,
despite the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special
Adviser and others in support of the United Nations efforts to
promote a comprehensive settlement,
3m

“Letter dated 14 December 1998 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1998/11 66)”.3D6

Ibid., Fifiy-third Year, Suppletnentfor April, May and June 1998,
’06 Ibid.,

document S/1998/518.

89

Supplement f i r October, November and December 1998.

Welcoming the report of the Secretary-General of 7
December 1998 on the United Nations operation in

confidence between the parties and as a first step towards the
withdrawal of non-Cypriot forces as described in the set of
stressesthe importance of eventual demilitarizationof
the Republic of Cyprus as an objective in the context of an
overall comprehensive settlement, and encourages the
Secretary-General to continue to promote efforts in this
direction;

Welcoming also the letter from the Secretary-General
dated 14 December 1998 addressed to the President of the
Security Council on his mission of good offices in Cyprus ,308

6. Reaffirms that the status quo is unacceptable and
that negotiations on a fmal political solution of the Cyprus
problem have been at an impasse for too long;

Noting that the Government of Cyprus has agreed that, in
view of the prevailing conditions on the island, it is necessary
to keep the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
beyond 3 1 December 1998,

7. Reafirms its position that a Cyprus settlementmust
be based on a State of Cyprus with a single sovereignty and
international personality and a single citizenship, with its
independence and territorial integrity safeguarded, and
comprising two politically equal communities as described in
the relevant Security Councilresolutions,in a bicommunal and
bi-zonal federation, and that such a settlement must exclude
union in whole or in part with any other country or any form
of partition or secession;

Resolution 1217 (1998)
of 22 December 1998
The Security Council,

Reafirming all its earlier resolutions on Cyprus,
Calling once more upon all States to respect the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Cyprus, and requesting them, along with the
parties concerned, to refrain from any action which might
prejudice that sovereignty, independence and temtorial
integrity, as well as from any attempt of partition of the island
or its unification with any other country,
Noting with concern that restrictions to the freedom of
movement of the Force continue,
Noting with satisfaction that the situation along the
ceasefire lines has remained generally calm, notwithstanding
numerous minor violations,
Reiterating the need to make progress on a
comprehensive political solution,
1. Decides to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus for a further period
ending on 30 June 1999;
Reminds both sides of their obligations to prevent
any violence directed against Farce personnel, to cooperate
fully with the Force and to ensure its complete freedom of
movement;
2.

8. Stresses itsjiill support for the Secretary-General’s
mission of good offices and for the efforts of his Special
Adviser and Deputy Special Representative in Cyprus to
resume, when appropriate, a sustained process of direct
negotiationsaimed at achievinga comprehensive settlementon
the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions, and
stresses also the importance of concerted efforts to work with
the Secretary-General to that end;

9. Calls once again upon the leaders of the two
communities to commit themselves to this process of
negotiations,to cooperate actively and constructively with the
Secretary-General,his Special Adviser and his Deputy Special
Representative and to resume when appropriate the direct
dialogue, and urges all States to lend their fbll support to these
efforts;
10. Welcomes the ongoing efforts by the Force to
implement its humanitarian mandate in respect of Greek
Cypriots and Maronites living in the northern part of the
island, and Turkish Cypriots living in the southern part, as
mentioned in the report of the Se~retary-General;~~’

3 . Ca12s upon the military authorities on both sides to
refrain from any action, particularly in the vicinity of the
buffer zone, which would exacerbate tensions;

11. Welcomes also the resumption of work of the
Committee on Missing Persons, and calls for implementation
without delay of the agreement on missing persons of 3 1 July
1997;

4. Reiterates its grave concern at the continuing
excessive levels of military forces and armaments in the
Republic of Cyprus and the rate at which they are being
expanded, upgraded and modernized, including by the
introduction of sophisticated weaponry, and the lack of
progress towards any significant reduction in the number of
foreign troops in the Republic of Cyprus,which threaten to
raise tensions both on the island and in the region and
complicate efforts to negotiate an overall political settlement;
I

12. Reiterates its support for the efforts of the United
Nations and others concerned to promote the holding of
bicommunalevents so as to build cooperation,trust and mutual
respect between the two communities;

13. Welcomes the efforts made to improve the
efficiency of the Force, including by the establishment of a
new Civil Affairs Branch;

5 . Calls upon all concerned to commit themselves to
a reduction in defence spending and a reduction in the number
of foreign troops in the Republic of Cyprus to help to restore

14, Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
by 10 June 1999 on the implementation of the present
resolution;

15. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
’07

Ibid., documents S/1998/1149 and Add. 1.
Ibid., document S/1998/1166.

Adopted unanimously at the
3959th meeting.
90

5. Also requests the Secretary-General, in particular,
to work intensivelywith the two sides on the following, taking
into account resolution 1178 (1998) of 29 June 1998:

Resolution 1218 (1998)
of 22 December 1998
The Security Council,

Reaffirming all its earlier resolutions on Cyprus,

(a) An undertaking to refrain from the threat or use of
force or violence as a means to resolve tile Cyprus problem;

Reiterating its grave concern at the lack of progress
towards an overall political settlement on Cyprus,

(b) A staged process aimed at limiting and then
substantiallyreducing the level of all troops and armaments in

Cyprus;

1. Expresses its appreciation for the letter dated
14 December 1998 from the Secretary-General addressed to

the President of the Security Council on his mission of good
offices in Cyprus, in particular on the work of his Deputy
Special Representative?’8
2. Endorses the initiative of the Secretary-General
announced on 30 September 1998 within the framework ofhis
mission of good offices, with the goal of reducing tensions and
promoting progress towards a just and lasting settlement in
Cyprus;

3 . Expresses its appreciation for the spirit of
cooperation and constructive approach the two sides have
demonstrated thus far in working with the Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General;

(c) Implementation of the package of measures of the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus aimed at
reducing tensions along the ceasefire lines, and a commitment
to enter into discussions with the Force with a view to early
agreement on further specific and related tension-reducing
steps, including demining along the buffer zone;

(4 Further progress in the area of tension-reduction;
(e) Efforts to achieve substantive progress on the core
aspects of a comprehensive Cyprus settlement;

03 Other measures that will buildtrust and cooperation
between the two sides;
6 . Calls upon the two sides to show compliance with
all the objectives in paragraphs 4 and 5 above, in full
cooperation with the Secretary-General;

Requests the Secretary-General, in view of the
objectives of promoting progress towards a just and lasting
settlement and of reducing tension, set out in his initiative of
30 September 1998, and building on the serious engagement
already demonstrated by the two sides to continue to make
progress towards these two objectives, on the basis of relevant
Security Council resolutions;
4.

7. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Security
Council informed of progress made on his initiative;

8, Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the
3959th meeting.

THE SITUATION IN AFRICA
[Resolufionsor decisions on this question were also adopted by fhe Security Council in 1997.1

and Zimbabwe to participate, without vote, in the discussion of
the item entitled:

Decisions
At its 3871st meeting, on 16 April 1998, the Security
Council considered the item entitled:

“The situation in Africa
“Report of the Secretary-General (S/1998/31 8 ) ~ ~ ’ ~

“The situation in Africa
“Report of the Secretary-General(SA 998/318)r’.3w
At its 3875th meeting, on 24 April 1998, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Algeria, Argentina,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Cameroon, Canada, Colombia, the
Comoros, Cuba, Cyprus, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiopia, Germany, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Italy, Kuwait, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, the
Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, the Philippines, the
Republic of Korea, South Africa, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukraine,
the United Arab Emirates, the United Republic of Tanzania

At the same meeting, the Council decided, at the request
of the Director of the Liaison Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees at the United Nations
Headquarters, to extend an invitation to Mrs. Sadako Ogata,
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, under
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Council,
At the same meeting, the Council also decided to extend
an invitation to Mrs. Sylvie Junod, Head of Delegation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross to the United
Nations, under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the same meeting, the Council also decided to extend
an invitation to Archbishop Jean-Louis Tauran, Secretary for
Relations with States of the Holy See to participate, without
vote, in the discussion of the item.

’09 See Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fifry-third Year,
Supplernenffor April, May and June 1998.

91

crises in accordance with international law, including
internationalhumanitarian law,

At its 3886th meeting, on 28 May 1998, the Council
considered the item entitled:
"The situation in Africa
"Report of the Secretary-General (S/1998/318),'.309

B

Resolution 1170 1998)
of 28 May 19 8

The Securiiy Council,
Recalling the statement by its President of 25 September
1997,3"

Stressing the close linkage between international peace
and security and sustainable development,
Noting that African States have made significant strides
towards democratization, economic reform, and respect for
and protection of human rights, and stressing the importance
of promoting political stability, peace and sustainable
development,
Stressing the importanceof promoting good governance,
the rule of law and sustainabledevelopment as essential factors
in the prevention of conflicts in Africa,

Having considered the report of the Secretary-Generalof
13 April 1998 submitted to the General Assembly and to the
Security Council in accordance with the above-mentioned
~tatement,~"

Expressing concern that the use of mercenaries and the
presence of armed militias continue to contribute to instability
in Africa,

Fully supporting the engagement of the United Nations
in Africa through its diplomatic, peacekeeping, humanitarian,
economic development and other activities,

Emphasizingthe destabilizing effects ofthe illicittransfer
of arms, especially small arms, and urging Governments
concerned to combat the trafficking of such weapons,

Reaflrming the principles of political independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States,

1. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of
13 April 199&3"and the comprehensive recommendations
containedtherein, and commendsthe Secretary-Generalfor his
efforts to address the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa, and for
the steps he is taking to reinforce the role of the United
Nations system towards these ends;

Rea$ming also the obligation of all Member States to
settle their disputes by peaceful means, and stressing its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations,

2. Stresses that the challenges in Africa demand a
comprehensive response, and in this context expresses the
hope that the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council, other relevant bodies of the United Nations, regional
and subregional organizations, international financial
institutions and other relevant organizations, as well as
Member States will consider the report and its
recommendations and take action as they deem appropriate
within their respective areas of competence;

Recalling the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter
on regional arrangements,

Mindful of the Cairo Declaration of 1993;" which
stipulated that the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution of the Organization of African
Unity would have as a primary objective the anticipation and
prevention of conflicts,
Recognizing that the adoption of the African NuclearWeapon-Free Zone Treaty13" declaring Africa a nuclearweapon-free zone, is an important contribution to the
promotion of regional peace and security and to global efforts
towards nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament,

3. Notes the importantrole ofthe Secretary-Generalin
coordinating the work of the United Nations agencies
concerned in the implementation of the recommendations in
his report, and requests the Secretary-General to keep the
Council regularly informed of the efforts being undertaken by
the agencies and other bodies of the United Nations system in
this regard;

Gravely concerned that the continuation of armed
conflicts in the continent threatens regional peace, causes
massive human displacement, suffering and poverty,
perpetuates instability and diverts scarce resources from longterm development,

4. Decides to establish an ad hoc Working Group,
comprised of all members of the Council, for a period of six
months, to review all recommendations in the report related to
the maintenance of international peace and security, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, and in that
context, to prepare a framework for the implementation of
recommendations, as appropriate, and to submit specific
proposals for concrete action for consideration by the Council
by September 1998;

Recognizing the importance of the commitment of the
United Nations ~ o u g its
h Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and other United Nations
agencies, and of humanitarian organizations to assist the
efforts of African States to address humanitarian and refugee
0I'

5. Expresses its intention to convene at the ministerial
level on a biennial basis, beginning in September 1998 and
subsequently as needed in order to assess progress in
promoting peace and security in Africa;

SPRSTIl997/46.

''I
Uficial Records of the Security Council. Fiftr-third Year,
Supplementfor April, May and June 1998,document S/1998/318.
2I' See N481322, annex 11.
313

See N50f426.

92

6. Stresses the importanceof appropriateconsultations
and cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity on the follow-up to the report;

Stressing the principles of the political independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States,

Mindful of the Cairo Declaration of 1993,’12 which
stipulated that the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution of the Organization of African
Unity would have as a primary objective the anticipation and
prevention of conflicts,

7. Welcomes the important contributions of the
Organization of African Unity to conflict prevention and
resolution in Africa, including its Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution, as well as those of
subregional arrangements;

Reaffirmingthe obligations of all Member States to settle
their international disputes by peaceful means, and stressing
the primary responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations,

Welcomesalso the efforts made by Member States,
regional organizations and the United Nations to enhance the
capacity of African States to contribute to peacekeeping
operations in accordance with the Charter;
8.

9. Invites Member States and regional organizationsto
provide assistance to the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution of the Organization of African
Unity to enhance its capacity in the anticipationand prevention
of conflicts;

Recognizing that the International Commissionof Inquiry
establishedby its resolution 1013 (1995) of 7 September 1995
and reactivated in accordance with its resolution 1161 (1998)
of 9 April 1998 is an example of a useful means for
strengtheningthe effectivenessof an arms embargo established
by the Council,

10. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take concrete actions aimed at enhancing the capacity of the
Organization of African Unity to anticipate and prevent
conflicts in Africa, on the basis of the United NationsOrganization of African Unity Cooperation Agreement of
15 November 1965;3’4

1. Reiterates the obligation of all Member States to
carry out decisions of the Security Council on arms
embargoes;
2. Emourages each Member State, as appropriate, to
consider as a means of implementing the obligations referred
to in paragraph 1 above the adoption of legislation or other
legal measures making the violation of arms embargoes
established by the Council a criminal offence;

11. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the
3886th meeting.

3. Requests the Security CounciI committees
establishedby resolutions imposing arms embargoes in Africa
to include in their annual reports a substantive section on the
implementation of the arms embargoes, on possible violations
of the measures reported to the committees and with
recommendations as appropriate for strengthening the
effectiveness of the arms embargoes;

Decision

At its 3927th meeting, on 16 September 1998, the
Security Council considered the item entitled:
“The situation in Africa
“Report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainabledevelopmentin Africa (SA 9981318)’’?09

4, Encourages the chairmen of the committeesreferred
to in paragraph 3 above to seek to establish channels of
communication with regional and subregional organizations
and bodies, including in Africa the Mechanism for Conflict
Resolution 1196 (1998)
of 16 September 1998
Prevention, Management and Resolution of the Organization
of African Unity, the Economic Community of West African
The Security Council,
States, the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa, the Southern African
Reaffirming its resolution 1170 (1998) of 28 May 1998, Development Community and the Intergovernmental
Recalling the statement made by its President on Authority on Development, in addition to other sources of
25 September 1997 at the meeting of the Security Council at information, including Member States, already mentioned in
the level of Ministers for Foreign on the situation in Africa,310 the guidelines of the committees, in order to improve the
monitoring of arms embargoes through wider and regular
Having considered the recommendations contained in the exchange of information with relevant parties in the region
report of the Secretary-Generalof 13 April 1998 entitled “The concerned;
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
S. Reiterates its request that all States, relevant United
sustainable development in Africa”, which was submitted to
Nations
bodies and, as appropriate, other organizations and
the General Assembly and to the Security Council’” in
accordance with the above-mentionedstatement,regardingthe interested parties report information on possible violations of
importance of strengthening the effectiveness of arms arms embargoes established by the Council to the relevant
embargoes as a means to diminish the availability of arms with committees referred to in paragraph 3 above;
which to pursue armed conflicts,
6. Requests the committees referred to in paragraph 3
above to make relevant information publicly available through
appropriate media, including through the improved use of
information technology;
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 548, No. 614.

”‘

93

affms that strengtheningAfrica’scapacity to participate
in all aspects of peacekeeping operations, including their
military, police, humanitarian and other civilian
components, is a key priority.

7 . Welcomes the initiative of the chairmen of the
committees established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993) of
15 September 1993 and resolution 1132 (1997) of 8 October
1997 concerning the situation in Angola and in Sierra Leone,
respectively, to visit countries in the region, and invites other
committees to consider this approach, where and when
appropriate, in order to enhance the full and effective
implementation of the measures specified in their respective
mandates with a view to urging the parties to comply with
relevant Council resolutions;

“The Council encourages increased bilateral and
multilateral cooperation in the field of peacekeeping,
especiallycapacity-building,between Member States,the
United Nations and the Organizationof African Unity, as
well as subregional organizations in Africa. It welcomes
the efforts already undertaken by the United Nations and
Member States to promote greater transparency and
coordination in multilateral efforts to enhance Africa’s
capacity for peacekeeping. In particular, it welcomes
efforts to implement the recommendations in the report
of the Secretary-General of 1 November 1995 entitled
‘Improving preparedness for conflict prevention and
peacekeeping in
and to follow up the outcome
of the meetings organized by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operationsof the Secretariat in December
1997 and May 1998. It encourages all States and
Organizations concerned to work with African States in
particular on the basis of African initiatives and
proposals.

8. Expresses its willingness to consider, whenever it
establishes arms embargoes, all appropriate measures to assist
their effective implementation, and notes, in this context, that
measures such as inquiries into arms-trafficking routes, the
follow-up of possible specific violations and the deployment
of border or point-of-entry monitors may be relevant, in
consultation with the countries concerned;

9. Urges Member States, relevant United Nations
bodies and agencies and other international agencies to
consider the provision of technical and other assistance, in
consultation with the States concerned, to facilitate the
implementation of arms embargoes;

10. Stresses that arms embargoes established by the
Council should have clearly established objectives and
provisions for regular review of the measures with a view to
lifting them when the objectives are met, in accordance with
the terms of the applicable Council resolutions;

“The Council encourages contributions, financial
and in kind, aimed at enhancing Africa’s peacekeeping
capacity. In particular, it urges Member States to
contribute to the trust funds established by the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity to
improve preparedness for conflict prevention and
peacekeeping in Africa.

11. Requests all Security Council committees
established pursuant to resolutions imposing arms embargoes
to consider, as appropriate, the application of the measures
contained in the present resolution;

“The Council affirms the role of the United Nations
in setting general standards for peacekeeping, and urges

12. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

Adopted unanimously at the
3927th meeting.
Decisions
At the 3927th meeting also, following consultations
among members of the Security Council, the President made
the following statement on behalf of the Coun~il:”~
“The Security Council welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General of 13 April 1998 entitled ‘The causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa’, which was submitted
to the General Assembly and the Security Coun~il.~’’
“It agrees with the Secretary-General that the
credibility of the United Nations in Africa to a great
extent depends upon the willingness of the international
community to act and to explore new means of
advancing the objectives of peace and security in the
African continent.

compliance with existing United Nations guidelines,
including through the use of the ‘Ten Rules: Code of
Personal Conduct for Blue Helmets’, which were
elaborated following a request b? the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping operation^.^' It encourages all those
involved in enhancing Africa‘speacekeeping capacity to
ensure that training for and the conduct of peacekeeping
give due emphasis to international humanitarian law and
human rights, including the rights of the child, as well as
to gender issues. It requests all those conducting
peacekeeping operations in Africa to pay particular
attention to the situation of children in armed conflict, as
appropriate, both in mandates for and reports about such
operations.
“The Council supports the efforts of the United
Nations, regional and subregional organizations as well
as Member States in the field of training for
peacekeeping.
“The Council welcomes the readiness of the United
Nations to act as a clearing house for information on
available training initiatives. It particularly welcomes the
intention of the Secretary-General to establish a United
Nations database on training. With the aim of
strengthening Africa’s peacekeeping capacity, the

“The Council, which has the primary responsibility
under the Charter of the United Nations for international
peace and security, expresses its commitment to
exercising this responsibility in relation to Africa, and

316OBciaI Recordsof the Security Council, F$ieth Year, Supplement
for October, November and December 1995, document S1199Y91 I .
”’See A/51/130and Corr.1.

S/PRST/1998/28.
94

Council requests the Secretary-General to pursue these
plans and to include in the database information about
African needs in this field, possible regional and extraregional contributionsto assist in achieving this goal, and
available expertise on training. It encourages Member
States and regional and subregional organizations to
contribute information to the database. It encourages the
Secretary-Generalto consider possible further uses and
broadening of United Nations databases, for instance in
humanitarian crises.

“Report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainabledevelopmentinAfrica(S/1998/318),’.309
Resolution 1197 (1998)
of 18 September 1998

The Security Council,
Reaftirming its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of internationalpeace and security in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations,

“The Council also welcomes the proposal of the
Secretary-Generalto establish an informal working group
composed of African and non-African States directly
involved or interested in the provision of training
assistance.

Having considered the recommendationscontained in the
report of the Secretary-Generalof 13 April 1998 entitled “The
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa”, which was submitted to
the General Assembly and to the Security Council,”‘ regarding
the need for the UnitedNations to provide support for regional
and subregional initiatives and the strengthening of
coordination between the United Nations and regional and
subregionalorganizations in the area of conflict prevention and
the maintenance of peace,

“The Council emphasizes the value of training
aimed at improving coordinationand cooperation among
military, police, humanitarian and other civilian
components of peacekeeping operations. It encourages
the Secretary-General and Member States to engage
international and non-governmental humanitarian
organizations, as appropriate, in peacekeeping training
activities.

Recalling the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter
on regional arrangements or agencies, which set out the basic
principles governing their activities and establish the legal
frameworkfor cooperationwith the UnitedNations, in the area
of the maintenance of international peace and security,

“The Council underlines the importance of the
availability of appropriately trained personnel and
relevant equipment for all components of peacekeeping
operations. In this context, it encourages increased
participation by Member States, in particular from
Africa, in the United Nations standby arrangements. The
Council further encourages the use of United Nations
Training Assistance Teams as a usefbl tool in support of
national peacekeeping training, It recognizes the value of
joint training exercises, as well as the establishment of
partnerships between States whose contingents require
equipment and States and organizations that are able to
assist them. It also encourages the exchange of lessons
learned from previous operations.

Recalling also the agreement of 15 November 1965 on
cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization
of African Unity3I4as updated and signed on 9 October 1990
by the Secretaries-General of the two organizations,
Recalling&rther the resolutions of the General Assembly
on the enhancement of cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity, in particular
resolutions 43/12 of 25 October 1988,43/27of 18 November
1988, 44/17 of 1 November 1989, 47/148 of 18 December
1992, 48/25 of 29 November 1993, 49/64 of 15 December
1994, and 50/158 of 21 December 1995,

“The Council requests the Secretary-General to
study ways to improve the availability of logistics for
peacekeeping efforts in Africa.

Mindfir] of the need for continued cooperation between
the United Nations and its relevant bodies and specialized
agencies on the one hand, and the Organization of African
Unity and subregional organizations in Africa on the other,

“The Couricil stresses the need for it to be fully
informed of peacekeeping activities carried out or
planned by regional or subregional organizations and
underlines the fact that the improved flow of information
and the holding of regular briefmg meetings between
members of the Council, African regional and
subregional organizations involved in peacekeeping
operations and troop contributors and other participating
Member States have an important role to play in helping
to enhance African peacekeeping capacity. In that
context, the Council encouragesthe Secretary-Generalto
establishappropriateUnited Nations liaison with regional
and subregional organizations and invites those
organizations and Member States to provide the Council
and tlie Secretary-General with information on their
activities in the field of peacekeeping.”

Welcoming the high-level meeting between the United
Nations and regional organizations held in New York on
28 July 1998, and encouraging the holding of suchmeetings at
regular intervals,

Noting that subregional arrangements in Africa, as well
as the Organization of African Unity through its Mechanism
for Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, are
developing their capacities in preventive diplomacy, and
encouragingAfrican States to make use of these arrangements
andmechanisms in the prevention of conflict and maintenance
of peace in Africa,
I

1, Urges the Secretary-General, through the use of the
United Nations Trust Fund for Improving Preparedness for
Conflict PreventionandFeacekeeping in Africa, to assist in the
establishment within the Organization of African Unity of an

At its 3928th meeting, on 18 September 1998, the
Council considered the item entitled:
“The situation in Africa
95

subregional organizations in Africa, both at the field and
headquarterslevel, and recognizes that the nomination ofjoint
special representatives may be useful to further these aims;

early warning system based on the model currently being used
by the United Nations, and to assist in strengthening and
making operational the conflict management centre of the
Organization of African Unity and its situation room;

10. Welcomes the fact that both the United Nations and
the Organization of African Unity have agreed to strengthen
and broaden their cooperation on measures to prevent and
resolve conflicts in Africa, and in this regard invites the
Secretary-General:

2. Encourages contributions to the Trust Fund and to
the Peace Fund of the Organization of African Unity, and also
encourages the Secretary-General to develop a strategy for the
purpose of enhancing contributions to the Trust Fund;

(a) To adopt measures for an improved flow of
information through systematic mechanisms between the
United Nations and Organization of African Unity and
between the United Nations and subregional organizations in
Africa;

3. Requests the Secretary-Generalto continue to assist
Member States in the fhrther development of commonly
accepted peacekeeping doctrine and to share existing
peacekeeping doctrine and concepts of operation with the
Organization of African Unity and subregional organizations
in Africa;

(b) To develop, in collaborationwith the Organization
of African Unity and with subregional organizations in Arnica,
common indicators for early warning, and share, as
appropriate, early warning information both with their field
representatives on the ground and with their headquarters;

Invites the Secretary-General to assist the
Organization of African Unity and subregional organizations
in Africa to establish logistics assessment teams through the
sharing of information on the establishment, composition,
methods and functioning of United Nations logistics
assessment teams, and also invites the Secretary-General to
assist the organization of African Unity and subregional
organizations, as appropriate, to determine the logistical and
fmancial requirements ofregional or subregionalpeacekeeping
operations authorized by the Council;
4.

(c) To arrange, in collaboration with the Organization
of African Unity and with subregional organizations in Africa,
occasional visits of staff at working level between the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity and between
the United Nations and subregional organizations in Africa;

(d) To arrange, in collaboration with the Organization
of African Unity and with subregional organizations in Africa,
joint expert meetings on certain specific areas of early warning
and prevention, including joint reviews of potential and
existing conflicts with a view to coordinating initiatives and
actions;

5 . Encourages the establishment of partnerships
between States and regional and subregional organizations
involved in peacekeeping operations, in which one or more
States or Organizations contribute troops and others contribute
equipment, encourages the Secretary-General to facilitate
efforts to that end, and requests him to consider developing a
framework to coordinate such partnerships;

11, Requests the Secretary-General to implement the
present resolution in the course of his ongoing efforts to
develop cooperation with the Organization of African Unity
and subregional organizations in Africa and, where necessary,
drawing on the Trust Fund, and to keep the Council informed
periodically, as necessary, on the implementation of the
present resolution;

6. Cornmends the various initiatives taken by several
States to enhance African preparedness to participate in the
military, police, humanitarian and other civilian components
of peacekeeping operations, and in this context encourages
joint training and simulation exercises and seminars with
African peacekeepers;

12. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

7. Welcomes the proposal by the Economic
Community of West African States to establish a Council of
Elders within its Mechanism for the Prevention, Management,
Resolution of Conflicts, Peacekeeping and Security for the
purpose of facilitating mediation efforts, and urges the
Secretary-General, in consultation with the Executive
Secretary ofthe Economic Community of West African States,
to assist in facilitating its establishment and to help to ensure
its effectiveness;

Adopted unanimously at the
3928th meeting.

Decisions
At its 3931st meeting, on 24 September 1998, the
Security Council considered the item entitled:
“The situation in Africa

n

“Report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainabledevelopmentin Afiica (S/1998/318)’’.3w

8.

Endorses the establishment of a United Nations
Preventive Action Liaison Office in the Organization of
African Unity, and urges the Secretary-General to consider
ways of making this office more effective and also the
possibility of appointing liaison officers to peacekeeping
operations of the Organization of African Unity and of
subregional organizations in Africa, which are authorized by
the Council;

At the same meeting, the Council decided to extend an
invitation to Mr. Blaise Compaork, President of Burkina Faso
and current Chairman of the Organization of AfricanUnity, to
sit at the Council table during the discussion of the item,

At the same meeting, the Council also decided to extend
an invitation to Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, Secretary-General of
the Organization of African Unity, to sit at the Council table
during the discussion of the item.

9. Encourages the enhancement of consultation and
coordination betweenthe UnitedNations and the Organization
of African Unity and between the United Nations and
96

At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the
“The Security Council met on 24 September 1998,
at the level of Ministers for Foreign Affairs, in
accordance with its resolution 1170 (1998) of 28 May
1998, to assess progress in achieving peace and security
in Africa since the last ministerial meeting on
25 September 1997. It recalls the statement by its
President of 25 September 19973’0and reiterates its
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report of
13 April 1998.3”

among, conflicts in Africa, and especially at the
emergence of new conflicts during the past year. The
border conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea, the
resurgence of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the impasse in the peace process in Angola,
the continued violence in Sierra Leone, and the complex
emergencies in Somalia and Sudan, among others, cause
grave concern. These situations, which in some cases
threaten the stability of large parts of the continent, call
for concerted action by African States, the international
community and the United Nations system to prevent
further tragedy.
“The Councilurgently callsupon AfricanStates and
all parties concerned to demonstrate the political will to
settle their disputes by peaceful rather than military
means, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, and to respect international humanitarian law
and the sovereignty,political independenceand territorial
integrity of States in the region. It also encourages States
in the region to continue to improve the implementation
of good governance and undertake the various reforms
needed to promote economic growth. It calls upon the
international community to assist those efforts initiated
by African States and regional and subregional
organizations aimed at such goals.

‘The Council reaffirms its commitment to Africa in
the areas of conflict prevention and the maintenance of
international peace and security, in accordance with its
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations. It
also reaffirms the principles of the political
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of all
States.
“The Council underlines the fact that peaceful
societies rest upon respect for fundamental human rights
and the dignity and worth of the human person. It
recognizes the close linkage between the promotion of
economic and social development and the prevention of
conflict. It stresses that the quest for peace in Africa
requires a comprehensive, concerted and determined
approach, encompassing the eradication of poverty, the
promotion of democracy, sustainable development and
respect for human rights, as well as conflict prevention
and resolution, including peacekeeping, and
humanitarian assistance. It underlines the fact that
genuine political will is necessary, in Africa and beyond,
to achieve durable results towards these ends, and
stresses the urgent need for Member States, the United
Nations system, including the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, the international financial
institutions and other relevant organizations to continue
to consider appropriate action in response to the
comprehensive recommendations set out by the
Secretary-General in his report.

“For its part, the Council expresses its renewed
commitment to contributing to conflict resolution in
Africa. In this context, it recalls its decisions during the
past year to authorize two new United Nations
peacekeepingoperations,in the Central African Republic
and Sierra Leone, to assist efforts towards peace and
national reconciliation. It also expresses its determination
to improve further its ability to prevent conflicts, and to
make its responses to conflicts more efficient and
effective, and underlines its support for measures taken
within the United Nations system to strengthen postconflict peace-building efforts.
“The Council, based on the recommendationsof its
ad hoc Working Group established pursuant to its
resolution 1170 (1998), has already begun to take
concrete steps as part of a wider, comprehensiveresponse
to the recommendations put forward by the SecretaryGeneral. It has taken action to help to strengthen support
for regional and subregional initiatives as well as to
enhance coordination between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in the areas of
conflict prevention and the maintenance of peace. It has
also taken action in order to strengthen the effectiveness
of arms embargoes imposed by the Council and
addressed the need to support the strengthening of
African peacekeeping capacity.

“The Councilrecognizes the positive developments
in Africa in the past year and welcomes progress
achieved by African States in promoting
democratization, economic reform, the protection of
human rights and sustainabledevelopment. It cornmends
efforts by African States and regional and subregional
organizations, in particular the Organization of African
Unity, to resolve conflicts by peaceful means. It
welcomes progress made in Sierra Leone and the Central
African Republic, and in the peace process in Burundi. It
urges all States and relevant bodies to provide financial
and technical support to strengthen African regional and
subregional arrangements for conflict prevention, the
maintenance of peace and security and dispute
settlement. It calls for an enhanced partnership between
the United Nations and African regional and subregional
organizations in support of these efforts.

“The Council encourages the ad hoc Working
Group to continue its work, in accordance with its
mandate, and to elaborate further concrete
recommendations to the Council, in particular on the
need to stem illicit arms flows to and in Africa and with
regard to measures to assist host Governments in Africa
in maintaining the security and neutrality of refugee
camps and to enhance the ability of the Council to
monitor activities authorized by it but carried out by
Member States or coalitions of Member States.

“The Council expresses its continuing concern over
the number and intensity of, and the interrelationship

”’S/PRST/1998/29.
97

population, conflicts between refugees and the local
population, common crime and banditry and the flow of arms,

“The Council, recognizing that the challenge of
achieving peace and security in Africa is a continuous
process, will continue to assess progress in promoting
peace and security in Africa at the level of Ministers for
Foreign Affairs, on a biennial basis, in accordance with
its resolution 1170 (1998).”

Recognizingthe need to take steps to assist African States
to improvethe security of refugeesand to maintain the civilian
and humanitarian character of refugee camps and settlements
in accordance with international refugee, human rights and
humanitarian law,

At its 3945th meeting, on 19 November 1998, the
Council considered the item entitled:
“The situation in Africa
“Report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable developmentin Africa (S/1998/318)”.3w
Resolution 1208 (1 998)
of 19 November 1998

Stressingtheparticular securityneeds of women, children
and the elderly, who are the most vulnerable groups in refugee
camps and settlements,
Recalling General Assembly resolutions 52/103 and
52/132 of 12 December 1997 regarding, respectively, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and human rights and mass exoduses,
1. Reaflrms the importance of the principles relating
to the status of refugees and the common standards for their
treatment contained in the Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees of 28 JuY 1951,322as modified by the Protocol of
31 January 1967;32

The Security Council,
Reaflrming its resolution 1170 (1998) of 28 May 1998,
ReafirminK also the statements by its President of
19 June 1997,3 16 September 1998315and 29 September
1998,320

2. Underlines the particular relevance of the provisions
contained in the Organization of African Unity Convention
govemingthe specificaspects of refugee problems in Africa of
10 September 1969;324

Emphasizing that the provision of security to refugees
and the maintenance of the civilian and humanitarian character
of refugee camps and settlements is an integral part of the
national, regional and international response to refugee
situations and can contribute to the maintenance of
international.peace and security,

3, A@rms the primary responsibility of States hosting
refugees to ensure the security and civilian and humanitarian
character of refugee camps and settlementsin accordancewith
international refugee, human rights and humanitarian law;

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of
13 April 1998 entitled “The causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in
AfTica”, which was submitted to the General Assembly and to
the Security Council3” in accordance with the statement by its
President of 25 September 1997,3’0

4. Calls upon African States further to develop
institutions and procedures to implement the provisions of
international law relating to the status and treatment of
refugees and the provisions of the Organization of African
Unity Convention, especially those relating to the location of
refugees at a reasonable distance from the frontier of their
country of origin and the separation of refugees from other
persons who do not qualify for international protection
afforded refugees or otherwise do not require international
protection, and in this regard urges African States to seek
international assistance, as appropriate;

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General of
22 September 1998 on protection for humanitarian assistance
to refugees and others in conflict ~ituations,’~’
Recognizing the extensive experience of African States

in hosting refugees and in dealing with the effects of refugee

5 . Recognizes the primary responsibility of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, with
the assistance of other relevant international bodies and
organizations, to support African States in their actions
directed towards the full respect and implementation of the
provisions of international law relating to the status and
treatment of refugees, and requests the Office of the High
Commissioner, as needed, to keep in close touch with the
Secretary-General, the Organization of African Unity,
subregional organizations and the States concerned in this
regard;

camps and setnements,
Afirming the civilian and humanitarian character of
refugee camps and settlements, and in this regard underlining
the unacceptability of using refugees and other persons in
refugee camps and settlements to achieve military purposes in
the country of asylum or in the country of origin,
Noting the diverse causes of insecurity of refhgee camps
and settlements in Africa, including the presence of armed or
militaIy elements and other persons who do not qualify for
international protection afforded refugees or otherwise do not
require international protection, differences within the refugee

6 . Notes that a range of measures by the international
community is needed to share the burden borne by African
States hosting refugees and to support their efforts to ensure
the security and civilian and humanitarian character of refugee

S/PRST/I 998/30.
Official Records of the Security Council, Fifry-third Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1998, document
Sl19981883.
320

322 UnitedNations, Treaty Series, vol.

321

323 Ibid.,

606, No*8791-

’I4 Ibid., vol. 1001,No. 14691.

98

189, No. 2545,

organizations and to keep it informed about developments in
AErica related to the security and civilian and humanitarian
character of refugee camps and settlements which affect the
maintenance of international peace and security in the region,
and to recommend concrete measmes, such as those mentioned
in paragraph 7 above, as needed, in this regard;

camps and settlements, including in the areas of law
enforcement, disarmament of armed elements, curtailment of
the flow of arms in refugee camps and settlements, separation
of refugees from other persons who do not qualify for
international protection afforded refugees or otherwise do not
require international protection, and demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants;

14. Expresses its readiness to consider the
recommendations referred to in paragraph 13 above in
accordance with its responsibilities under the Charter;

7. Notes also that the range of measures referred to in
paragraph 6 above could include training, logistical and
technical advice and assistance, financial support, the
enhancement of national law enforcement mechanisms, the
provision or supervision of security guards and the deployment
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations of
international police and military forces;

15. Requests all Member States, relevant international
bodies and organizations and all regional and subregional
organizationsto consider, as appropriate, the applicationof the
measures contained in the present resolution to regions other
than Africa;

8 Requests the Secretary-General to respond, as
appropriate, to requests from African States, the Organization
of African Unity and subregional organizations for advice and
technical assistance in the implementation of international
refugee, human rights and humanitarian law relevant to the
present resolution, including through appropriate training
programmes and seminars;
I

16. Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the
3945th meeting.
Resolution 1209 (1998)
of 19 November 1998

9. Urges the Office of the High Commissioner, other
relevant United Nations bodies and organizations, Member
States, the Organization of African Unity and subregional
organizations to initiate coordinated programmes to provide
advice, training and technical or other assistance, as
appropriate, to African States which host refugee populations,
with a view to strengthening their capacity to implement the
obligations referred to in paragraph 4 above, and encourages
relevant non-governmental organizations to participate in such
coordinated programmes when appropriate;

The Security Council,
Reafirrningits resolutions 1170 (1998) of 28 May 1998,
1196 (1998) of 16 September 1998 and 1197 (1998) of
17 September 1998,
Recallingthe statementsby its President of 25 September
1997,310
16 September 199g3I5and 24 September 1998:’*
Havingconsideredthe recommendations contained in the
report of the Secretary-General of 13 April 1998 entitled “The
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
regarding the importance
sustainabledevelopmentin Afi~ca”~’’
of stemming the illicit arms flows to and in Africa,

10. Encourages the Secretaxy-General and Member
States involved in efforts to enhance Africa’s peacekeeping
capacity to continue to ensure that training gives due emphasis
to international refugee, human rights and humanitarian law
and in particular to the security of refugees and the
maintenance of the civilian and humanitarian character of
refugee camps and settlements;

Recognizing the close relationship of the problem of
illicit arms flows to and in Africa with international peace and
security,
Recognizing with concern that commercial and political
motivesplay an unduly important role in the illicit transfer and
accumulation of small arms in Africa,

11. Expresses its support for the inclusion in the United

Nations stand-byarrangementsof military and police units and
personnel trained for humanitarian operations, as well as
related equipment, which relevant United Nations bodies and
organizations could draw on in providing advice, supervision,
training and technical or other assistance related to the
maintenance of the security and civilian and humanitarian
character of refugee camps and settlements, in coordinationas
appropriate with the African States hosting refugees;

Stressing the close linkage between international peace
and security and sustainable development and the need for the
international community to respond to the challenge of illicit
arms flows to and in Africa in a comprehensive manner,
encompassing not only the field of security but that of social
and economic development,

12. Requests the Secretary-General to consider the
establishment of a new category within the United Nations
Trust Fund for Improving Preparedness for ‘Conflict
Prevention and Peacekeeping in Africa to support, as needed,
and in addition to existing sources of funding, the provision of
advice, supervision,training and technical or other assistance
related to the maintenance of the security and civilian and
humanitarian character of refugee camps and settlements,
including those activities referred to in paragraph 11 above,
and urges Member States to contribute to the Fund;

Reaflrming the right of African States to procure or
produce necessary weapons to meet their legitimate national
security and public order needs in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations and other rules and principles of
international law,
Welcoming the offer of the Government of Switzerland
to host in Geneva, not later than 2001, an international
conference on the illicit a r m trade in all its aspects,
Welcoming ulso the negotiation process in Vienna on the
elaborationof an internationalconvention against transnational
organized crime, including a protocol to combat illicit
manufacturing of and trafficking in frearms,

13. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue his
consultations with Member States, regional and subregional
organizations and other relevant international bodies and
99

Welcoming further the ongoing work of the SecretaryGeneral on small arms and light weapons pursuant to General
Assembly resolutions 50/70 B of 12 December 1995 and
52/38 J of 9 December 1997, including the work of the group
of governmental experts nominated by him, and noting the
findings pertaining to illicit arms flows to and in Africa in the
report on small arms submitted by the Secretary-General on
27 August 1 997,325

3 lOctober 1998,326
and urges other subregional organizations
in Africa to consider taking similar measures;
7. Encourages African States to examine the efforts
undertaken in other regions such as by the Organization of
American States and the European Union in preventing and
combating illicit arms flows, and to consider adopting similar
measures as appropriate;

Welcoming the decision of the Secretary-General to
coordinate all action on small arms within the United Nations
system through the Coordinating Action on Small Arms, for
which the Department of Disarmament Affairs of the
Secretariat is designated as the focal point,

8. Welcomesthe intention of the Secretary-General to
accord high priority to the role of the United Nations in
promoting better understanding of the direct and indirect
consequencesof illicit arms flows, and stresses the importance
of bringing the negative impact of illicit arms flows to and in
Africa to the widest possible public attention;

Cornmending the national, bilateral and subregional
initiatives being taken in Africa in combating illicit arms
flows, such as those that have been taken in Mali and
Mozambique, by the Economic Community of West African
States and the Southern African Development Community,

9. Encourages the Secretary-Generalto explore means
of identifying international arms dealers acting in
contraventionof national legislation or embargoes established
by the United Nations on arms transfers to and in Africa;

Welcoming the decision by the Organization of African
Unity to prepare a situation report on Africa containing
detailed information on the magnitude of the problem of small
arms proliferation as well as appropriate policy
recommendations,
1. Expresses its grave concern at the destabilizing
effect of illicit a m flows, in particular of small arms, to and
in Africa and at their excessive accumulation and circulation,
which threatennational, regional and international security and
have serious consequences for development and for the
humanitarian situation in the continent;
2. Encourages African States to enact legislation on
the domestic possession and use of arms, including the
establishment of national legal andjudicial mechanisms for the
effective implementation of such laws, and to implement
effective import, export and re-export controls, and encourages
the international community, in consultation with African
States, to assist in these efforts;

3. Stresses the importance of all Member States, in
particular States involved in the manufacturing or marketing
of weapons, restricting arms transfers which could provoke or
prolong armed conflicts or aggravate existing tensions or
conflicts in Africa, such as through voluntary moratoria;
4. Encourages African States to participate in the
United Nations Register of Conventional Arms, encourages
also the establishment of appropriate regional or subregional
registers of conventional arms on the basis of agreement
reached by African States concerned, and encourages Member
States to explore other appropriate ways to enhance
transparency of arms transfers to and in Africa;

5.
Urges Member States with relevant expertise to
cooperate with African States to strengthen their capacity to
combat illicit arms flows, including through the tracking and
interdiction of illicit arms transfers;

6. Welcomes the declaration of a moratorium adopted
by the Heads of State and Government of the Economic
Community of West African States, adopted in Abuja on
325

A/52/298.

10. Also encourages the Secretary-General to promote
cooperation among Member States, the United Nations,
regional and subregional organizations and other relevant
organizations to collect, review and share information on
combating illicit a r m flows, especially regarding small arms,
and to make available, as appropriate, information about the
nature and general scope of the international illicit arms trade
with and in Africa;
11. Reiterates the obligation of all Member States to
carry out decisions of the Council on arms embargoes, and in
this context notes the broader implications of the findings and
experience of the International Commission of Inquiry
establishedby its resolution 1013 (1995) of 7 September 1995
and reactivated in accordancewith its resolution 1161 (1998)
of 9 April 1998,and requests the Secretary-Generalto consider
the possible application of such a measure to other conflict
zones in Africa with specific emphasis on the sources of such
arms and, if appropriate, make recommendations to the
Council;
12. Encourages the Secretary-General,in consultation
with Member States, to explore means for collecting, sharing
and disseminating information, including technical
information, on illicit small arms flows and their destabilizing
effects, in order to improve the ability of the international
community to prevent the exacerbation of armed conflicts and
humanitarian crises, as well as means for the rapid exchange
of data on possible violations of arms embargoes;

13 Requests the Secretary-Generalto consider practical
ways to work with African States in implementing national,
regional or subregional programmes for voluntary weapons
collection, disposal and destruction, including the possibility
of the establishment of a find to support such programmes;
I

14. Recognizes the important contribution of
programmes for voluntary weapons collection, disposal and
destruction in specific post-conflict situations in Africa, and
expresses its intention to consider including, as appropriate,
means to facilitate the successful conduct of such programmes
326 Official Records of the Security Council. Fift-third Year,
Supplemerit for October, November and December 1998, document
S/1998/1194, annex.

100

its ability to monitor any activities that it has authorized,
the Council expresses its readiness to examine
appropriate measures whenever such an authorization is
being considered,

in the mandates of future peacekeeping operationsit authorizes
in Africa on the basis of recommendations by the SecretaryGeneral;
15. Calls upon regional and subregional organizations
in Africa to strengthen efforts to establish mechanisms and
regionalnetworks among relevant authoritiesoftheir Members
States for information sharing to combat the illicit circulation
of and trafficking in small arms;

16. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

Adopted unanimously at the
3945th meeting.
Decisions
At its 3950th meeting, on 30 November 1998, the
Security Council considered the item entitled:
“The situation in Africa
“Report of the Secretary-Generalon the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainabledevelopmentin Africa (S/1998/318)”.309
At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the

“In this regard, the Council notes that there is a
wide variety of arrangements and relationships which
have developed in different instances of cooperation
between the UnitedNations, Member States and regional
and subregional organizations in the maintenance of
peace and security,and that monitoring requirements will
vary and should be tailored according to the specifics of
the operations in question, including in relation to
ongoing peace efforts. But, in general, operations should
have a clear mandate, including a statement ofobjectives,
rules of engagement, a well-developed plan of action, a
time-frame for disengagement, and arrangements for
regular reporting to the Council. The Council affirms that
a high standard of conduct is essential for successful
operations, and recalls the role of the United Nations in
setting general standards of peacekeeping. The Council
stresses that missions and Operations must ensure that
their personnel respect and observe international law,
including humanitarian, human rights and refugee law.
“The Council is also of the view that, where
necessary or desirable, monitoring of such activities
could also be enhanced by the inclusion of certain
civilian elements, for instance dealing with political and
human rights issues, within missions and operations. In
this context, the Council also recognizes that the
attachment of a United Nations liaison officer or team
could improve the flow of information between the
Council and those engaged in the conduct of an operation
authorized by it but carried out by a coalition of Member
States or a regional or subregional organization. It
expresses its readiness to consider, in consultation with
the Member States and the regional or subregional
organization concerned, the deployment of liaison
officers to such operations, on the basis of
recommendations by the Secretary-General and as
proposed in paragraph 8 of its resolution 1197 (1 998) of
18 September 1998. In the case ofoperations conducted
by regional or subregional organizations, the Council
also expresses its readiness to consider, in consultation
with the regional or subregional organization concerned,
whether the deployment of liaison officers at the
headquarters of the organization would be valuable.

“The Security Council recalls the report of the
Secretary-General of 13 April 1998 entitled ‘The causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Afri~a’.~”
While reaffirming
its primary responsibilityunder the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
security, it underlines the increasingly important role of
regional arrangements and agencies and of coalitions of
Member States in the conduct of activity in this field. The
Council reaffirms that all such activity undertaken under
regional arrangementsor by regional agencies, including
enforcement action, shall be carried out in accordance
with Articles 52, 53 and 54 of Chapter VIII of the
Charter . It also underlines the importance of all such
activity being guided by the principles of sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity of all
States, and by the operational principles for United
Nations peacekeeping operations set out in the statement
by its President of 28 May 1993.328
“The Council welcomes the views expressed by the
Secretary-Generalin paragraphs 42 to 44 of his report, in
particular as they relate to Africa. It recognizes that the
authorization by the Council of action by regional or
subregional organizations, or by Member States or
coalitions of States, can be one type of effective response
to conflict situations, and commends Member States and
regional and subregional organizations which have
undertaken efforts and initiatives towards the
maintenance of peace and security. In order to enhance

“The Council also underlines the fact that the
monitoring of such operations could be enhanced by the
improved flow and exchange of information, inter alia,
through regular submission of reports, as in the case of
the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation
of the Bangui Agreements in the Central African
Republic, and through the holding of regular briefing
meetings between its members and regional and
subregionalorganizations and Member States conducting
such operations, and troop contributors and other
participating Member States.
“The Council shares the view of the SecretaryGeneral that one possible means of monitoring activities
of forces authorized by it, while also contributing to the
broader aspects of a peace process, is through COdeployment of United Nations observers and other

SIPRSTI1998lJ5.

”’S/25859; see Resolutions and Decisions ofthe Security Council,
1993.

101

personnel together with an operation carried out by a
regional or subregional organization or by a coalition of
Member States, The Council agrees with the SecretaryGeneral that, while such collaboration is not applicable
in all cases, co-deployment can make an important
contribution to peacekeeping efforts, as in the cases of
Liberia and Sierra Leone where United Nations observer
missions have been deployed alongside the Monitoring
Group of the Economic Community of West African
States.

the respective roles and responsibilities of the United
Nations and the regional or subregional organization or
coalition concerned and of the areas of interaction of
forces, and clear provisions regarding the safety and
security of personnel. The Council also stresses the
importance of ensuring that United Nations missions
maintain their identity and autonomy with regard to
operational command and control and logistics.
“The Council urges Member States and regional
and subregional organizations to ensure the Council is
kept fully informed of their activities for the maintenance
ofpeace and security, The Council undertakes to consult
regularly with Member States and regional and
subregional organizations involved in such activities to
facilitate this.”

“The Council underlines the importance, whenever
the United Nations deploys forces alongside forces of
regional or subregional organizations or Member States,
of establishing a clear framework for cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and the
regional or subregional organizations or coalition of
Member States concerned. Such a framework should
include specifying objectives, the careful delineation of

LETTER DATED 31 MARCH 1998 FROM THE CHARGd D’AFFAIRES A.I. OF THE PERMANENT
MISSION OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA TO THE UNITED NATIONS ADDRESSED
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
“The Council encourages all parties to cooperate in
promoting reconciliation, so that the objectives of the
Lincoln Agreement can be met, and urges a11 parties to
continue to cooperate in accordance with the Lincoln
Agreement in order to achieve and maintain peace, to
renounce the use of armed force and violence, to resolve
any differences by consultation, both now and in the
future, and to c o n f i i their respect for human rights and
the rule of law.

Decisions
At its 3874th meeting, on 22 April 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representative of Papua New
Guinea to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the
item entitled “Letter dated 31 March 1998 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of PapuaNew Guinea
to the UnitedNations addressed to the President ofthe Security
Council (S/1998/287)”.329
At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Co~ncil:”~

“The Council commends the efforts of countries in
the region for the resolution of the conflict, and
welcomes the establishment, as outlined in the Lincoln
Agreement, of the peace-monitoring group composed of
civilian and military personnel from Australia, Fiji, New
Zealand and Vanuatu, the mandate of which is to monitor
the implementation of the said Agreement.

“The Security Council, taking note of the
development of the Bougainville conflict, strongly
supports the Agreement on Peace, Security and
Development on Bougainville, signed at Lincoln
University, New Zealand, on 23 January 1998 (the
“LincolnAgreement”),33’achieved by the Governmentof
Papua New Guinea, the Bougainville Transitional
Government, the Bougainville Resistance Force, the
Bougainville Interim Government, the Bougainville
Revolutionary Army and the Bougainville leaders, with
regard to a ceasefire among conflicting parties.
“The Council welcomes the extension of the period
of truce, and welcomes further a permanent and
irrevocable ceasefire which will take effect on 30 April
1998 as stipulated in the Lincoln Agreement.

“The Council notes that the Lincoln Agreement
calls for the United Nations to play a role in
Bougainville, and requests the Secretary-General to
considerthe compositionand financial modalities of such
involvement by the United Nations.
“The Council will remain seized of the matter.”
On 15 June 1998, the President of the Security Council
addressed the following letter to the Se~retary-General:~~’
“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 2 June 1998 concerning your intention to establish
a United Nations poljical office in Arawa, Bougainville,
Papua New Guinea, in response to the request of the
Security Council in its presidential statement of 22 April

’19 See OJkial Records of”the Security Council, Fijiy-third Year,
Supplementfor January, February and March 1998.

”’S/PRST/l998/10.

’”

See Oflcial Records oythe Securiq Council, Fijly-third Year,
Supplemen1 for January, Febmav and March 1998, document
S/1998/287.

S/1998/507.
Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fifty-third Year,
Supplementfor April, May and June 1998, document S/I9981506.
’32

102

1998,”’has been brought to the attention of the members
of the Council. They welcome your conclusion on this
issue and agree with the intention expressed in your
letter, taking note that the financial modalities will be
handled in accordance with the briefing provided by the
Under-Secretary-Generalfor PoliticalAffairs, Mr. Kieren
Prendergast on 11 June 1998.”

“Following the briefmg to the Council on
9 December 1998 by the Director of the Asia and the
Pacific Division of the Department of Political Affairs of
the Secretariat, members of the Council agree with your
proposal to extend the mandate of the Office in
Bougainville until December 1999, subject to a review
by the Council of the situation in Bougainville and
activities ofthe Office there in June 1999. Members of
the Council welcome your decision to appoint Mr. Noel
Sinclair to head the Office. The Council also takes note
of your intention to brief them, on a quarterly basis, on
progress achieved in the implementationof the objectives
set forth in the Lincoln Agreement of 23 January 199833’
and the Arawa Agreement of 30 April 1998,336and
requests you, as part of the first of those briefmgs, to
provide details of the programme of work of the Office
for 1999 in relation to the peace process in
Bougainville.”

On 11 December 1998, the President of the Security
Council addressed the following letter to the SecretaryGeneral:’34
“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 20 November 1998 concerning the United Nations
Political Office in Bo~gainville”~
has been brought to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.

’” Ibid., Supplement for April, May and June 1998, document

334 S/1998/1157.

’’’

OflciaI Records of the Security Council, Fifty-third Year,
Supplement for October, November and December I998, document

‘I1
998/506, annex-

S/1998/1156.

THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL IN THE MAINTENANCE
OF INTERNATIONAL PEACE AND SECURITY
[Resolutionsor decisions on this question were also adopted by the Security Council in 1992.1

and the ComprehensiveNuclear-Test-BanTreaty .339The
Council appeals to India, and all other States which have
not yet done so, to become parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty without delay
and without conditions. The Council also encourages
India to participate, in a positive spirit, in the proposed
negotiations with other States for a fissile-material cutoff treaty in Geneva with a view to reaching early
agreement.

Decisions
At its 3881st meeting, on 14 May 1998, the Security
Council considered the item entitled “The responsibility of the
Security Council in the maintenanceof international peace and
security”.
At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:”’
“The Security Council strongly deplores the three
underground nuclear tests that India conducted on
11 May 1998, and the two further tests conducted on
13 May 1998 despite overwhelming international
concern and protests. The Council strongly urges India to
refrain from any further tests. It is of the view that such
testing is contrary to the de facto moratorium on the
testing of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices and to global efforts towards nuclear nonproliferationand nuclear disarmament. The Council also
expresses its concern at the effects of this development
on peace and stability in the region.

“Witha view to preventing an escalation in the
arms race, in particular with regard to nuclear weapons

and their delivery systems, and to preserving peace in the
region, the Council urges States to exercise maximum
restraint. The Council underlines the fact that the sources
of tension in South Asia should be e I S a t e d only
through dialogue and not by military build-up.

“The Council reiterates the statement by its
President of 31 January 1992,’40 in which it was stated,
inter alia, that the proliferation of all weapons of mass
destructionconstituted a threat to internationalpeace and
security.”

“The Council affirms the crucial importance of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons338
339
337 SPRSTl1998l12.

See General Assembly resolution 501245.

Sl23500;see Resohiions and Decisions offheSecurity Council,
1992.

340

”’United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
103

responsibility of the Security Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security”.

At its 3888th meeting, on 29 May 1998, the Council
considered the item entitled “The responsibility of the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security”.

Resolution 1172 (1998)
of 6 June 1998

At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:34’

The Security Council,

“The Security Council strongly deplores the
underground nuclear tests that Pakistan conducted on
28 May 1998, despite overwhelming international
concern and calls for restraint. Reaffming the statement
by its President of 14 May 1998, on Indian nuclear tests
of 11 and 13
the Council strongly urges India and
Pakistan to refrain from any further tests. It is of the view
that testing by India and then by Pakistan is contrary to
the de facto moratorium on the testing of nuclear
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, and to
global efforts towards nuclear non-proliferation and
nuclear disarmament. The Council also expresses its
concern at the effects of this development on peace and
stability in the region.
“The Council reaffirms the crucial importance of
the Try$ on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test -Ban
Treaty .339 The Council appeals to India andPakistan, and
all other States which have not yet done so, to become
parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and to the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty, without delay and without conditions. The
Council also encourages India and Pakistan to
participate, in a positive spirit, in the proposed
negotiations with other States for a fissile-material cutoff treaty in Geneva with a view to reaching early
agreement.
“The Council calls upon all parties to exercise
maximumrestraint and to take immediate steps to reduce
and remove tensions between them. The Council
reaffirms that the sources of tension in South Asia should
be reduced and eliminated only through peaceful
dialogue and not by the use of force or other military
means.
“The Council urges India and Pakistan to resume
the dialogue between them on all outstanding issues,
including all those that the parties have already
discussed, especially matters concerning peace and
security, in order to remove the tensions between them
and to enhance their economic and political cooperation.
The Council calls upon India and Pakistan to avoid any
steps or statements that could lead to -er
instability or
impede their bilateral dialogue.
‘The Council will remain seized of the matter.”
At its 3890th meeting, on 6 June 1998, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Argentina, Australia,
Canada, Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Kazakhstan,
Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, the Republic of
Korea, Ukraine and the United Arab Emirates to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled “The
34’

S/PRST/I 99811 7.

Reaffirming the statements by its President of 14 May337
and 29 May 1998y’
Reiterating the statement by its President of 3 1 January
1992,j4’in which it was stated, inter alia, that the proliferation
of all weapons of mass destruction constituted a threat to
international peace and security,
Gravely concerned at the challenge that the nuclear tests
conducted by India and then by Pakistan constitute to
international efforts aimed at strengthening the global regime
of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, and also gravely
concerned at the danger to peace and stability in the region,
Deeply concerned at the risk of a nuclear arms race h
South Asia, and determined to prevent such a race,
Reafirming the crucial importance of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Wea o ~ and
s ~the ~
ComprehensiveNuclear-Test-Ban TreatyRgfor global efforts
towards nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament,
Recalling the principles and objectives for nuclear nonproliferation and disarmament adopted by the 1995 Review
and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,342
and the successful
outcome of the Conference,
Afirming the need to continue to move with
determination towards the full realization and effective
implementationof all the provisions of the Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and welcoming the
determination of the five nuclear-weapon States to fblfil their
commitmentsrelating to nuclear disarmament under article VI
of the Treaty,
Mindfil of its primary responsibility under the Charter of
the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace
and security,

1. Condemns the nuclear tests conducted by India on
11 and 13 May 1998 and by Pakistan on 28 and 30 May 1998;

2. Endorses the joint communique issued by the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of China, France, the Russian
Federation, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America at their meeting in
Geneva on 4 June 1998;343
3. Demands that India and Pakistan refrain from
further nuclear tests, and in this context calls upon all States

See 1995 Review and Extension Confirence of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Find
Document, Part I (NPTKONF. 1995132 (Part I)), annex, decision 2.
343 Oflcial Records of !he Security Council, Fijll-third Year,
Supplement for April, May and June 1998. document Sl19981473,
annex.
104

~

not to carry out any nuclear weapon test explosion or any other
nuclear explosion in accordance with the rovisions of the
ComprehensiveNuclear-Test-Ban Treaty;3 3 9

10. Reaflrms its full commitment to and the crucial
importance of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons3’*and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
as the cornerstones of the international regime on the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons and as essential foundations
for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament;

4. Urges India and Pakistan to exercise maximum
restraint and to avoid threatening military movements, crossborder violations, or other provocations in order to prevent an
aggravation of the situation;
5. Also urges India and Pakistan to resume the
dialogue between them on all outstanding issues, particularly
on all matters pertaining to peace and security, in order to
remove the tensions between them, and encourages them to
find mutually acceptable solutions that address the root causes
of those tensions, including Kashmir;

6 . Welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to
encourage India and Pakistan to enter into dialogue;

Calls upon India and Pakistan immediately to stop
their nuclear weapon development programmes, to refrain
from weaponization or from the deployment of nuclear
weapons, to cease development of ballistic missiles capable of
delivering nuclear weapons and any further production of
fissile material for nuclear weapons, to confirm their policies
not to export equipment, materials or technology that could
contribute to weapons of mass destruction or missiles capable
of delivering them and to undertake appropriate commitments
in that regard;

7.

8. Encourages all States to prevent the export of
equipment, materials or technology that could in any way
assist programmes in India or Pakistan for nuclear weapons or
for ballistic missiles capable of delivering such weapons, and
welcomes national policies adopted and declared in this
respect;

1 1. Expresses its firm conviction that the international
regime on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons should be
maintained and consolidated, and recalls that in accordance
with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
neither India nor Pakistan can have the status of a nuclearweapon State;
12. Recognizes that the tests conducted by India and
Pakistan constitute a serious threat to global efforts towards
nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament;

13. Urges India and Pakistan, and all other States that
have not yet done so, to become parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty without delay and
without conditions;
14. Also urges India and Pakistan to participate, in a
positive spirit and on the basis of the agreed mandate, in
negotiations at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva on
a treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, with a view to
reaching early agreement;

15. Requests the Secretary-general toreport urgently to
the Council on the steps taken by India and Pakistan to
implement the present resolution;
16. Expresses its readiness to consider further how best
to ensure the implementation of the present resolution;

9. Expresses itsgrave concern at the negative effect of
the nuclear tests conducted by India and Pakistan on peace and
stability in South Asia and beyond;

17. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

Adopted unanimously at the
3890th meeting.

THE SITUATION BETWEEN ElUTREA AND ETHIOPIA
Decision
At its 3895th meeting, on 26 June 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representatives of Eritrea and
Ethiopia to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the
item entitled “The situation between Eritrea and Ethiopia”.

6

Resolution 11 77 1998)
of 26 June 19 8
The Security Council,
Expressing grave concern at the conflict between
Ethiopia and Eritrea, its political, humanitarian and security
implications for the region, and its effect on the civilian
populations there,

Aflrming also the principle of peaceful settlement of
disputes, and stressing that the use of armed force is not
acceptable as a means of addressing territorial disputes or
changing circumstances on the ground,
Noting that the official statements by the Government of
Ethiopia and the Government of Eritrea pledging to
discontinue the threat of and use of air strikes in the conflict
have contributed to the continuation of the efforts to achieve
a peaceful resolution of the conflict, reduced the &eat to the
civilian populations as well as the economic and social
infrastructure, and enabled the resumption ofnormaleconomic
activity, including commercial transportation,

Noting the strong traditional ties between Ethiopia and
Eritrea.

Affirming the commitment of all Member States to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ethiopia and Eritrea,
105

Welcoming the official statements by the Government of
Ethiopia and the Government of Eritrea that they share the
ultimate goal of delimiting and demarcating their common
border on the basis of a mutually agreeable and binding
arrangement, taking into account the charter of the
Organization of African Unity, colonial treaties, and
international law applicable to such treaties,

Taking note of the resolution adopted by the Council of
Ministers of the Organization of African Unity in a special
session on 5 June 1998,’”
Cowmending the efforts of the Organization of African
Unity and of others, in cooperation with the that organization,
to achieve a peaceful settlement of the conflict,

Organization of African Unity to follow up as quickly as
possible;

5 . Calls upon the parties to cooperate fully with the
Organization of African Unity;
6 . Also calls upon the parties to avoid any steps which
would aggravate tensions, such as provocative actions or
statements, and to take steps to build confidence between
them, including by guaranteeing the rights and safety of each
other’s nationals;

7. Requests the Secretary-General to make available
his good offices in support of a peaceful resolution of the
conflict, and stands ready to consider further recommendations
to this end;

1. Condemns the use of force, and demands that both
parties immediately cease hostilities and refrain from further
use of force;

8. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide
technical support to the parties to assist in the eventual
delimitation and demarcation of the common border between
Ethiopia and Eritrea, and, for this purpose, establishes a trust
fund, and urges all Member States to contribute to it;

2. Welcomes the commitment of the parties to a
moratorium on the threat of and use of air strikes;
3. Urges the parties to exhaust all means to achieve a
peaceful settlement of the dispute;

9.

Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the
the 3895th meeting.

4. Expresses its strong support for the decision of the
Assembly of the Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity of 10 June 1998,945as well as
for the mission and efforts of the Heads of State, and urges the

Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fijiy-third Year,
Supplement for April, May and June 1998, document Sf1998f485,
annex.
345 Ibid., document S/1998/494,annex.
344

CHILDREN AND ARMED CONFLICT
“The Security Council expresses its grave concern
at the harmful impact of armed conflict on children.

Decisions

At its 3896th meeting, on 29 June 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representatives of Argentina,
Azerbaijan, Burundi, Canada, the Czech Republic, El
Salvador, Germany, Indonesia,Italy, Latvia, Liberia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Norway, Romania, Slovakia and
Ukraine to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the
item entitled “Children and armed conflict”.

“The Council strongly condemns the targeting of
children in armed conflicts, including their humiliation,
brutalization, sexual abuse, abduction and forced
displacement, as well as their recruitment and use in
hostilities in violation of international law, and calls upon
all parties concerned to put an end to such activities.
“The Council calls upon all parties concerned to
comply strictlywith their obligationsunder international
law, in particular their obligations under the Geneva
Conventionsof 1949,347the Additional Protocols thereto,
of 1977348and the Convention on the Rights of the Child
of 1989.’49The Council stresses the obligation of all
States to prosecute those responsible for grave breaches
of international humanitarian law.

At the same meeting, the Council decided to extend an
invitation to Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special Representative of the
Secretary-Generalfor Children and Armed Conflict, under rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Council.
At its 3897th meeting, on 29 June 1998, the Council
considered the item entitled “Children and armed conflict”.
At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Counci!, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:346
346

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 370-973.
3481bid.,vol.1125,Nos. 17512and 17513.
General Assembly resolution 44/25, annex.
347

’”

S/?RST/I 998118.
I06

and use of children in armed conflicts in violation of
international law; to give special consideration to the
disarmament and demobilization of child soldiers and to
the reintegration into society of children maimed or
otherwise traumatized as a result of an armed conflict;
and to support or promote child-focused mine-clearance
and mine-awareness programmes, as well as childcentred physical and social rehabilitation programmes.

“The Council recognizes the importance of the
mandate of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, supports his
activities and welcomes his cooperation with all relevant
programmes, funds and agencies of the United Nations
system, which he deems appropriate.
“The Council expresses its intention to pay serious
attention to the situation of children affected by armed
conflicts and, to this end, to maintain contact, as
appropriate, with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and with the relevant programmes,
funds and agencies of the United Nations system.

“The Council recognizes the importance of special
training of personnel involved in peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peace-building activities in respect of
the needs, interests and rights of children, as well as their
treatment and protection.

“The Council, while dealing with situations of
armed conflict, expresses its readiness to consider, when
appropriate, means to assist with the effective provision
and protection of humanitarian aid and assistance to
civilian populations in distress, in particular women and
children; to consider appropriate responses whenever
buildings or sites that usually have a significantpresence
of children, such as schools, playgrounds and hospitals,
are specifically targeted; to support efforts aimed at
obtaining commitments to put to an end the recruitment

“The Council fbrther recognizes that, whenever
measures are adopted under Article 41 of the Charter of
the United Nations, consideration should be given to
their impact on the civilian population, bearing in mind
the needs of children, in order to consider appropriate
humanitarian exemptions.”

THE SITUATION IN THE OCCUPIED ARAB TERRITORIES
[Resolutions or decisions on this question were also adopted by the Security Council in 1976, I979 to 1983. 1985 to 1992
and 1994 to 1997.1

Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Decisions
At its 3900th meeting, on 30 June 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representatives of Algeria,
Bangladesh, Colombia, Cuba, Egypt, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Norway, Oman, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, the
United Arab Emirates and Yemen to participate, without vote,
in the discussion of the item entitled:

At the same meeting, the Council also decided, at the
request of the representative of Bahrain,’” to extend an
invitation to Mr, Ali Al-Salafi, ChargC d’affaires a.i. of the
Office of the Permanent Observer for the League of Arab
States to the United Nations, under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

“The situation in the occupied Arab territories
“Letter dated 23 June 1998 from the Charge
d’affaires a i . of the Permanent Mission of the
Sudan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/1998/558)”.350
At the same meeting, the Council decided to extend an
invitation to the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations, at his reque~t,~”
to address the Council in the course
of its consideration of the item, under the provisional rules of
procedure of the Council and its previous practice in that
regard.

At the same meeting, the Council finher decided, at the
request ofthe representative of Qatar,353to extend aninvitation
to Mr. Mokhtar Lamani, Permanent Observer of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to the United Nations,
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At its 3904th meeting, on 13 July 1998, the Council
decided, in accordance with the decisions taken at the 3900th
meeting, to invite the representative of Israel to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled:
“The situation in the occupied Arab territories
“Letter dated 23 June 1998 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the
Sudan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/1998/558)”?50

At the same meeting, the Council also decided to extend
an invitation to the Chairman of the Committee on the
350

See Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fifly-third Year,
Supplement for April, May and June 1998.
35’ Document S/1998/587, incorporated in the record of the 3900th
meeting.

352

Document Sll998l588, incorporated in the record of the 3900th

meeting,
J53

Document S/1998/592, incorporated in the record ofthe 3900th

meeting.

107

At the same meeting, the Council also decided to invite
the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations, in
accordance with the decision taken at the 3900th meeting.
At the same meeting also, following consultationsamong
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:354
“The Security Council has considered the letters
dated 18 and 22 June 1 9 9 8 y as well as the letters dated
8,9 and 15 June 1998:56 from the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations, and the letter dated
23 June 1998 from the Permanent Representative of the
Sudan to the United Nations, on behalf of the States
members of the Lea ue of Arab States, relating to the
issue of Jerusalem.3 5 F
“The Council recognizes the importance and
sensitivity of the issue of Jerusalem to all parties and
expresses its support for the decision of the Palestine
Liberation Organization and the Government of Israel, in
accordance with the Declaration of Principles of
13 September 1993,358 that the permanent status
negotiations shall cover the issue of Jerusalem. The
Council therefore calls upon the parties to avoid actions
which might prejudice the outcome of these negotiations.

Israel on 21 June 1998 to take steps to broaden the
jurisdiction and planning boundaries of Jerusalem a
serious and damaging development. The Council
therefore calls upon the Government of Israel not to
proceed with that decision and also not to take any other
steps which would prejudice the outcome of the
permanent status negotiations. Further, the Council calls
upon Israel to abide scrupulouslyby its legal obligations
and responsibilities under the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War of 12 August 1949.”’
“The Council supports the efforts of the United
States aimed at breaking the stalemate in the peace
process, calls upon the parties to respond positively to
these efforts, notes that the Palestinian side has already
given agreement in principle to the proposals of the
United States of America, and expresses the hope that the
permanent status negotiations can resume and progress
can be made towards the achievement of a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace based on Council resolutions
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967 and 338 (1973) of
22 October 1973.
“The Council will keep Israeli actions under
review.”

“In the context of its previous relevant resolutions,
the Council considers the decision by the Government of

S/PRST/1998/21.
Official Records of the Security Council, Fifty-third Year,
Supplement for April, May and June 1998, documents S/1998/535
and St19981557.
356 Ibid., documents S/1998/481, Sl19981487 and S/1998/51 I.
”’l Ibid., document S/1998/558.
358
Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government
Arrangements, including its Annexes and Agreed Minutes, signed by
the Government of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization
in Washington, D.C.(see Ojjicial Records of the Securify Council,
Forty-eighth Year,Supplementfor October, November and December
1993, document S/26560),
3s4

’’’ United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No.973.

THE SITUATION IN BURUNDI
[Resolutions or decisions on this question have been adopted by the Security Council every year since 1993.1

Decisions

which the Council requested the Secretary-General to
establish an international commission of inquiry into the
assassinationof the President of Burundi on 21 October
1993, as well as to establish a trust fund to receive
voluntary contributions,as a supplement to help to finance
the work of the commission.The letter informs the Council
that, according to the Financial Rules and Regulations of
the United Nations, the legislative authority establishing a
trust h n d should formally decide to close it.

On 30 June 1998, the President of the Security Council
addressed the following letter to the Secretary-General:3”

“The Security Council takes note of the letter dated
23 June 1998 from the Secretary-General addressedto the
President of the Security Council,36’which refers to
Council resolution 1012 (1995) of 28 August 1995, by

“The Council hereby authorizes the closing of the
trust fund establishedpursuantto resolution 1012 (199S).”

SI1998159 1.
36‘ S/1998/590.
108

On 19 October 1998, the President of the Security
Council addressed the following letter to the SecretaryGeneral:j6*

On 17 November 1998, the President of the Security
Council addressed the following letter to the SecretaryGeneral?

“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 15 October 1998 concerning your decision to
appoint Mr. Ayitk Jean-Claude Kpakpo, of Benin, as
Senior United Nations Adviser to the Facilitator of the
Burundi peace process, Mr. Julius N y e ~ e r e ?has
~ ~been
brought to the attention 6f the members of the Security
Council. They take note of the decision contained in your
letter.”

“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
concerning your intention to
dated 11November 1998365
extend the mandate of the United Nations Office in
Burundi until the end of December 1999 has been
brought to the attention of the members of the Security
Council. They take note of the intention expressed in
your letter.”

3M S11998/1085.

362 S/1998/969.

S/1998/968.

365

’~3

51199811084.

LETTER DATED 29 JUNE 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERALADDRESSED
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

LETTER DATED 25 JUNE 1998 FROM THE PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE
OF THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO TO THE UNITED NATIONS
ADDRESSED TO THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
LETTER DATED 25 JUNE 1998 FROM THE PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE
OF RWANDA TO THE UNITED NATIONS ADDRESSED
TO THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
other violations described in the report of the SecretaryGeneral’sInvestigativeTeam.368It notes the responses to
the report provided by the Governments of the
and R~anda.~’’
It
Democratic Republic of the
recognizes the work of the Investigative Team in
documenting some of these violations, in spite of the fact
that the Team was not allowed to carry out its mission
fully and without hindrance,

Decisions
At its 3903rd meeting, on 13 July 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representatives of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda to participate, without
vote, in the discussion of the item entitled:
“Letter dated 29 June 1998 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1998/58

“TheCouncil reaffirms its commitmenttotheunity,
sovereignty and territorial intesrity of the States of the
Great Lakes region.

“Letter dated 25 June 1998 from the Permanent
Representativeof the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/1998/582)’&

“The Councilrecognizes the necessity to investigate
further the massacres, other atrocities and violations of
international humanitarian law and to prosecute those
responsible. It deplores the delay in the administrationof
justice. The Council calls upon the Governments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda to
investigate without delay, in their respective countries,
the allegationscontained in the report of the Investigative
Team and to bring to justice any persons found to have
been involved in these or other massacres, atrocities and
violations of international humanitarian law. The Council
takes note of the stated willingness of the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to try any of its
nationals who are guilty of or were implicated in the

“Letter dated 25 June 1998 from the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/1998/583)”.’66
At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the
“The Security Council condemns the massacres,
other atrocities and violations of international
humanitarian law committed in ZaireDemocratic
Republic of the Congo, and especially its eastern
provinces, including crimes against humanity and those

ODcial Records of the Security Council, Fify-third Year,
Supplement f o r April, May and June 1998, document SI1998158 I .
’69 Ibid., document S/1998/582.
Ibid., document S/1998/583.

166

See Official Records of the Security Council, Fijiy-third Y e w ,
Supplement for April, May and June 1998.

”’

S@RST/1998/20.
to9

agencies to provide the necessary technical and other
assistance, as requested, to the Governments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda in the
development of independent and impartial judicial
systems.

alleged
Such action is of great importance
in helping to bring an end to impunity and to foster
lasting peace and stability in the region. It urges Member
States to cooperate with the Governments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda in the
investigation and prosecution of these persons.

“The Council expresses support for United Nations
and other internationalactivitiesto reduce ethnic tensions
and promote national reconciliation in the region, and
encourages the Governments concerned to continue to
cooperate in these activities to bring about a real
improvement in the situation.

“The Council encourages the Governments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda to seek
international assistance, such as technical assistance, as
needed, in this process. It also invites the Governments
concerned to consider the inclusion of international
observers, as appropriate. It requests the Governments
concerned to provide an initial progress report to the
Secretary-General by 15 October 1998 on the steps being
taken to investigate and prosecute those responsible.

“The Council attaches great importance to the role
of the Organization of African Unity and welcomes its
decision to establish the International Panel of Eminent
Personalitiesto Investigate the Genocide in Rwanda and
the Surrounding event^.^" It appeals to Member States to
contribute to the special trust fund established to support
the work of the Panel.

“The Council expresses its readiness to consider, as
necessary in the light of actions by the Governments of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda,
additional steps to ensure that the perpetrators of the
massacres, other atrocities and violations of international
humanitarian law are brought to justice.

“The Council will remain actively seized of the
matter.”

“The Council urges Member States, relevant United
Nations bodies and agencies and other international

37’

Ibid., document S A 998/461.

THREATS TO PEACE AND SECURITY CAUSED BY INTERNATIONAL TERRORIST ACTS
Decision

At its 3915 meeting, on 13 August 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representative of the United
Republic of Tanzania to participate, without vote, in the
discussion of the item entitled “Threats to peace and security
caused by international terrorist acts”.

Resolution 1189 1998)
of 13 August 1 98

b

The Security Council,

Deeply disturbed by the indiscriminate and outrageous
acts of international terrorism that took place on 7 August
1998 in Nairobi and Dar-es-Salaam,

Condemning such acts which have a damaging effect on
international relations and jeopardize the security of States,

and security, and r e a f f i n g the determination i f the
international community to eliminate international terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations,
Reafirming the obligations of Member States under the
Charter of the United Nations,

Stressing that every Member State has the duty to refrain
from organizing, instigating, assisting or participating in
terrorist acts in another State or acquiescing in organized
activities within its territory directed towards the commission
of such acts,

Mindful of General Assembly resolution 52/164 of
15 December 1997 on the International Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings,
Recalling that, in the statement issued on 31 January
1992 on the occasion of the meeting of the Security Council at
the level of heads of State and Go~ernment,”~
the Council
expressed its deep concern over acts of international terrorism,
and emphasized the need for the international community to
deal effectively with all such criminal acts,
Stressing the need to strengtheninternationalcooperation
between States in order to adout mactical and effective

Cornmending the responses of the Governments of
Kenya, the United Republic of Tanzania and the United States
of America to the terrorist bomb attacks in Kenya and the
United Republic of Tanzania,
372

5/23500;see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council,

1992.

4. Expresses its sincere gratitude to all States,
internationalinstitutions and voluntary organizations for their
encouragement and timely response to the requests for
assistance from the Governments of Kenya and the United
Republic of Tanzania, and urges them to assist the affected
countries,especially in the reconstruction of infrastructureand
disaster preparedness;

Determined to eliminate international terrorism,

1 . Strongly condemns the terrorist bomb attacks in
Nairobi and Dar-es-Salaam on 7 August 1998, which claimed
hundreds of innocent lives, injured thousands of people and
caused massive destruction to property;
2. Expresses to the families of the innocent victims of
the terrorist bomb attacks during this difficult time its deep
sorrow, sympathy and condolences;

3.

Calls upon all States and international institutions

to cooperate with and provide support and assistance to the

ongoing investigations in Kenya, the United Republic of
Tanzania and the United States of America to apprehend the
perpetrators of these cowardly criminal acts and to bring them
swiftly to justice;

5. Calls upon all States to adopt, in accordance with
international law and as a matter of priority, effective and
practical measures for security cooperation, for the prevention
of such acts of terrorism, and for the prosecution and
punishment of their perpetrators;

6.

Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the
3915th meeting.

-

THE SITUATION CONCERNING THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO
[Resolutionsor decisions on this question were also adopted by the Securiw Council in 1997.1

“The Council urges all parties to respect and protect
human rights and respect humanitarian law, in particular
the Geneva Conventions of 1949374and the Additional
Protocols thereto, of 1977:” as applicable to them. It
condemns reported summary executions, torture,
harassment and detention of civilians based on their
ethnic origin, the recruitment and use of child soldiers,
the killing or wounding of combatants who have laid
down their weapons, hate propaganda, sexual violence
and other abuses by any side. In particular, the Council
calls for the protection of the civilian population. It
recalls the unacceptability ofthe destruction or rendering
useless of objects indispensable to the survival of the
civilian population, and in particular of using cuts in the
electricity and water supply as a weapon against the
population. The Council reaffirms that all persons who
commit or order the commission of grave breaches of the
above-mentioned instruments are individually
responsible in respect of such breaches.

Decisions
At its 3922nd meeting, on 31 August 1998, the Security
Council decided to invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate, without vote, in the
discussion of the item entitled “The situation concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo”.
At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the
“The Security Council expresses its deep concern
about the current conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which poses a serious threat to regional peace
and security.The Council expresses alarm at the plight of
the civilian population throughout the country.
“The Council reaffirms the obligationto respect the
territorial integrity and national sovereignty of the
DemocraticRepublic of the Congo and other States in the
region and the need for all States to refrain from any
interference in each other‘s internal affairs. In this
context, the Council calls for a peaceful solution to the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including an immediate ceasefire, the withdrawal of all
foreign forces, and the initiation of a peaceful process of
political dialogue with a view to national reconciliation.
The Council expresses support for all the regional
diplomatic initiatives aimed at a peaceful settlement of
the conflict.The problems of the DemocraticRepublic of
the Congo must be solved on the basis of a process of allinclusive national reconciliation which fully respects the
equality and harmony of all ethnic groups and which
leads to the holding of democratic, free and fair elections
as soon as possible.

“The Council calls for safe and unhindered access
for humanitarian agencies to all those in need in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It calls for
unrestricted access by the International Committee of the
Red Cross to all detainees in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It urges all parties to guarantee the safety and
security of United Nations and humanitarian personnel.
“The Council encourages the Secretary-Generalto
continue to consult, as a matter of urgency, with regional
leaders in coordination with the Secretary-Generalof the
Organization of African Unity about ways to bring about
a peaceful and durable solution to the conflict, and to
keep it informed about developments and his ownefforts.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
’”Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.

374

’” S/PRST/1998/26.
111

I

end to the conflict and reach an immediate, unconditional
ceasefire, The Council welcomes the public
commitments made in Pans in this regard by the
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Presidents of Uganda and Rwanda and the Presidents and
heads of delegation of Namibia, Zimbabwe, Angola and
Chad. It strongly urges them to give effect to these
commitments. To that end, the Council calls upon all the
parties concerned to participate at the highest level
possible in the upcoming summit to be held in Lusaka on
14 and 15 December 1998, and urges them to work in a
constructive and flexible spirit with a view to the signing
of a ceasefire agreement as a matter of urgency. The
Council also encourages participants at the meeting of
the central organ of the Organization of African Unity, to
be held in Ouagadougou on 17 and 18 December 1998,
to use that opportunity to take urgent steps towards a
peaceful settlement of the conflict.

It reaffirms the importance of holding an international
conference on peace, security and development in the
Great Lakes region under the auspices of the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity.
“The Council will follow the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo closely. It will remain
actively seized of the matter.”
At its 3953rd meeting, on 11 December 1998, the
Council considered the item entitled “The situation concerning
the Democratic Republic of the Congo”.
At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:376
“The Security Council recalls the statement by its
President of 31 August 3998 on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.373It remains deeply
concerned about the continuing conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which threatens
peace, security and stability in the region, and about its
grave humanitarian consequences.

“The Council is prepared to consider, in the light of
efforts towards peaceful resolution of the conflict, the
active involvement of the UnitedNations, in coordination
with the Organization of African Unity, including
through concrete, sustainable and effective measures, to
assist in the implementation of an effective ceasefire
agreement and in an agreed process for a political
settlement of the conflict.

“The Council reaffirms the obligation to respect the
territorial integrity, political independence and national
sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and other States in the region, including the obligation to
refrain from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any State
or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of
the United Nations. It also reaffirms the need for all
States to refrain from any interference in each other’s
internal affairs, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.

“The Council condemns any violations of human
rights and humanitarian law, including acts of and
incitementto ethnic hatred and violence by all parties. It
urges all parties to respect and protect human rights and
respect humanitarian law, in particular the Geneva
Conventions of 1949374and the Additional Protocols
thereto, of 1977,’75 as applicable to them, and the
Convention on the Preventlon and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide of 1948.377

“The Council, in this context, calls for a eaceful
solution to the conflict in the Democratic Repubgc of the
Congo, including an immediate ceasefire, the orderly
withdrawal of all foreign forces, arrangements for
security along the international borders of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the re-establishment
of the authority of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo over the whole temtory of the
country, and the initiation of an all-inclusive national
reconciliation process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo which fully respects the equality and rights of all,
ixrespective of ethnic origin, and of a political process
which leads to the early holding of democratic, free and
fair elections.

“The Council notes with particular concern that the
worsening of tensions is resulting in a deteriorationof the
food situation for the civilian population and an increase
in the flow of refugees and displaced persons. In this
context, the Council reiterates its call for safe and
unhindered access for humanitarian agencies to all those
in need in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
once again urges all parties to guarantee the safety and
security of United Nations and humanitarian personnel.
“The Council also reaffirms the importance of
holding, at the appropriate time, an international
conference on peace, security and development in the
Great Lakes region under the auspices of the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity.

T h e Council expresses its support for the regional
mediation process begun by the Organization of African
Unity and the Southern African Development
Community, and currently led by the President of
Zambia, takes note of the steps, including the
establishment of the ad hoc liaison committee, that have
been taken towards a peaceful settlement of the conflict
and encourages the President of Zambia to continue his
efforts.

“The Council strongly encourages the SecretaryGeneral to continue to work actively with the SecretaryGeneralof the Organizationof African Unity and with all
the parties concerned to help to find a peacefbl and
lasting solution to the conflict, It requests him to keep it
informed about efforts to achieve a peaceful solution and
to make recommendations on a possible role of the
United Nations to this end.

“The Council welcomes in particular the initiative
taken by the Secretary-General at the Twentieth
Conference of Heads of State of Africa and France, held
in Paris from 26 to 28 November 1998, to bring about an
376 S/PRST/l998/36.

“The Council will remain actively seized of the
matter.”

”’General Assembly resolution 260 A (111).
112

PROTECTION FOR HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE TO REFUGEES
AND OTHERS IN CONFLICT SITUATIONS
[Resolutionsor decisions on this question were also adopted by the Securib Council in 1997.1

Decisions

recommendationsmade in the report entitled ‘Thecauses
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa’.’82

At its 3932nd meeting, on 29 September 1998, the
Security Council decided to invite the representatives of
Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan, Canada, Indonesia, Norway,
Pakistan and the Republic of Korea to participate, without
vote, in the discussion of the item entitled:

“The Council reaffirms the importance ofpursuing
a coordinated and comprehensive approach, in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and principles and
provisions of international law, in improving protection
for humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in
conflict situations.

“Protection for humanitarian assistance to rehgees and
others in conflict situations
“Report of the Secretary-General(S/1998/883)”.378

“The Council condemns the attacks or use of force
in conflict situations against refugees and other civilians,
in violation of the relevant rules of international law,
including those of international humanitarian law.

At the same meeting, the Council decided to extend an
invitation to the Deputy Executive Director of the United
Nations Children’s Fund and to the Director of the Liaison
Office of the United Nations High Commissionerfor Refugees
at United Nations Headquarters, under rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Council.

“The Council likewise condemns all attacks or use
of force against United Nations and other personnel
associated with United Nations operations, as well as
personnel of humanitarian organizations, in violation of
international law, including international humanitarian
law. In this context, the Council recalls the statementby
its President of 12 March 1997,383as well as other
relevant statements and decisions. It also recalls the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel adopted by the General Assembly
on 9 December 1 994.384

At the same meeting, the Council also decided to extend

an invitation to Mrs. Sylvie Junod, Head of Delegation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross to the United
Nations, under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At its 3933rd meeting, on 29 September 1998, the
Council considered the item entitled:
“Protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations

“The Council a f f m its intention to review
thoroughly and promptly the recammendations of the
Secretary-General with a view to taking steps consistent
with its responsibilities under the Charter and, in this
context, notes the views expressed in the debate on the
matter at its 3932nd meeting on 29 September 1998.”38s

“Report of the Secretary-General(S/1998/883)”.378
At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:379
“The Security Council recalls the statement by its
President of 19 June 1997 concerning protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations.380

At its 3942nd meeting, on 10 November 1998, the
Council considered the item entitled “Protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations”.

“The Council welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral on protection for humanitariag, assistance to
refugees and others in conflict situations and notes the
recommendations contained therein.

At the same meeting, the Council decided to extend an
invitation to Mrs. Sadako Ogata, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

“The Council notes that several of the
recommendations contained in the report coincide with

370 See Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fifty-third Year,
Supplementfor July, August and September 1998.
3’9 SIPRST/1998/30.
noSIPRST11997/34.
OfJi~ciulRecords of the Securiq Council, Fgy-third Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1998, document

”’

S/1998f883.

”* Ibid., Supplement for April, May and June 1998, document
Sf1998I318.
3s3 SIpRST/1997113.

General Assembly resolution 49/59, annex.
See SIpV.3932. For the final text, see Oflcial Records of the
Security Council, Fiftv-third Year, 3932nd meeting.

385

113

THE SITUATION IN CAMBODIA
[Resolutionsor decisions on !his question have been adopted by the Security Council every year since 1990.1

Decisions
On 22 October 1998, the President of the Security
Council addressed the following letter to the SecretaryGeneral:386

On 17 November 1998, the President of the Security
Council addressed the following letter to the SecretaxyGeneral:’EB
‘7 have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 13 November 1998 concerning your proposal to
extend the office of your Personal Representative in
Cambodia for a further period of twelve months3E9has
been brought to the attention of the members of the
SecurityCouncil.They agree with the proposal contained
in your letter.”

“I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 19 October 1998 concerning the successful
completion on 30 September 1998 of the monitoring
operation of returning political leaders”’ has been
brought to the attention of the members of the Security
Council. They take note of the content of the letter.”

387

S/1998/987.

’”S/199811087.

S/l998/986,

S/1998/1086.

THE SITUATION IN GUINEA-BISSAU
Decisions

other leaders, in particular the preponderant role of the
President of the Gambia, in the negotiations that led to
that agreement.

At its 3940th meeting, on 6 November 1998,the Security
Council decided to invite the representative of Guinea-Bissau
to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item
entitled:

“The Council affinns its fmcommitment to
preserve the unity, sovereignty, constitutional order and
territorial integrity of Guinea-Bissau.

“The situation in Guinea-Bissau

“The Council considers the agreement to be a
positive step towards national reconciliation and lasting
peace in Guinea-Bissau. The Council calls upon the
Government and the Self-Proclaimed Military Junta to
respect ful1~ their obligations under the Abuja
Agreemen?’ and the Praia Agreement of 26 August
1998.393The Council welcomes, in particular, the
decision to put in place immediately a government of
national unity and to hold general and presidential
elections no later than the end of March 1999.

“Letter dated 3 November 1998 fiom the
Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1998/102$)”, 390
At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:39’
‘The Security Council welcomes the agreement
reached on 1 November 1998, in Abuja, between the
Government of Guinea-Bissau and the Self-Proclaimed
Military Junta during the Twenty-fxst Summit of the
Authority of the Heads of State and Government of the
Economic Community of West African States.’92In this
context, the Council commends the mediation efforts of
the Economic Community of West African States and of
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, and
their respective Chairmen, and recognizes the role of

See Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fifiy-third Year,
Supplementfor October, November and December 1998.
39‘ SIPRST/I998/31.
Oflciol Records of the Security Council, Fiftv-third Year,
Supplementfor October, November and December 1998, document
S/1998/1028, annex,

“The Counciltakes note of the agreementregarding
the withdrawal from Guinea-Bissauof all foreign troops
and of the simultaneousdeployment of the interposition
force of the Monitoring Group of the Economic
Community of West African States, which will take over
from the withdrawn forces. The Council calls upon all
States to provide voluntarily technical, financial and
logisticalsupport to assist the Monitoring Group to carry
out its mission.
“The Council appeals to States and organizations
concerned to provide urgent humanitarian assistance to
displaced persons and refugees. It calls upon the
Government and the Self-Proclaimed Military Junta to

’”

393

Ibid, SupplementfirJuly, August and September 1998, document

S/1998/825, annex I.
114

I

continue to respect relevant provisions of international
law, including humanitarian law, and to ensure safe and
unimpeded access by international humanitarian
organizations to persons in need of assistance as a result
of the conflict. In this regard, it welcomes the decision to
open the international airport and the seaport at Bissau.
“The Council will remain actively seized of the
matter.”

At its 3958thmeeting, on21 December 1998,the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Guinea-Bissau and
Togo to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item
entitled ‘The situation in Guinea-Bissau”.
Resolution 1216 (1998)
of 21 December 1998
The Security Council,
Reaf-rming the statements bXg4its President of
6 N0vernbe3~’and 30 November 1998,

Gravely concerned by the crisis facing Guinea-Bissau
and the serious humanitarian situation affecting the civilian
population in Guinea-Bissau,
Expressing its firm commitment to preserve the unity,
sovereignty, political independence and territorial integrity of
Guinea-Rissau,

1, Welcomes the agreements between the Government
of Guinea-Bissau and the Self-Proclaimed Military Junta
signed in Praia on 26 August 1998,393and in Abuja on
1 November 199g3” and the additional protocol signed in
Lom6 on 15 December 1998Cg5
2, CaZIs upon the Government and the Self-Proclaimed
Military Junta to implement fully all the provisions of the
agreements, including with regard to respect for the ceasefie,
the urgent establishment of a government of nationalunity, the
holding of general and presidential elections no later than the
end of March 1999, and the immediate opening of the airport
and seaport in Bissau and, in cooperation with all concerned,
the withdrawal of all foreign troops in Guinea-Bissau and the
simultaneous deployment of the interposition force of the
Monitoring Group of the Economic Community of West
African States;

3. Cornmends the States Members of the Community
of Portuguese-Speaking Countries and the Economic
Community of West African States on the key role they are
playing to restore peace and security throughout GuineaBissau, and on their intention to participate with others in the
observation of the forthcoming general and presidential
elections, and welcomes the role of the Monitoring Group in
the implementation of the Abuja Agreement, aimed at
guaranteeing security along the Guinea-BissadSenegal border,
keeping apart the parties in conflict and guaranteeing free
access to humanitarian organizations and agencies to reach the

affected civilian populations, to be carried out in accordance
with, inter d i n , paragraph 6 below;

4. Approves the implementation by the interposition
force of the Monitoring Group of its mandate refened to in
paragraph 3 above in a neutral and impartial way and in
conformity with United Nations peacekeeping standards in
order to achieve its objective to facilitate the return to peace
and security by monitoring the implementation of the Abuja
Agreement;
5 . Cullsupon all concerned, including the Government
and the Self-Proclaimed Military Junta, to respect strictly
relevant provisions of international law, including
humanitarian and human rights law, and to ensure safe and
unimpeded access by internationalhumanitarian organizations
to persons in need of assistance as a result of the conflict;
6. Affirms that the interposition force of the
Monitoring Group may be required to take action to ensure the
security and freedom of movement of its personnel in the
discharge of its mandate;
7. Requests the Monitoring Group to provide periodic
reports at least every month through the Secretary-General,the
first report to be made one month after the deployment of its
troops;
8 . Requests the Secretary-General to make
recommendations to the Council on a possible role of the
United Nations in the process of peace and reconciliation in
Guinea-Bissau, including the early establishment of
arrangements for liaison between the United Nations and the
Monitoring Group;

9. Reiterates its uppeal to States and organizations
concerned to provide urgent humanitarian assistance to
displaced persons and refigees;
10. Reiterates its call on States to provide voluntarily
financial, technical and logistical support to assist the
Monitoring Group to carry out its peacekeeping role in
Guinea-Bissau;

11. Requests the Secretary-General to take the
necessary steps to establish a trust fund for Guinea-Bissau
which would assist in supporting the interposition force of the
Monitoring Group in providing logistical support to them, and
encourages Member States to contribute to the fond;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to keep the
Council regularly informed of the situation in Guinea-Bissau
and to submit a report to it by 17 March 1999 on the
implementation of the Abuja Agreement, including the
implementation by the interposition force of its mandate;

13. Decides to review the situation, including the
implementation of tile present resolution, before the end of
March 1999, on the basis of the report of the SecretaryGeneral referred to in paragraph 12 above;

14. Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Adopted unanimously at the
3958th meeting.

S@RST/1998/35.
Oflcial Records of the Securiv Council, Fifiy-third Year,
Supplement for October, November and December 1998, document
S/1998/1178, annex 11.

394

’”

115

THE SITUATION IN LIBERIA
[Resolufions or decisions on this question have been adopted by the Security Council every year since 1991.1

extendthe mandate of the UnitedNations Peace-building
Support Office in Liberia until the end of December
1999397
has been brought to the attention of the members
of the Security Council. They take note of the intention
expressed in your letter.”

Decision
On 16 November 1998, the President of the Security
Council addressed the following letter to the SecretaryGeneral:”‘
‘‘1 have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 11 November 1998 concerning your intention to
396S/1998/1081.

397 S/1998/1080.

MAINTENANCE OF PEACE AND SECURITY AND POST-CONFLICT PEACE-BUILDING

Decisions

session.4o’ In this context, it welcomes the
recommendations of the Secretary-General concerning
the role of the Council in the aftermath of conflict, in
particular in ensuring a smooth transition from
peacekeeping to post-conflict peace-building. The
Council recalls further the statement by its President of
30 April 1993402on the report of the Secretary-General
entitled ‘An Agenda for Peace’,4o3including the subject
of post-conflict peace-building.

At its 3954th meeting, on 16 December 1998, the
Security Council decided to invite the representatives of
Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh,Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Canada, Croatia, Egypt, India, Indonesia,
Jamaica, Malaysia, Mongolia, Mozambique, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, the Republic of Korea, Slovakia, the Sudan, Tunisia
and Ukraine to participate, without vote, in the discussion of
the item entitled “Maintenance of peace and security and postconflict peace-building”.

“The Council reaffirms its primary responsibility
under the Charter of the United Nations for the
maintenance of international peace and security. It
stresses the need to prevent the resurgence or escalation
of conflict.The Councilrecognizes the importance of the
post-conflictpeace-building efforts of the United Nations
to this end in all regions of the world and with due
involvement of all United Nations bodies. In particular,
it welcomes the role played by the Secretary-Generalin
this field. It recognizesthe timeliness of exploring firther
means to prevent and settle conflicts, which are based on
the Charter and generally recognized principles of
peacekeeping,and which would incorporatepost-conflict
peace-building as an important component.

The Council resumed the 3954th meeting on
23 December 1998.
At its 396lstmeeting, on29December 1998,the Council
considered the item entitled “Maintenance of peace and
security and post-conflict peace-building”.
At the same meeting, following consultations among
members of the Security Council, the President made the
following statement on behalf of the
“The Security Council recalls the open debate held
at its 3954th meeting on 16 and 23 December 1998 on
the maintenance of peace and security and post-conflict
peace-b~ilding.’~It recalls also the report of the
Secretary-General of 13April 1998 entitled “The causes
of conflict and the promotion of durabIe peace and
sustainable development in Africa”, which was submitted
to the General Assembly and to the Security Counci1,4O0
as well as the report of the Secretary-General of
27 August 1998 on the work of the Organization,
submitted to the General Assembly at its fifty-third

“The Council recalls the statement by its President
of 24 September 1998F4which affirmed that the quest
for peace in Africa requires a comprehensive, concerted
and determined approach, encompassing the eradication
of poverty, the promotion of democracy, sustainable
development and respect for human rights, as well as
conflict prevention and resolution, including
Oflcial Records of the General Assembly, Fiftr-third Session,
Supplement No. I (tV5311).
402
Sl25696; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Coucil,
1993.
403 OIficial Records of the Security Council, Forty-seventh Year,
Supplement for Januav, Februaty and March 1992, document
s/24111.
4w SIPRSTII 998129.
4Q‘

’’’ SIPRST/1998/38.
’99 See SIPV. 3954 and Resumption. For the final text, see Oflcial
Records of the Security Council, Fiftv-third Year, 3954th meeting.
400 Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fgiy-third Year,
Supplementfor April, May andJune 1998, document SII 99813 18.

116

peacekeeping, and humanitarian assistance. The Council
underlines the fact that efforts to ensure lasting solutions
to conflicts require sustained political will and a longterm approach in the decision-making of the United
Nations, including by the Council itself. It affirms its
commitment to the principles of the political
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of all
States in conducting peace-building activities, and the
need for States to comply with their obligations under the
Charter and the principles of international law,

elements should be explicitly and clearly identified and
could be integrated into the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. It notes that peacekeeping operations may
include military, police, humanitarian and other civilian
components. It requests the Secretary-General to make
recommendations to the Council to this effect whenever
appropriate.
“The Council also requests the Secretary-General to
make recommendations to the appropriate United
Nations bodies concerning the period during the
transition to the post-conflict peace-buildingphase when
recommending the final drawdown of a peacekeeping
operation.

“The Council underlines the fact that economic
rehabilitation and reconstruction often constitute the
major tasks facing societies emerging from conflict and
that significant international assistance becomes
indispensable to promote sustainable development in
such cases. In that context, it recalls that Article 65 of the
Charter provides that the Economic and Social Council
may furnish information to the SecurityCouncil and shall
assist the Council upon its request.

“The Council recognizes the need for close
cooperation and dialogue between the bodies of the
United Nations system, in particular those directly
concerned in the field of post-conflict peace-building, in
accordance with their respective responsibilities, and
expresses its willingness to consider ways to improve
such cooperation. It also emphasizes the need to improve
the exchange of information between all relevant actors
in the field of post-conflict peace-building, including
United Nations agencies and bodies, international
financial institutions, regional and subregional
organizations, troop contributors and the donor
community.In this context, it notes with appreciation the
Secretary-General’s plans for strategic frameworks to
ensure increased coherence and effectivenessin the entire
range of United Nations activities in States in and
recovering from crisis.

“The Council, conscious of the emphasis placed by
the Secretary-Generalon the issue ofpost-conflict peacebuilding, in particular in the context of the reform of the
UnitedNations, encourages him to explore the possibility
of establishingpost-conflict peace-building structures as
part of efforts by the United Nations system to achieve a
lasting peaceful solution to conflicts, including in order
to ensure a smooth transition from peacekeeping to
peace-building and lasting peace.
“The Council recognizes the value of including, as
appropriate, peace-building elements in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations. It agrees with the SecretaryGeneral that relevant post-conflict peace-building

“The Council will remain seized of the matter.”

I17

Part IX. Other matters considered by the Securiq Council
SECURITY COUNCIL WORKING METHODS AND PROCEDURE
Decision
On 30 April 1998, the President of the Security Council issued the following note:405
“1. Further to the note by the President of the Security Council dated 27 July 1993
concerning the Council’s documentationand related
which provides for the
distribution of the tentative forecast of the programme of work of the Council for each
month to all Member States for information,the members of the Council have agreed
that the following reminder should be placed in the JournaZ each month:

‘The monthly tentative forecast has been made available to Member States
in accordance with the note b the President of the Security Councildated 27 July
1993:06 and 30 April 1998:‘In
accordance with the aforementioned decisions,
copies of the tentative forecast have been placed in the delegations’ boxes and
may be collected at the delegations’ pick-up area.’
“2. The members of the Council have recommended that the President make
available to all Member States the calendar setting out the provisional schedule of
work, after the completion of the consultations of the whole on the programme of
work, in an appropriate fonn and under his responsibility. The following footnote
should be included in the calendar:

‘The schedule is provisional; the actual schedule will be determined by
developments. The description of agenda items contained in the provisional
schedule may differ from the official formulation.’

“3. The members of the Council will continue their consideration of other
suggestions concerning the Council’s documentation and related matters.”
On 30 October 1998, the President ofthe Security Council issued the f o l l o ~ i n g n o t e : ~ ~ ~
The members of the Security Council, recalling the statementby the President of
the Council of 16 December 1994:08 in which the need for greater recourse to open
meetings of the Council was identified, and intending to continue to enhance the
transparency of the methods of work of the Council, have agreed that the SecretaxyGeneral is to be encouraged to make statements to the Council, when he deems it
appropriate, in public meetings of the Council.
“1.

“2. Recalling the enhancement of meetings with troop-contributing countries, the
members of the Council, taking note of the procedures set out in the statement by the
President of the Council of 28 March 1996,“whave also agreed to the following:
“(a) With reference to the existing practice of the President of the Council of
reporting, in the course of informal consultationsofmembersof the Council, the views
expressed by participants in each troop contributors’ meeting, troop-contributing
countries are encouraged to make available to the President, whenever appropriate,
copies of their statements during those meetings. Written copies of the Secretariat’s
briefing at those meetings should, whenever possible, be made available to troopcontributing countries upon request;

‘’’ S/1998/354.
‘06

Sl26 176.

SlI998l1016.
SlPRSTf 1994181.
‘09 SlPRST/1996/13.
40’

4MI

118

“(b) With reference to the existingpractice of the Secretariatofproviding weekly
briefing notes to the Councilon field operations, the Secretariatis encouraged to make
those briefrng notes available to troop-contributingcountries upon request;
“(c) Relevant United Nations bodies and agencies may be invited to troop
contributors’ meetings, when they have a specific contribution to make to the issue
under discussion;

“(4 With reference to the existing practice of inviting to troop contributors’
meetings Member States that make special contributions to peacekeeping operations
other than troops and civilian police that is to say, contributions to trust funds,
logistics and equipment other Member States contributing to peacekeeping
operations, as appropriate, should also be invited to these meetings;

-

-

“(e) The President of the Council will inform troop contributors about
forthcoming Council deliberations and expected decisions.

“3. The Secretariat should establish an appropriate mechanism for alerting nonmembers of the Council about unscheduled or emergency meetings of the Council
during nights, weekends or holidays.
“4. (a) The annual report of the Council to the General Assembly shall include, as
an appendix, in addition to the elements identified in the note by the President of the
Council of 12 June 1997;” the annual reports of the sanctions committees;

“(b) With effect from 1999, the bureau of each sanctions committee shall be
appointed by that committee,following consultationsamong Council members, either
at its first meeting if that meeting takes place in January, or in writing at the instance
of the Presidency of the Council under a no-objection procedure.”

CONSIDERATION OF THE DRAFT REPORT OF THE SECURITY
COUNCIL TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Decisions
At its 3923rd meeting, on 9 September 1998, the Security Council considered the item
entitled “Consideration of the draft report of the Council to the General Assembly”,
The decision of the Council was reflected in the following note by the President?”
“At its 3923rd meeting, on 9 September 1998, the Security Council considered
its draft report to the General Assembly covering the period from 16 June 1997 to
15 June 1998. The Council adopted the draft report without a vote.”

4‘0

s/1997/45 1.

4”

S/1998/843.
119

ITEMS INCLUDED IN THE AGENDA OF THE SECUIUTY
COUNCIL IN 1998 FOR THE FIMT TIME
NOTE: The practice of the Security Council is to adopt at each meeting, on the basis
of the provisional agenda circulated in advance, the agenda for that particular meeting; the
agenda as adopted for each meeting in 1998 will be found in the Oficr'al Records ofthe
Security Council, Fifty-third Year, 3847th to 3962nd meetings.
The following chronological list shows the meeting at which the Council decided, in
1998, to include in its agenda an item that had not been inscribed previously.
Meeting

Date

Letter dated 27 March 1998 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council ..........................

3868'

31 March

Letter dated 31 March 1998 from the Charge
d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Papua
New Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the
President o€the Security Council . . , . , , . , , . ,

3874'

22 April

....

3 895'

26 June

................

3896'

29 June

Letter dated 25 June 1998 from the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General ...........

3903rd

13 July

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States ............

3908"

15 July

Threats to peace and security caused by
international terrorist acts ..................

3915'

13 August

The situation in Guinea-Bissau . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3940'

6 November

Maintenance of peace and security and postconflict peace-building ....................

3954'

16 December

Item

Letter dated 11 March 1998 from the Deputy
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain andNorthern Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council

.

The situation between Eritrea and Ethiopia
Children and armed conflict

Letter dated 29 June 1998 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council
Letter dated 25 June 1998 from the Permanent
Representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General

121

CHECKLIST OF RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY
THE SECURITY COUNCIL IN 1998
Resolution number

Date of adoption

Subject

1147 (1998)

13 January

1148 (1998)

26 January

1149 (1998)

27 January

1150(1998)

30 January

1151 (1998)

30 January

.................................
The situation concerning Western Sahara ...................
The situation in Angola .................................
The situation in Georgia .................................
The situation in the Middle East ..........................

1152 (1998)

5 February

The situation in the Central African Republic ................

57

1153 (1998)

20 February

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait .....................

22

1154 (1998)

2 March

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait .....................

23

1155 (1998)

16 March

The situation in the Central African Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

59

1156 (1998)

16 March

The situation in Sierra Leone .............................

68

1157 (1998)

20 March

The situation in Angola .................................

37

1158 (1998)

25 March

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait .....................

24

1159 (1998)

27 March

The situation in the Central African Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

59

1160(1998)

31 March

Page

ThesituationinCroatia

1
31

36
49
54

Letter dated 11 March 1998 from the Deputy Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council
Letter dated 27 March 1998 from the Permanent Representative of
the United States of America to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council ..........................

10

1161 (1998)

9 April

The situation concerning Rwanda .........................

84

1162 (1998)

17 April

The situation in Sierra Leone .............................

68

1163 (1998)

17 April

The situation Concerning Western Sahara . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

32

1164 (1998)

29 April

The situation in Angola .................................

38

1165 (1998)

30 April

The situation concerning Rwanda

1166 (1998)

13 May

Establishment of an international tribunal for the
prosecution of persons responsible for serious violations
of international humanitarian law committed in the
territory of Rwanda and Rwandan citizens responsible
for such violations committed in the territory of
neighbouring States ................................

85

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia . . . . . . . . .

17

65

1167(1998)

14 May

The situation in Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan border

1168 (1998)

21 May

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

123

...................

7

Resolution number

Date of adoption

Subject

Page

1169 (1998)

27 May

The situation in the Middle East ..........................

55

1170 (1998)

28 May

The situation in Africa ..................................

92

1171 (1998)

5 June

The situation in Sierra Leone .............................

70

1172 (1998)

6 June

The responsibility of the Security Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security ...........................

104

1173 (1998)

12 June

The situation in Angola .................................

40

1174 (1998)

15 June

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina ...................

7

1175 (1998)

19 June

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait .....................

26

1176 (1998)

24 June

The situation in Angola .................................

42

1177 (1998)

26 June

The situation between Eritrea and Ethiopia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

105

1178 (1998)

29 June

The situation in Cyprus .................................

88

1179 (1998)

29 June

The situation in Cyprus .................................

89

1180 (1998)

29 June

The situation in Angola .................................

42

1181 (1998)

13 July

The situation in Sierra Leone .............................

71

1182 (1998)

14 July

The situation in the Central African Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

62

1183 (1998)

15 July

The situation in Croatia .................................

4

1184 (1998)

16 July

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

1185 (1998)

20 July

The situation concerning Western Sahara

33

1186 (1998)

21 July

...................
The situation in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia . . .

20

1187 (1998)

30 July

The situation in Georgia .................................

51

1188 (1998)

30 July

The situation in the Middle East ..........................

55

1189 (1998)

13 August

Threats to peace and security caused by international terrorist acts

110

1190 (1998)

13 August

The situation in Angola .................................

43

1191 (1998)

27 August

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia . . . . . . . . .

19

Letters dated 20 and 23 December 1991, from France. the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America ......................................

74

1192 (1998)

27 August

1193 (1998)

28 August

The situation in Afghanistan .............................

80

1194 (1998)

9 September

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait .....................

27

1195 (1998)

15 September

The situation in Angola .................................

44

1196 (1998)

16 September

The situation in Africa ..................................

93

1197 (1998)

18 September

The situation in Africa ..................................

95

1198 (1998)

18 September

The situation concerning Western Sahara . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

34

124

Resolution number

Date of adoption

Subject

1199 (1998)

23 September

Letter dated 11 March 1998 from the Deputy Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council

1200 (1998)

30 September

Page

Letter dated 27 March 1998 from the Permanent Representative of
the United States of America to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council ..........................

13

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States ....................................

87

1201 (1998)

15 October

The situation in the Central African Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

63

1202 (1998)

15 October

The situation in Angola .................................

45

1203 (1998)

24 October

Letter dated 11 March 1998 from the Deputy Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council
Letter dated 27 March 1998 from the Permanent Representative of
the United States of America to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council ..........................

15

1204 (1998)

30 October

The situation concerning Western Sahara ...................

34

1205 (1998)

5 November

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait .....................

29

1206 (1998)

12 November

The situation in Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan border . , .

66

1207 (1998)

17 November

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia . . . . . . . . .

19

1208 (1998)

19 November

ThesituationinAfrica ..................................

98

1209 (1998)

19 November

Thesituationin Africa ..................................

99

1210 (1998)

24 November

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait .....................

30

1211 (1998)

25 November

57

1212 (1998)

25 November

1213 (1998)

3 December

..........................
The question concerning Haiti . , , . . , . . , . , , . , , . . . . , , , . . .
The situation in Angola .................................

1214 (1998)

8 December

The situation in Afghanistan .............................

82

1215 (1998)

17 December

The situation concerning Western Sahara . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

35

1216 (1998)

21 December

The situation in Guinea-Bissau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

115

1217 (19.98)

22 December

The situation in Cyprus .................................

90

1218 (1998)

22 December

The situation in Cyprus .................................

91

1219 (1998)

31 December

The situation in Angola .................................

48

The situation in the Middle East

I

125

I

I

76

46

CHECKLIST OF STATEMENTS MADE AND/OR ISSUED BY THE PRESIDENT
OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL DURING 1998
Date of statement

Subject

Page

14 January

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait (S/PRST/1998/1) .........................

21

30 January

The situation in the Middle East (S/PRST/1998/2) ..............................

54

13 February

The situation in Croatia (S/PRST/1998/3) .....................................

2

24 February

The situation in Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan border (S/PRST/1998/4) .......

64

26 February

The situation in Sierra Leone (S/PRST/1998/5) .................................

67

6 March

The situation in Croatia (S/PRST/1998/6) .....................................

3

19 March

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/PRST/1998/7) .......................

6

25 March

The question concerning Haiti (S/PRST/l998/8) ................................

75

6 April

The situation in Afghanistan (SRRST/1998/9) .................................

77

22 April

Letter dated 3 1 March 1998 from the ChargC d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Papua New Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/PRST/1998/10) .......................................................

102

14 May

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait (S/PRST/1998/11) ........................

25

14 May

The responsibility of the Security Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security (S/PRST/1998/12) ................................................

103

20 May

The situation in Sierra Leone (S/pRST/1998/13) ................................

69

22 May

The situation in Angola (S/PRST/1998/14) ....................................

39

27 May

The situation in the Middle East (SPRST/1998/15) .............................

55

28 May

The situation in Georgia (S/PRST/1998/16) ...................................

50

29 May

The responsibility of the Security Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security (SPRSTA 998/17) ................................................

104

29 June
2 July

13 July

................................
The situation in Croatia (S/PRST/1998/19) ....................................
Children and armed conflict (SPRST/1998/18)

106
3

Letter dated 29 June 1998 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council
Letter dated 25 June 1998 from the Permanent Representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
Letter dated 25 June 1998 from the Permanent Representative of Rwanda to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/PRST/1998/20) ....................

109

13 July

The situation in the occupied Arab territories (S/PRST/t998/21) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

108

14 July

The situation in Afghanistan (SffRST/1998/22) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

78

30 July

The situation in the Middle East (S/PRST/1998/23) .............................

56

6 August

The situation in Afghanistan (S/PRST/1998/24) ................................

79

127

Page

Date of statement

Subject

24 August

Letter dated 11 March 1998 from the Deputy Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council
Letter dated 27 March 1998 from the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/PRST/1998/25) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

., . ,

111

31 August

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/PRST/1998/26)

15 September

The situation in Afghanistan (SIPRST/1998/27) ................................

81

16 September

The situation in Africa (S/PRST/1998/28) .....................................

94

24 September

The situation in Africa (S/PRST/1998/29) .....................................

97

29 September

Protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict situations
(S/PRST/1998/30) .......................................................

113

6 November

The situation in Guinea-Bissau (S/PRST/1998/31) ..............................

114

6 November

The situation in Croatia (S/PRST/1998/32) ....................................

5

25 November

The situation in the Middle East (S/PRST/1998/33) .............................

57

25 November

The situation in Georgia (S/PRST/1998/34) ...................................

53

30 November

The situation in Africa (S/PRST/1998/35) .....................................

101

11 December

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/PRST/1998/36) . . . .

112

23 December

The situation in Angola (S/PRST/1998/37) ....................................

48

29 December

Maintenance of peace and security and post-conflict peace-building (S/PRST/l998/38) .

116

128

Litho in United Nations, New York

ISSN 0257-1455

00 47208
