United Nations

S/PV.6036

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

6036th meeting
Wednesday, 10 December 2008, 12.45 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Vilović. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Croatia)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Grauls
Mr. Tiendrébéogo
Mr. Kang Yong
Mr. Weisleder
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Suescum
Mr. Churkin
Ms. Qwabe
Mr. Quarrey
Mr. Wolff
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-63944 (E)

*0863944*

S/PV.6036

The meeting was called to order at 12.45 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ambassador Jan Grauls, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
resolution 1737 (2006). I now give him the floor.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium): This is the eighth 90-day
report to the Security Council in accordance with
paragraph 18 (h) of resolution 1737 (2006). The report
covers the period from 12 September to 10 December
2008, during which the Committee held one session of
informal consultations to hear two briefings. In my
previous report, I noted that the members of the
Committee were considering a written request for
certain specific information from a Member State. I
wish to add now that the Committee subsequently
responded to the communication from the Member
State.
On 15 October 2008, the United States provided a
briefing on its efforts to implement paragraphs 3 and 4
of resolution 1737 (2006) and paragraph 8 of
resolution 1803 (2008). Those paragraphs relate to the
transfer of goods and technology to the Islamic
Republic of Iran that could contribute to enrichmentrelated, reprocessing or heavy water-related activities,
or to the development of nuclear weapon delivery
systems; and to the transfer of any further items that, as
determined by the State, could contribute to the pursuit
of activities related to other topics about which the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has
expressed concerns or which the IAEA has identified
as outstanding. The general rule established by
resolution 1737 (2006) was that, with a few exceptions,
such transfers were prohibited.
Resolution 1803 (2008) widened the prohibition
to include the transfer of dual-use items, with the

2

exception of certain specific items to be used in light
water reactors and under the framework of IAEA
technical cooperation. Following the briefing, some
other members of the Committee also shared with the
Committee the steps they had taken to implement the
relevant provisions.
On the same date, Norway, a non-member of the
Security Council, provided a briefing on its plans to
strengthen the effectiveness of the regulatory oversight
of the safety at the Bushehr nuclear power plant in
Iran. The Norwegian project, to be implemented under
the auspices of the IAEA, falls under the scope of the
aforementioned exceptions.
With respect to those exceptions, I would also
like to mention that by notes verbales dated
7 November and 21 November 2008, the Russian
Federation, as it has done in the past, notified the
Committee of supplies it had delivered for the light
water reactor at the Bushehr nuclear power plant.
Finally, Mr. President, with regard to reporting by
States on their implementation of all the relevant
measures contained in resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747
(2007) and 1803 (2008), the updated figures are as
follows: 90 reports under resolution 1737 (2006), 77
reports under resolution 1747 (2007) and 63 reports
under resolution 1803 (2008).
As you are aware, Mr. President, by its resolution
1835 (2008) of 27 September 2008, the Council
reaffirmed the three resolutions, as well as resolution
1696 (2006), and also reaffirmed its commitment to an
early negotiated solution through a dual-track approach
to the Iranian nuclear issue and welcomed the
continuing efforts in that regard.
The Council also called upon Iran to comply fully
and without delay with its obligations under the
previously mentioned resolutions of the Security
Council and to meet the requirements of the IAEA
Board of Governors.
As this is my last 90-day report to the Security
Council, I would like to conclude by thanking the
members of the 1737 Committee for their cooperation.
The President: I thank Mr. Grauls for his
briefing and I now give the floor to members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): The
United States welcomes Ambassador Grauls’ briefing

08-63944

S/PV.6036

on the activities of the Iran sanctions committee.
Today, I would like to focus on three points.
First, I note that the most recent report of the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) on Iran contains troubling findings
that deserve the Council’s attention. The report
documents Iran’s continued failure to comply with the
Council’s demands to suspend all uranium enrichmentrelated reprocessing and heavy water activities. The
report also elaborates on the IAEA’s concerns about
Iran’s past weaponization-related activities, as well as
Iran’s refusal to permit the IAEA to have the access
necessary to establish the international community’s
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of its
nuclear activities.
Iran’s failure to cooperate with the IAEA has,
indeed, gotten worse, in that Iran is once again refusing
to permit the IAEA access to conduct a special kind of
verification inspection at the Arak reactor, which is
essential to monitor the ongoing construction of the
facility, which itself is a violation of the Council’s
resolutions.
The report chillingly notes that Iran’s stockpile of
low-enriched uranium has reached 630 kilogrammes,
which is over half the amount needed for a nuclear
weapon. I hope that the Council will take serious note
of those findings and support the IAEA secretariat in
continuing its investigation.
Secondly, in the light of this evidence of Iran’s
non-compliance, the Iran sanctions committee should
redouble efforts to ensure full and robust
implementation of resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747
(2007) and 1803 (2008). The Committee’s efforts are
essential to our broader two-track approach, which
includes both targeted sanctions and generous
incentives for Iran.
As Ambassador Grauls noted, the Iran sanctions
committee has endeavoured to share best practices
among Member States and encourage greater
transparency in the international community’s nuclear
dealings with Iran. We particularly welcome Norway’s
decision to brief the Committee on its nuclear training
programme in Iran and the safeguards put in place to
ensure that those activities do not violate existing
Security Council resolutions. We urge the Committee
to continue its efforts and to consider new, more
effective ways to carry out its mandate.

08-63944

Finally, I would like to thank Ambassador Grauls
for his excellent work in leading the 1737 Committee
and his dedication to ensuring that the Committee carry
out its mandate. He has set a high bar for excellence
and professionalism for any successor.
Mr. de Rivière (France) (spoke in French): This
was the last quarterly report of Ambassador Grauls as
chair of the 1737 Committee, and my delegation would
like, first of all, to pay tribute to the remarkable skill
with which he and his team discharged their difficult
duties.
The last two reports of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) on the situation in Iran are
particularly negative. In fact, they indicate that Iran is
continuing not to suspend its sensitive activities.
Indeed, it is continuing to step them up, unabated. Iran
is continuing to fail to implement the transparency
measures demanded of it. The IAEA finds of particular
concern the presumed studies on the militarization of
the Iranian programme.
The IAEA also regrets Iran’s persistent refusal to
provide it with the necessary information and access to
shed light on this question at a time when the Iranian
reaction corroborate documents that originally Iran had
said were false. The Agency has concluded that, unless
there is progress on these points, it will not be in a
situation to guarantee the absence of undeclared
nuclear materials activity in Iran.
I would add that Iran has still not responded to
offers for dialogue with the E3+3 Governments,
despite the historic involvement of the United States,
nor has it responded to the E3+3 Governments’ freezefor-freeze proposal. If Iran continues on this path, the
price will be intensified isolation and regional tension.
We are engaged on a dual-track approach
reaffirmed unanimously by the Security Council in its
resolution 1835 (2008). As long as Iran fails to meet
the demands of the international community, we must
demonstrate increasing firmness. To do this, we need to
begin by a rigorous application of the resolutions the
Council has already adopted.
I would like to briefly recall here measures
adopted by the European Union (EU) for the
implementation of resolution 1803 (2008), which
include the additional naming of individuals and
enterprises contained in resolution 1803 (2008), which
has been transferred in its entirety to the EU, an

3

S/PV.6036

additional complementary list of individuals and
enterprises was also adopted by the EU in June and the
designating process will continue for the individuals
and enterprises who participate in the proliferation
activities of Iran, in order to ensure the complete
implementation of Security Council resolutions.
At the same time, the embargo on dual-use goods
is fully in place in the EU. This has been supplemented
by an additional list of particularly sensitive goods that
are also under embargo. So as not to contribute
financially to proliferation activities of Iran, the EU is
showing restraint regarding the provision of loans and
credits for exports.
Regarding financial vigilance toward Iranian
banks, the EU has defined enhanced concrete
monitoring measures to avoid having financial flows
be redirected to proliferation activities. These measures
include the identification of clients, a register of the
operations in which Iranian banks are participating, the
making available by the authorities of all necessary
documentation and the declaration of suspicious cases
in case of dubious transactions and the publication of
lists of branches of Iranian banks. It has also frozen the
activities of the Melli Bank, which has shown itself to
be heavily implicated. It has also established a
monitoring regime for the activities of Bank Saderat
Iran. All of these financial measures provide a serious
and responsible set of mechanisms that conforms with
the recently adopted directives of the Financial Action
Task Force on Money Laundering.
Finally, regarding cargo inspections, the EU is
implementing the regime established under resolution 1803
(2008) and has established a system of a priori declarations
for Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines and Iran Air
Cargo.
This vigilance is critical to safeguarding the
security of all of us. We therefore urge all of our
partners to implement it fully. We will make all
information available to delegations that wish to learn
more on ways to implement their obligations. We also
hope to recall here that the Committee can still do a
great deal more to assist Member States in this area, as
the Ambassador of Burkina Faso requested a few
months ago. We hope that in the next few months we
will be working on that.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Permanent
Representative of Belgium, Ambassador Grauls, for his

4

briefing on the work of the 1737 Committee of the
Security Council for the last three month period and
also for the work he has done in heading this
Committee.
We take note of the fact that in this reporting
period, the Committee was acting in strict compliance
with Security Council resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747
(2007) and 1803 (2008). We believe that, in its further
work, the Committee will continue to be guided by the
spirit and letter of those resolutions aiming at
promoting the achievement of the major goal, which is
an effective solution to the Iran nuclear problem solely
through political and diplomatic means, that is, through
negotiations on the basis of proposals formulated by
the group of six.
Resolution 1835 (2008) of the Security Council,
adopted in September, clearly demonstrated the unity
of the group of six around the major unifying goal,
namely, to cooperate with the International Atomic
Energy Agency in fact-finding and in establishing the
lack of any military aspects in Iran’s nuclear
programme. There may be tactical divergences, but
these should not weaken the dedication of the group of
six to this most important objective, namely, to
strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom): First of all, I
would like to thank Ambassador Grauls for this year’s
final report to the Council and, on behalf of my
delegation, join others in paying tribute to his
outstanding chairmanship of the 1737 Committee.
The United Kingdom remains committed to the
E3 + 3 Governments dual-track policy. The generous
offer made by this group in June 2008 still stands. It is
deeply disappointing that we have not had a clear
response to date from Iran.
The United Kingdom stands ready to build a
positive relationship with Iran across a range of issues,
but we must first see serious action by Iran to work
with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
and to comply with its Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons responsibilities.
The IAEA Director-General’s November report
stated that the agency had received no cooperation
from Iran in the previous two months and that Iran’s
uranium enrichment programme continued. Iran’s
continued failure to cooperate with the IAEA, or to

08-63944

S/PV.6036

answer its questions, only increases our concerns about
Iran’s nuclear programme and its intentions.

and has received extensive
international community.

It is vital that Iran urgently and comprehensively
provide the IAEA with all the requested information,
documentation and access. We share the IAEA’s
continued concern about outstanding issues relating to
the possible military dimensions of Iran’s nuclear
programmes.

China is always of the view that the peaceful
solution to the Iran nuclear issue lies in diplomatic
negotiations, which is the best option and in the
interest of the international community.

If Iran remains determined to isolate itself, then
we in the international community must remain equally
determined to stand together both in maintaining
pressure on Iran to meet its international obligations
and in making clear to Iran that its choices will have a
cost.
In that context, I would like to highlight the
important measures recently taken by the European
Union as referred to previously by my French
colleague.
Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
too thank Ambassador Graul for his report. I will not
refer to the substance of his report. This is one of the
most disturbing issues for the international community
as it endangers peace and stability. This issue falls,
therefore, within the responsibilities of this Council in
accordance with the United Nations Charter. I will also
not comment on the report because previous speakers
have, quite rightly, spoken about it, as has Ambassador
Grauls as Chair of the Committee.
However, I simply asked for the floor to thank
Ambassador Grauls and the Belgium Mission for the
excellent work they have done on such a delicate issue
as this is the last report that they are submitting to this
Council.
Mr. Kang Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I would like to thank Ambassador Grauls for his
briefing on the work of the Committee over the last 90
days. Since its establishment and under the diligent
leadership of Ambassador Grauls and Ambassador
Verbeke, the Committee has successfully undertaken
various kinds of tasks. I thus take this opportunity to
express sincere thanks to Ambassador Grauls and
Ambassador Verbeke for their vigorous efforts.
The Iran nuclear issue relates to the effectiveness
of the international nuclear non-proliferation regime
and its close connection with the security regime in the
Middle East and its impact on international nuclear
energy security. This issue is complex and sensitive

08-63944

attention

from

the

At the present time, the Iran nuclear issue is at
crucial juncture. The United Kingdom, France,
Germany, China, the United States and Russia are
currently, through the European Union, maintaining
constructive dialogue and contact with Iran regarding
the resumption of negotiations.
The IAEA and Iran are also cooperating on
pending questions with regards to Iran’s nuclear
programme. This demonstrates that the international
community’s diplomatic efforts to advance the
resumption of negotiations are effective and opportune.
No side should readily pass up that opportunity.
China notes the new report submitted by
Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), on the
Iran nuclear issue. China commends the IAEA and its
Director General for that effort. In the current
circumstances, the international community should
further intensify its diplomatic efforts and maintain and
promote dialogue with Iran to seek an early resumption
of negotiations. At the same time, Iran should be
encouraged to strengthen its cooperation with the
IAEA to resolve pending issues at an early date, to
alleviate the international community’s misgivings
about its nuclear programme, and to seek an
appropriate, comprehensive and long-term solution to
the Iran nuclear issue. China is prepared to continue to
play a constructive role in that regard.
China consistently supports maintaining the
international non-proliferation regime, opposes the
proliferation of nuclear weapons and hopes that there
will be no new turbulence in the Middle East region.
China supports a peaceful settlement of the Iran
nuclear issue through diplomatic negotiations. We will
continue to participate actively in the work of the
Committee, support and cooperate with the Chairman
in his efforts, and do our best to help the Committee
play a constructive role in appropriately resolving the
Iran nuclear issue.
Mr. Mantovani (Italy): At the outset, I would
like to thank Ambassador Grauls for his comprehensive

5

S/PV.6036

briefing and for his effective leadership of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006).
Unfortunately, the most recent report of the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) confirms Iran’s non-compliance with
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the
IAEA Board of Governors. Italy remains committed to
resolving the Iranian nuclear issue through a dual-track
approach, based on dialogue and the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1737
(2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1835 (2008).
The French delegation’s intervention just
highlighted the initiatives undertaken by the European
Union to that end, which Italy firmly supports. At the
same time, we wish to reaffirm the importance of the
political dimension, which is prominent in the package
of incentives offered to Tehran, as an essential means
to overcome the current stalemate and to strengthen
regional stability by actively involving all actors
concerned.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): We wish to thank Ambassador Jan Grauls,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and
representative of Belgium, for his valuable briefing, in
which he reviewed the work accomplished by the
Committee over the past 90 days.
Libya once again reaffirms the importance of
intensifying international efforts to achieve a peaceful
settlement of the dispute over the Iranian nuclear issue,
in accordance with paragraph 15 of Security Council
resolution 1803 (2008), on further enhancing

6

diplomatic efforts to promote resumption of dialogue
and consultations with Iran, with a view to seeking a
comprehensive, long-term and appropriate solution to
this issue that would allow for the development of allround relations and fruitful cooperation with Iran based
on mutual respect and international confidence in the
exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme. In this context, we call on all parties to
begin direct negotiations as soon as possible in order to
achieve that goal.
Libya expresses once again its firm belief that all
efforts to address non-proliferation and nuclear
disarmament
should
be
comprehensive
and
non-selective and that all countries, without exception,
should subject their nuclear facilities to the
comprehensive safeguards regime of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). We express our regret
that the Security Council has not devoted careful
attention to the Israeli nuclear-weapon issue, despite
the fact that Israel continues to refuse to accede to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) and to subject its nuclear facilities to the IAEA
safeguards regime. That makes it impossible to fulfil
the aspirations of the peoples of the Middle East to
establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone, in accordance
with the resolution on the Middle East adopted at the
1995 Review Conference of the Parties to the NPT and
the relevant General Assembly resolutions.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

08-63944
