S/PV.8638

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8638th meeting

Wednesday, 9 October 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Matjila. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Ms. Morrison González
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Ugarelli
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Repkin
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2019/776)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-30807 (E)
*1930807*

S/PV.8638

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2019/776)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to participate in this meeting.
Ms. Zerrougui is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Wilton Park, United Kingdom.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/776, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I now give the floor to Ms. Zerrougui.
Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in French): I wish to thank
the Security Council for having invited me to participate
in today’s discussion, which is taking place soon
after the closing of the general debate of the General
Assembly at its seventy-fourth session, during which
the Democratic Republic of Congo and the members
of the Council themselves — its partners — were
highly active.
A new positive dynamic has been established that
is likely to eventually lead the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to lasting peace and stability, following the
peaceful transition of power that we witnessed at the
beginning of the year. Regional diplomatic initiatives
have been launched. A coalition Government has been
2/12

09/10/2019

set up, with an ambitious agenda that aims to stabilize
the country, improve its governance and lead it towards
economic development. It is now incumbent upon the
entire Congolese political class to support that dynamic
and work towards its consolidation. The establishment
of the National Assembly, the Senate and provincial
assemblies — the parliamentary sessions of which
started last week — as well as the recent formation of
the Government that I have just mentioned, mark the
starting point for the consolidation of democracy in
the country.
Finding a balance in the functioning of those
institutions remains fragile. The United Nations is
working closely with the presidency, the Government
and all Congolese institutions to help them to prioritize
options for the consolidation of stability and ensure
that the activities of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO), as well as agencies,
funds and programmes, are aligned with national
priorities, thereby serving to enhance their impact.
While continuing to support the Congolese authorities
in neutralizing the armed groups, which pose an
unacceptable threat to the civilian population, we must
together strengthen the sovereign functions of the State
and its ability to manage the country by promoting the
rule of law.
(spoke in English)
The opportunities offered by the advent of a
new political dispensation bring a wind of hope, as
the Secretary-General said during his recent visit to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Yet seizing
that opportunity is not without risks and challenges,
and it must also urgently translate into sustainable
improvement and relief for the many Congolese who
continue to live in a state of insecurity, dependency
on humanitarian aid and economic exclusion. As
described in the report before the Council (S/2019/776),
the recent escalation of intercommunal and armed
group violence — at times running along ethnic
lines — and egregious human rights violations have
led to significant population displacements in several
areas in Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu provinces.
A large number of armed groups — both national and
foreign — including notably the Allied Democratic
Forces (ADF), Nduma défense du Congo Rénové
(NDCR), the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda (FDLR) and splinter groups, continue to exact
an intolerable toll on civilians, adding to an already
19-30807

09/10/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

dire humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
I am particularly concerned regarding the level of
brutality used against civilians in a number of recent
incidents. The killing and post-mortem decapitation of
14 civilians, including 11 children, in Bukatsele, Ituri,
as well as reported cases of female genital mutilation in
Fizi territory, South Kivu, are unacceptable and deeply
troubling. We will make every effort to ensure that the
perpetrators are apprehended and held accountable.
Another troubling incident occurred in the form of a
cross-border attack by a FDLR splinter group in Kinigi
village in Rwanda, resulting in civilian casualties
and threatening regional stability and security. The
expression of support from bilateral and multilateral
partners of the Democratic Republic of the Congo with
a view to finding common security responses to the
situation in the east of the country is therefore both
timely and encouraging.
I believe strongly that, in addition to addressing
these security threats through military means, further
strengthening the core function of the State, including
through the professionalization of the defence and
security sector and the empowerment of the judiciary,
will enable the Government to better respond to these
threats. While further addressing the root causes of
this conflict, MONUSCO places great emphasis on
supporting the Government, including encouraging
local and national mediation and reconciliation efforts
and responding to incitement to ethnic hatred through
target strategies against hate speech. The ongoing
process involving the Force de résistance patriotique
de l’Ituri illustrates that efforts to ensure conducive
security contacts, coupled with sustained political and
community engagement, can yield tangible results.
Currently, more than 900 elements are pre-cantoned
awaiting a peace agreement, expected to be concluded
later this year.
Besides those processes, the reintegration of
former members of armed groups following the wave
of voluntary surrenders in early 2019 remains a critical
task. I strongly believe that that will impact on stability
in the country, and I therefore call on the international
community to support the Government in delivering on
sustainable, locally anchored and flexible communitybased approaches that will deliver justice and set the
basis for long-term peacebuilding and development.

S/PV. 8638

I am encouraged by the overall downward
trend in the number of new Ebola cases throughout
September and early October. That is linked to the
strengthened coordination of overall response efforts
and an enhanced and integrated approach to create an
environment conducive for the response and a sharper
focus on building community acceptance to ensure full
access to areas affected by the virus.
We must, however, not waver in our support, as
the battle is far from won. Creating acceptance for
the response remains a daily challenge in areas more
recently affected by the virus. That serves to remind
us of the importance of not only addressing Ebola, but
also responding to the broader needs of the population,
including safety, health-care, sanitation and education.
That is in line with population’s clear message sent
during the electoral period, calling for sustainable
development, health-care, education and, above
all, peace.
I reiterate the readiness of MONUSCO to assist the
Government in supporting the protection of civilians,
advancing stabilization and further strengthening
key State institutions. We collectively need to take
advantage of this wind of hope and navigate towards a
future that corresponds to the hopes and expectations of
the Congolese people. I would like to thank the Council
and Member States for their continuing support in
that regard.
The President: I thank Ms. Zerrougui for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this meeting and
commends Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), for
her excellent briefing.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the positive developments
in the sociopolitical situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in particular with regard to the
appointment of the Prime Minister, the formation of the
new Government and the National Assembly’s approval
of the Government programme on 6 September. The
programme represents a framework for concerted
action that will enable the Government to undertake

19-308073/12

S/PV.8638

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

political, economic, social, defence and security
reforms. My country therefore urges international
financial institutions, development assistance agencies
and bilateral partners to provide further support for the
Congolese Government in order to consolidate peace
and stability.
My delegation notes that, despite the efforts of
the Congolese authorities, supported by MONUSCO,
the security situation in the eastern provinces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains a matter
of concern. Activities involving the illicit exploitation
of natural resources carried out by foreign and local
armed groups unfortunately continue to destabilize
the provinces of North Kivu, South Kivu and Ituri.
Albeit the primary responsibility of the Congolese
Government, the neutralization of those negative forces
cannot be achieved without the involvement of all
regional actors, in particular neighbouring countries.
In that regard, my delegation commends the holding
of the quadripartite presidential summit held in Luanda
on 12 July among the Presidents of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Angola, Uganda and Rwanda,
the outcome of which underlines the importance of
economic integration and enhanced cooperation on
peace and security in regional efforts to combat armed
groups in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. My country also encourages the Congolese
Government to redouble efforts to complete the
process of disarmament, demobilization, repatriation
and reintegration, as part of the implementation of its
programme of action.
The humanitarian situation, which has been
exacerbated by the persistence of the Ebola epidemic in
the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
is also a matter of great concern for my delegation. The
humanitarian crisis is compounded by the difficulties
faced by humanitarian agencies in accessing people in
need owing to the precarious security situation. Added
to that is the low level of funding that has been secured
to meet the amount required to finance the humanitarian
response plan, which is estimated at $1.65 billion.
In that regard, my country expresses its
appreciation to the members of the response team, who
are on the front line in combating the Ebola epidemic,
and to the humanitarian workers for their exemplary
work in particularly challenging security and health
environments. My country also urges all donors to
honour their commitments, which is key to maintaining
4/12

09/10/2019

and stepping up humanitarian assistance to refugees
and displaced persons.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the
commitment of the international community in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular the
specialized United Nations agencies operating on the
ground. We view the recent visit by the SecretaryGeneral to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
from 30 August to 1 September, as a sign of his
willingness to reaffirm international support for the
Congolese authorities and of his solidarity with, and
support for, the victims of violence by armed groups
and the populations living in the areas affected by the
Ebola epidemic.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the useful briefing by Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui, to whom
we reiterate our support for her efforts to bring about
lasting peace to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
At the outset, we welcome the progress achieved
in the political arena in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, under the leadership of President Félix
Tshilombo Tshisekedi, which includes the formation
of a coalition Government, the appointment of
Mr. Sylvestre Ilunga Ilunkamba as Prime Minister and
the approval of the Government programme. As such,
the necessary foundations that will lead to stabilization
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are being laid.
We also welcome the resumption of political and
diplomatic relations between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the countries of the subregion, such as
Rwanda, Uganda, Burundi and Angola. Nevertheless,
we continue to be concerned about the deterioration
of the security situation owing to the activities of both
Congolese and foreign armed groups in the eastern part
of the country and about pockets of intercommunal
violence, which have continued to cause fatalities and
forced displacement.
In that regard, we approve of the initiative by
President Tshisekedi launched at the thirty-ninth
summit of the Heads of State and Government of the
Southern African Development Community, held
in Dar es Salaam, to establish a regional coalition to
eradicate armed groups from the eastern provinces in
reaction to the acts of extremism and terrorism in the
Beni area.
19-30807

09/10/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Accordingly, we believe that it extremely important
to intensify synergies between the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the Congolese
security forces in order to neutralize the activities of
those groups, which include the forced recruitment of
child soldiers. That should be complemented by effective
steps relative to the disarmament, demobilization and
social reintegration of former combatants.
We believe that the current environment makes the
civilian component of MONUSCO’s operations even
more relevant, especially with regard to promoting
dialogue, preventing cases of sexual violence among
community members, building trust among the
various actors in the country and coordinating support
from international partners. We also encourage the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to work together with the various political forces to
facilitate reform of the justice system focused on
transforming it into a cornerstone of the fight against
impunity and corruption in the country and combating
the continuing alarming situation regarding human
rights violations.
The focus on ending the violence should not in
any way overlook the urgency of dealing immediately
and simultaneously with the worrying humanitarian
situation that is threatening the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and that appears to be worsening on the
ground. About 10 per cent of the population is living
with food insecurity. In addition, the population has
been dealing with severe problems in the form of
outbreaks of diseases such as cholera, measles and
Ebola, of which the last has been declared a public
health emergency of international concern by the World
Health Organization. We particularly commend the
Government’s commitment to addressing the scourge
of Ebola by setting up a multisectoral expert committee
to oversee the various national, regional and local
outbreaks. We also welcome international support, such
as that of the United Nations and MONUSCO, which
is providing security to response teams, including in
mining areas.
In conclusion, we reiterate the commitment we have
made to the Mission to continue contributing decisively
to the efforts aimed at overcoming the humanitarian
crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
furthering its inclusive economic development and,
especially, combating sexual violence and promoting
the participation of women in peace processes.

S/PV. 8638

Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): I would first like to thank Ms. Leila
Zerrougui for her usual comprehensive and detailed
briefing to the Council.
Equatorial Guinea has been following the positive
developments in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
with great interest. We thank the Secretary-General
for his recent report (S/2019/776) and reiterate our
gratitude to the Special Representative. We also thank
all the personnel of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), the United Nations country team, the
troop- and police-contributing countries, regional
organizations, bilateral and multilateral partners and
non-governmental organizations for their efforts and
commitment to their work. And I commend the political
will of the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Thanks to all those actors, positive winds
are blowing in the country.
It is as a result of the efforts of the international
community and the determination of the Congolese
people that today we are celebrating the recent positive
developments in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, such as the holding of peaceful elections, a
peaceful transfer of power, the formation of the Senate
and Parliament, the appointment of the Prime Minister
and the formation of a new coalition Government.
Those are unquestionably steps in the right direction
towards lasting stability in that great country, whose
importance to every aspect of life in our subregion we
have emphasized on many occasions.
We should ensure that the international community
helps the Congolese Government so that it can secure
full control of the country’s military forces and thereby
exercise its authority throughout its national territory
in order to defend its independence, sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity. At the same time, we
also call for ensuring an atmosphere in the region
of good-neighbourliness, regional cooperation and
non-interference in the affairs of other countries, as
stipulated in resolution 2424 (2018). The cooperation
between MONUSCO and the Congolese armed forces
constitutes an important relationship that is essential to
the fight to eradicate armed groups in the country.
The presence of fighting and armed groups in the
Democratic Republic of Congo has resulted in serious
human rights violations, the forced displacement of
persons and a chronic humanitarian crisis with serious

19-308075/12

S/PV.8638

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

consequences. Despite the assistance provided by
the Government and its international partners, we
remain concerned about the large number of people
who continue to be exposed to malnutrition, cholera,
measles and Ebola. The latter in particular requires
technical and financial assistance from the international
community. In that regard, we commend the SecretaryGeneral’s recent visit to the country.
Given that the Democratic Republic of Congo
possesses a vast array of natural resources and
significant mineral reserves, it is crucial to ensure
that it receive major support in the fight against the
illegal exploitation and commercialization of its natural
resources and in the consolidation and implementation
of certification mechanisms and protocols, so that
the benefits of those resources can contribute to
the country’s development and the welfare of the
Congolese people. The Democratic Republic of Congo
should be able to maximize its massive potential, which
would undoubtedly have a very positive impact on
our subregion.
The delegation of Equatorial Guinea firmly
believes that we need concerted efforts on the part of
the United Nations, the African Union and regional and
subregional organizations to address adequately and
in a coordinated manner the conflicts in the region in
general and in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
particular. We commend the renewed political will that
the leaders of the region have shown in strengthening
ties between their countries, addressing their
differences through trust and dialogue and working
constructively to manage cross-border incidents in
order to advance cooperation and integration, with
a view to achieving the stability that is essential to
enabling the development and renewal that will lead to
prosperity in this key subregion of Africa.
In conclusion, we urge the African Union, the
International Organization of la Francophonie, the
Southern African Development Community and
international partners to continue to develop synergies
with the member States of the International Conference
of the Great Lakes Region aimed at implementing the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. We
should not conclude without reiterating our gratitude
to MONUSCO for its arduous and excellent work in
a complex context. We wish it success in adapting
to the new circumstances, dynamics and positive
developments that are currently taking place in our
6/12

09/10/2019

great brother country in Central Africa. In this place
and moment we can see the political class and the
Congolese people coming to maturity at the same time.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Special Representative Zerrougui for
her briefing.
The very fact that a coalition Government has
been formed in the Democratic Republic of Congo
shows that the country has achieved a smooth transfer
of power since the December 2018 elections. The
new Government has outlined a programme of work,
already approved by Parliament, that focuses on
political defence, security, economic and financial
reconstruction and the social and cultural sectors.
President Tshisekedi is pursuing an active and packed
diplomatic agenda. He has met with the Presidents of
Angola, Rwanda and Uganda. He also attended the
Southern African Development Community summit in
an effort to resolve the issue of armed groups in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
by strengthening regional cooperation.
Those positive trends show that the Congolese
Government has both the ability and the will to
safeguard national security and stability and achieve
sustainable economic and social development. The
international community can further assist the
Democratic Republic of Congo in various areas of
domestic and foreign affairs, in accordance with the
priorities of the new Government programme. China
welcomed the Secretary-General’s successful visit to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 30 August
and 1 September. In defiance of fears of the Ebola
epidemic and security threats, the Secretary-General
ventured deep into the Ebola area in the eastern
part of the country, where he met with medical staff
working to combat the epidemic and with recuperating
patients, and to inspect camps of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), in a strong demonstration of
United Nations support in the fight against the Ebola
epidemic and the security problems in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Today I would like to focus on three issues, the
first being MONUSCO, which has long played an
important part in promoting peace and stability in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The report
of the Secretary-General (S/209/776) indicates that
MONUSCO still has a key role to play in responding
19-30807

09/10/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

to the security and humanitarian challenges facing the
country and that it should cooperate more effectively
with the armed forces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in tackling armed groups. In accordance
with resolution 2463 (2019), the Secretary-General
must submit to the Council a strategic review report on
the recent reform and drawdown of MONUSCO. It is
hoped that the Secretariat will continue to strengthen
its communication and consultation with the Congolese
Government and troop-contributing countries so as
to make recommendations on the future direction
of MONUSCO on a basis of full respect for the
wishes of the country concerned and in keeping with
developments on the ground.
Secondly, China believes that regional cooperation
is key to responding to foreign armed groups and
stopping the illegal flow of weapons. MONUSCO
can strengthen information-sharing and strategic
coordination with the Office of the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region,
support the signatories to the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region in fulfilling their respective
commitments, and strengthen regional cooperation and
tackle the root causes of conflict in a bid to promote
lasting peace and sustainable development in the region.
Thirdly, owing to intercommunal conflicts, violence
by armed groups and epidemics, the humanitarian
situation in parts of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has deteriorated, with approximately 11 million
people facing food crises and 4.5 million children
malnourished. China has also continued to follow
the development of the Ebola epidemic closely. Since
its outbreak in 2018, we have provided $1 million in
cash assistance to the Congolese Government and
$2 million in funding to the World Health Organization
(WHO) through the United Nations Fund for SouthSouth Cooperation. China will also provide emergency
humanitarian assistance to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and other countries in the near future
and cooperate with the WHO and the African Union
to control the epidemic and prevent it from spreading
further. We call on the international community to step
up humanitarian assistance, fulfil its aid commitments
and mitigate funding shortfalls.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Zerrougui for her briefing today.

S/PV. 8638

Last December, the Congolese people cast their
votes for change and for a peaceful transition of power,
stability and a brighter future. The United States
applauds the recent formation of a Government in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo that embraces
new leaders who could help realize such a future. We
commend President Tshisekedi for the commitments he
and his Government have made and for the first steps
they have taken to curb the Ebola outbreak, address
insecurity in the eastern part of the country and fight
corruption. Only concrete action can prove to the
Congolese people that this Government represents the
change they voted for.
We commend the efforts of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
and non-governmental organizations to fight Ebola,
especially the unique support and capabilities provided
by the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO). As the largest single-country donor to
the response, the United States is deeply committed
to global health. Still, we urge others to contribute
generously to the latest strategic response plan, which
calls for $376 million in donor funding.
While the Government has rightly focused on the
chronic insecurity in the east of the country, we remain
deeply concerned about the human rights abuses in the
region by armed groups and local militias. We are also
alarmed at the continued reports of attacks by those
groups across North Kivu, as well as the resurgence of
violence in South Kivu. We acknowledge MONUSCO’s
efforts amid the unrest to increase security through
an intensified troop presence as well as its support
of reconciliation efforts in the east. While an end to
violence is a necessary condition for peace, it is no
guarantee. We therefore urge the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the President
to work closely with the Mission and provincial
authorities to establish a long-term plan for justice
and reconciliation, one that addresses long-standing
grievances and structures that permit violence.
We also expect to see the Government reform its
security sector, including by improving standards in
the national police and armed forces, holding violators
of human rights to account, and demobilizing and
disarming willing armed groups and reintegrating them
into civilian life. In the east, provincial authorities
have already created an investigation commission
and two intercommunal dialogues with MONUSCO’s

19-308077/12

S/PV.8638

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

09/10/2019

support. These are small but commendable steps. We
similarly recognize the President’s recent overtures to
his neighbours in the Great Lakes region, and we hope
those meetings will yield a new pattern of good-faith
dialogue aimed at lasting regional peace.

Democratic Republic of the Congo in late August and
early September, which showed his support for the
country. Nevertheless, challenges remain, including the
dire situation in Kivu and Ituri provinces. To that end,
I would like to focus on a few points.

The stability of democratic institutions depends on
citizens being able to trust their elected officials. We
are therefore encouraged by the recent efforts of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to fight corruption, including a pledge to pass new
legislation to address impunity and ratify the African
Union’s Convention on Preventing and Combating
Corruption. The United States strongly supports those
efforts, including through its own bilateral programmes.
Because we understand that good governance is
essential for a society to flourish, and because we want
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to flourish,
the United States is launching a new anti-corruption
programme in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in support of our bilateral partnership initiated during
President Tshisekedi’s visit to Washington.

First, regional cooperation remains key to
addressing the threat posed by foreign armed groups.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo, like other
countries in the Great Lakes region, has been marred
by conflict and humanitarian difficulties for years. The
root causes of those problems should be addressed. We
welcome the steps that President Tshisekedi has taken
to strengthen relations with neighbouring countries and
that led to a confidence-building meeting in Kinshasa.
We also encourage the signatories to the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region to honour their
respective commitments under it and to work together to
promote lasting peace and sustainable development in
the region. It is time to place the needs of the Congolese
people above the pursuit of partisan interests.

We also look forward to seeing the MONUSCO
strategic review later this month. We expect to receive
the full text of the review in accordance with the
commitments made by the Secretariat. We also welcome
any additional documents that the Secretariat would
like to provide, though we recognize that the report
will not oblige the United Nations or Security Council
members to take any particular course of action.

Secondly, the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should be addressed
as a matter of urgency. While progress is being made
on the political front, it is disheartening that lives
are still being lost to violence and disease. Since
1 June, at least 197 civilians have been killed in Ituri
and at least 230,000 people displaced. Cooperation
between the armed forces of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) is important to the prevention of
further violence.

It is ultimately the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that has the power to deliver
resources and security to its citizens, and just as the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo marked
their ballots in favour of change, the new Government
has a vote of its own to cast — a vote against corruption
and violence and, most importantly, a vote for a better
future for the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We urge the Government to make the choice
that is best for all whom it represents.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, I would like
to join others in thanking Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui for her briefing.
We welcome the progress that has been made in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including the
establishment of a new coalition Government. We
join the Secretary-General in welcoming this sense
of hope across the country, as mentioned in his latest
report (S/2019/776). We also commend his visit to the
8/12

The current Ebola crisis in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is now the second-largest outbreak on
record, with 3,050 confirmed cases and 2,100 deaths
since August 2018. Measles, malaria and cholera
continue to claim lives and must be addressed with equal
urgency. We welcome the international conference
on public health to be hosted by the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo next month in
Goma. It will mobilize the international community
to provide sustainable development and humanitarian
assistance to the people of the country who are in need.
The Council and the wider membership of the United
Nations should unite and rally behind those efforts.
Thirdly, support for MONUSCO should be
prioritized. As the Special Representative of the
19-30807

09/10/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Secretary-General reports, and as is evident from the
report, MONUSCO’s role in the country is crucial and
critical. That is why support for MONUSCO is now
needed more than ever. The current financial situation
at the United Nations should be managed so that it will
not impair MONUSCO’s ability to fulfil its mandate.
Mandates and resources should work together, and
a commitment to a peacekeeping budget should be
followed by the realization of that commitment. For its
part, Indonesia is continuing its support as one of the
countries contributing the largest numbers of troops
to MONUSCO, amounting at the moment to 1,044
personnel, including 28 women peacekeepers, and an
850 person-strong rapidly deployable battalion. Our
peacekeepers continue to engage with the communities
in fulfilling their mandates.
In conclusion, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo needs our help, and we will continue to work
with the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as a friend and true partner, to ensure lasting
peace in their country.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of South Africa.
South Africa joins other delegations in thanking
the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for her briefing on
the activities of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO). My delegation recognizes and
commends the fundamental role played by MONUSCO
in addressing the perennial instability in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
protecting civilians. South Africa commends the role
and leadership displayed by Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Zerrougui with regard to
the critical issues in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in ensuring that MONUSCO discharges
its mandate effectively. Today I will focus on two key
issues — improving the political climate and the state
of affairs in the eastern part of the country.
With respect to the political situation, South
Africa welcomes the formation of the new coalition
Government in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
precisely because of the consensus approach to its
formation and the fact that the distribution of ministries
between the two main political platforms is in line
with the undertakings made in July. We especially
welcome the emphasis on promoting the role of women

S/PV. 8638

in politics in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as
their representation has increased to 17 per cent from
10 per cent.
Since the publication of the last report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/575), we have continued to
observe a positive trend in President Félix Tshisekedi’s
implementation of his strategic approach to conflict
resolution and peacebuilding in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region. The trust and
confidence-building initiatives with neighbouring
countries demonstrate his personal commitment to fully
implementing the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Region. Those positive developments,
supported by relative stability in the western part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, are giving impetus
to the resolution of other peace and security issues in
the region.
With regard to the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, a complex military and
humanitarian situation persists. As members may recall,
the Security Council was briefed on the Great Lakes
region last week (see S/PV.8630). As one of the countries
concerned, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
shared its concerns about the presence and activities
of armed groups and about intercommunal clashes and
the Ebola epidemic, concerns that are shared by the
Southern African Development Community (SADC).
However, we are encouraged by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s strategy aimed at addressing its
peace and security challenges, which includes capacitybuilding for the defence and security services as well as
the creation of national forums aimed at promoting the
peaceful coexistence of local communities, with a view
to bolstering national cohesion.
South Africa shares the concerns raised by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2019/776) about
the Ebola virus outbreak and its potential impact on
the region. The regional and international response
efforts continue to be hindered by insufficient funding
and poor access to the conflict areas, as well as low
levels of cooperation between the community and
the Government. Cholera and measles outbreaks are
further compounding the already fragile humanitarian
situation and weak health systems. My delegation is
also concerned about the attacks by armed groups on
Ebola treatment centres and staff, which we condemn.
Against that backdrop, we welcome the launch of
an African Union (AU) mission against Ebola in the

19-308079/12

S/PV.8638

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Democratic Republic of the Congo, demonstrating the
willingness of African countries to work together to
address an important health concern. We also welcome
the continued work of the United Nations Emergency
Ebola Response Coordinator and the World Health
Organization in support of national efforts.
In regard to the general security and humanitarian
situation, my delegation recognizes the vital role played
by MONUSCO, in collaboration with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s authorities, in addressing the
security challenges in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We also recognize the efforts of
the Force Intervention Brigade in addressing the threat
posed by armed groups, as well as the work done through
the good offices of Ms. Zerrougui in meeting with
key stakeholders to discuss opportunities to support
institutional reform and the ongoing Ebola response.
Going forward, one of the key areas of focus for the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is the importance of ensuring the implementation
of effective disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and security-sector reform programmes
and of establishing Government authority in areas
liberated from negative forces. That is especially
important given the progress registered in areas such
as Ituri with regard to the signing of a peace agreement
and willingness to demobilize armed combatants. South
Africa therefore looks forward to the outcomes of the
Secretary-General’s independent strategic review of
MONUSCO. Ultimately, however, we believe that any
adjustment of MONUSCO’s mandate should be based
on developments on the ground.
South Africa supports SADC’s continued commitment
to assisting the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
achieving sustainable peace, security and stability. The
communiqué issued after the thirty-ninth Ordinary
Summit of the Heads of State and Government of
SADC, held in August, highlights the concerns about the
security situation in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, on the basis of which SADC
agreed to collaborate with the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region in consolidating efforts for
security stabilization in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region. We are also encouraged by the
cooperation between the AU and the United Nations,
by which they have undertaken to continue to engage in
support of the consolidation of stability and democratic
governance in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
10/12

09/10/2019

In our opinion, the international community,
including the Council, has continued to witness
a positive trajectory in the developments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo since the peaceful
transfer of power in early 2019. To build on the current
momentum, the country will need genuine support
from bilateral, regional and international partners in
implementing its Government programmes, which
focus on political, security and socioeconomic efforts.
We are of the firm view that it is imperative for the
international community, working through SADC,
the AU, the United Nations and regional partners, to
continue to maintain solidarity with the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and provide the
necessary political, financial and other support in an
effort to ensure that there is no reversal of the gains
made so far.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): My delegation
would once again like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo only a few days after last week’s meeting
on the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of Congo and the Great Lakes region (see S/PV.8630).
We would also like to thank all the members
of the Security Council for their comments and
views on the situation prevailing in my country. My
delegation is particularly grateful to Secretary-General
António Guterres for the report under the Council’s
consideration (S/2019/776) and for his commitment
and personal involvement in seeking ways and means
to strengthen peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
We would like to express our same gratitude to
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO), who has just presented
the report to us. Kindly allow my delegation to make
some comments and observations on the report,
which will focus on the political, security, social and
humanitarian situations.
19-30807

09/10/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

As the report under consideration points out,
after His Excellency Mr. Félix Antoine Tshilombo
Tshisekedi, President of the Republic, took office,
the political situation was successively marked by the
establishment of the National Assembly, followed a few
months later by that of the Senate before the President
of the Republic appointed the coalition Government,
led by Prime Minister Sylvestre Ilunga Ilunkamba. In
the same vein, provincial authorities have been set up
and are functioning. It is important to note here that
this stage was completed with the settlement of the
various electoral disputes by the Constitutional Court.
As we pointed out in our statement before the
Council on 3 October (see S/PV.8630), during this
period the President of the Republic engaged in intense
diplomatic activity, which took him to several countries
of the region with a view to reaffirming his country’s
ongoing commitment to good-neighbourly relations and
peaceful coexistence, while respecting the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of other States. In addition
to the summits organized with his peers in Kinshasa
and Luanda, he therefore also participated in meetings
of the African Union in Niamey and of the Southern
African Development Community in Dar es Salaam.
In that context, mention should also be made of
the working visit that Secretary-General António
Guterres made to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo from 31 August to 2 September at the invitation
of the President of the Republic. The visit enabled the
Congolese authorities to reaffirm their trust in the
United Nations and the Secretary-General to show
solidarity with the Congolese people following the
outbreak of the Ebola virus disease, which has been
raging in the Beni area for nearly a year.
With regard to the security situation, the report
emphasizes the harmful presence of foreign and
national armed groups, which continue to cause
desolation and insecurity in the eastern part of my
country. That situation remains a great concern for the
Head of State, who has made it one of the priorities of
the Government’s programme. In fact, referring to the
situation in his inauguration address, he said:
“The restoration of peace throughout the country
is a priority because the survival of hundreds of
thousands of compatriots, the stability of established
institutions, economic recovery and the climate of
peace with all our neighbours are at stake.“

S/PV. 8638

Referring to the same situation from the United
Nations rostrum during the general debate of the
General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session, the
President of the Republic said the following:
“Today, the greatest challenge facing my
country is ensuring peace, security and stability.
Since our inauguration, convinced of the absolute
necessity of peace, we have unreservedly committed
to achieving that objective, taking into account
its full regional and international dimension.”
(A/74/PV.7)
In accordance with that objective, the Government
remains mobilized and determined to continue the fight
against the negative forces until their total eradication
in order to enable our people in that part of the country,
who have been aspiring to live in peace for a number of
years, to finally see their dream become a reality.
My delegation is pleased to note that, in that struggle,
the Forces armées de la République Démocratique
du Congo (FARDC) and MONUSCO will not only
continue their cooperation but also strengthen it in
order to overcome all armed groups and restore the
long-awaited peace in that part of the country once and
for all.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations also
shares this view. Indeed, speaking of the situation of
insecurity in the east of my country, at the audience
granted to him in Kinshasa by the President of the
Republic after meeting the people of Beni and Butembo,
he made the following observation.
“The first concern is security. I felt a sense of
frustration among the population, including
towards MONUSCO. MONUSCO must cooperate
more with the FARDC to counter the threat posed by
armed groups and the Allied Democratic Forces.“
It is therefore fitting that, referring to the SecretaryGeneral’s talks in Kinshasa with the Congolese
authorities and other figures whom he met, the report
under consideration points out in paragraph 17:
“During my visit to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo from 30 August to 1 September, I had the
opportunity to hold meetings with representatives
of the major political forces, civil society and
institutions of the country, including President
Tshisekedi, the Speaker of the National Assembly,
Jeanine Mabunda, and Prime Minister Ilunga. The
need for MONUSCO and national security forces

19-3080711/12

S/PV.8638

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

to work together more effectively to address the
threat posed by armed groups was an important
conclusion of my meetings.“ (S/2019/776, para. 17).
It is in the same context that the President of the
Republic places the discussions that will continue as
part of the strategic review of MONUSCO. he made his
position clear from the United Nations rostrum:
“I note a convergence of views with the SecretaryGeneral on the urgent need to readjust the
configuration of MONUSCO to the developing
situation on the ground by focusing more on
the operational response capabilities of United
Nations forces alongside the Forces Armées de
la République Démocratique du Congo. In other
words, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
still needs MONUSCO, but a streamlined, wellequipped, robust MONUSCO, with an appropriate
mandate, like the Rapid Intervention Brigade that
once helped rout the Mouvement du 23 mars.”
(A/74/PV.7)
That means that any adaptation of that force must
above all take into account the real needs and priorities
on the ground rather than any other consideration,
particularly financial.
In that regard, the Government, which has just been
formed and whose ambitious programme of actions
includes restoring calm to the country and promoting
reconciliation, cohesion and national unity, as well as
strengthening State authority, among other things will
need MONUSCO to support it in its efforts to maintain
security and to restore State authority in conflict areas
in order to establish lasting peace and stability so as to
put people back to work and promote development.
In addition, it is important to recall that the
President of the Republic’s accession to power has led
to a momentum that has driven the fighters of some
armed groups to lay down their arms. That ongoing
momentum should be encouraged by establishing an
appropriate framework to effectively reintegrate former
combatants into society. That explains the appeal by
the President of the Republic to the Secretary-General,
during his visit to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for consistent financial support to enable the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
of armed groups to be a programme that effectively
promotes the reintegration of former combatants.
As the Security Council knows, the situation in the
eastern part of my country also remains marked by the
12/12

09/10/2019

Ebola virus. Given the gravity of the situation, in May
the President of the Republic set up a technical unit,
comprising international experts, under his supervision.
That unit has developed a new response strategy that is
already producing results. We have to admit, however,
that while efforts have been made to contain the
epidemic, it has not yet been eradicated. Nevertheless,
my delegation would like to reassure the Council
that we will continue to take action to control and
eradicate this epidemic with the support of our various
partners, including the World Health Organization, the
African Union, UNICEF, the World Food Programme
and MONUSCO, among many others. My delegation
would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge
the solidarity that all our partners have shown towards
our country in the fight against Ebola. I also want
to urge the international community to support the
international public-health conference to be held in
Goma in November.
With regard to the humanitarian situation
highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report, and
without wishing to dwell on the subject, I want to say
briefly that this is mainly due to the armed conflicts
recurring in my country and in the region. It is because
of them that we are seeing massive displacements of
people forced to live far from their homes where the
provision of basic needs requires external intervention.
The situation is also due to epidemics and natural
disasters. My Government is requesting the support of
the partners that have always helped to support us in
coping with such circumstances.
I would like to conclude by reiterating the gratitude
of the Government and the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to the United Nations and
the Security Council for their continued efforts and
dedication to my country’s cause. I also want to once
again thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of MONUSCO.
Finally, I wish to acknowledge the peacekeepers of the
United Nations and troop-contributing countries for the
human and material sacrifices they continue to make
for the benefit of my country.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.
19-30807
