S/PV.8153

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8153rd meeting

Tuesday, 9 January 2018, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Umarov. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kazakhstan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Hickey
Ms. French

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2018/16)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-00588 (E)
*1800588*

S/PV.8153

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 9.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2018/16)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/16, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): As is customary at
this time of year, Mr. President, allow me to begin by
wishing you all the best for 2018, welcoming the new
non-permanent members of the Security Council and,
of course, wishing your country, Kazakhstan, all the
best for its presidency for the month of January.

09/01/2018

and Inclusive Political Agreement of 31 December 2016,
which made it possible to defuse political tensions in
the country and chart a course towards the holding of
transparent and credible elections by the end of 2017.
One year later, I regret to inform the Council that
implementation of the agreement has been only partial.
Although non-negligible advances have been made
in preparing the elections in the past year, the acts of
violence that took place during the demonstrations
on 31 December last in Kinshasa and in the country’s
interior are reminders of the fact that the political
situation remains very fragile.
The security situation is also cause for grave
concern. As the Council is aware, United Nations
peacekeepers suffered their heaviest losses in 20 years
when the advance base of the Tanzanian contingent in
Semuliki, North Kivu, was attacked, presumably by
rebels of the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF). The
deaths of those Tanzanian peacekeepers following
several hours of combat underscores, as if we needed
to be reminded, the volatility of the security situation
in certain parts of eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I must also remind the Council that United Nations
civilian personnel are also exposed to security risks in
certain parts of the country. The deaths in March last
year of the two members of the United Nations group
of experts in the Kasai region is a tragic reminder of
the situation.
Given this backdrop, I will focus my statement on the
political and security challenges facing MONUSCO in
the coming months and identify potential ways forward.

I welcome this opportunity to address the Council
once again on the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
(S/2018/16), which has been submitted to the Council,
takes stock of the situation and makes recommendations
on the steps to be taken.

The delays in the electoral process, the legitimacy
crisis of the institutions of the Republic and the lack
of progress towards implementing defusing measures
have led to frustration, impatience and tensions, which
led to acts of violence last December. Let me take
this opportunity to condemn the violent repression
by the national security forces of the demonstrations
organized by civil society on 31 December last. It is
key that the competent national authorities conduct the
necessary investigations to identify the perpetrators
and bring to justice those presumed responsible for
human rights violations.

A year ago the Council met (see S/PV.7856)
to welcome with great hope the signing, under the
auspices of the national Episcopal Conference of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Comprehensive

I also deplore the fact that the national security
forces created obstacles for the MONUSCO troops who
were patrolling on 31 December. Activities related to the
monitoring of the political, security and human rights

2/15

18-00588

09/01/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

situation are part and parcel of MONUSCO’s mandate
and should be fully supported by the authorities.
Given these challenges, it is vital that all sectors
of the Congolese political class refrain from any acts
leading to confrontation or to violence. Dialogue
remains the only way to resolve the political challenges
facing the country.
(spoke in English)
Although political tensions persist, electoral
preparations are advancing. The long-awaited electoral
calendar was published on 5 November 2017, the
amended electoral law was promulgated by the President
on 24 December 2017, and the voter registration process
is expected to conclude in February.
It is essential that all political actors play a
constructive role in the implementation of the electoral
calendar. The Government, the ruling majority, the
opposition and civil society, and the Independent
National Electoral Commission must all play their part
in in ensuring that electoral preparations proceed in a
timely fashion.
It is imperative that the political leaders of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo adhere to the
Constitution, the 31 December 2016 Political Agreement
and the electoral calendar, which together provide the
political and legal framework for the holding of free, fair
and credible elections, leading to a peaceful transition
of power and the consolidation of the country’s
democratic institutions. Political brinkmanship and
a refusal to compromise would only result in further
delays and a deepening of the political crisis.
The concerted support of the Council, key
international partners and regional actors remains key
to advancing the political process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Through his good offices,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Maman Sidikou, working in close collaboration with
Special Envoy Said Djinnit and regional actors, has
worked tirelessly to ensure that the main political
actors in the Democratic Republic of the Congo remain
committed to the 31 December 2016 Political Agreement
despite their many differences. Thanks to their efforts,
the United Nations has strengthened its cooperation
with the African Union, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and the Southern African
Development Community in support of the political
process. It is essential that the region continue to

S/PV. 8153

impress upon the Congolese political leaders the need
to pursue dialogue and place the legitimate aspirations
of the Congolese people above their own interests.
At the same time, it is imperative that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s partners, working
in close collaboration with the Government and the
electoral authorities, provide the necessary political,
financial, logistical and technical support to ensure
the timely holding of credible elections. Further delays
in the electoral process risk not only fuelling political
tensions but also compounding an already fragile
security situation.
In recent months, armed groups in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo have launched
repeated attacks on positions of the Forces armées
de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC),
inflicting losses on the FARDC and capturing, albeit
temporarily, resource-rich territories. These attacks,
mainly involving Mayi-Mayi groups, are taking place
in a context of competition for natural resources and
continued intercommunity violence, often fuelled by
local political actors seeking to take advantage of the
current situation.
The impact on the civilian population has been
severe, with more than 4 million persons internally
displaced as a result of violence and humanitarian
agencies predicting that this figure could rise
significantly this year. It is, however, encouraging to
note that the FARDC is gradually regaining the initiative
against the Mayi-Mayi groups and taking control of
territories previously lost to the armed groups.
MONUSCO remains actively engaged, in line with
its strategic priorities, in the protection of civilians. As
the Council will recall, in late September MONUSCO
acted decisively in support of the FARDC in repelling
an attack by Mayi-Mayi Yakutumba on Uvira, the
second-largest city in South Kivu. The actions of
MONUSCO, which were critical in preventing the
fall of the city, were a tangible demonstration of the
Mission’s readiness to take robust action against armed
groups that pose a threat to the civilian population.
In Beni territory, North Kivu, after being dormant
for months following major operations by the FARDC
and MONUSCO in 2016, the ADF resurfaced in the
summer of 2017, carrying out deadly attacks against
civilians, the FARDC and MONUSCO. The killing
of 15 Tanzanian peacekeepers of MONUSCO’s Force
Intervention Brigade and the wounding of 44 others on

18-005883/15

S/PV.8153

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

09/01/2018

7 December 2017 was the latest in a string of deadly
attacks perpetrated by suspected ADF elements.

police and civilian components to enable protection
through projection.

When I visited Semuliki, shortly after the incident,
I witnessed the particularly difficult terrain in which
the Brigade operates and the violence of the attack
that the assailants carried out against the base. Despite
the heavy losses sustained by the Tanzanian troops, I
was reassured by the Tanzanian authorities in Dar Es
Salaam that they remain committed to addressing the
threat posed by the ADF and other armed groups in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. I wish to
take this opportunity to once again convey my deepest
condolences to the Government and the people of
Tanzania for this tragic loss.

Specifically, preparations are under way for the
deployment of a third rapidly deployable battalion,
which will be operational by next month. We are
reviewing the statement of unit requirements for
rapidly deployable battalions so as to ensure that the
two that will be deployed later this year are lighter and
more flexible. Within the framework of the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation to review United Nations
air assets, MONUSCO has conducted a review to assess
how to obtain air assets that are more suitable for its
operations and enhance their use.

The asymmetric nature of the threat posed by the
ADF requires a combination of military and non-military
means. Neutralizing the ADF will require much closer
regional cooperation, enhanced information-gathering
and analysis, disruption of the political and economic
support networks of the group, strengthened cooperation
among MONUSCO and the national security forces,
and targeted military operations.
As part of the Secretariat’s response to the
Semuliki incident, the Secretary-General has appointed
former Assistant Secretary-General Dmitry Titov to
lead a special investigation into the circumstances
surrounding the Semuliki incident that will provide
recommendations on actions required to address the
ADF threat and enhance the ability of MONUSCO to
address the threat posed by armed groups. Mr. Titov
and his team, which includes senior representatives of
the Tanzanian armed forces, have already begun their
work and will be in the region in the coming days with
a view to presenting their findings to the SecretaryGeneral by the beginning of next month. Naturally, we
look forward to engaging closely with the Council once
the investigation team has completed its work.
Meanwhile, MONUSCO, in line with the
strategic priorities reaffirmed by the Security Council
following the strategic review, has enhanced its
support to the political and electoral processes and
is making the necessary adjustments to its civilian,
police and military components in order to enable a
comprehensive approach to the protection of civilians,
including by monitoring and reporting on the human
rights situation. Efforts are also ongoing to increase the
mobility and flexibility of the force and the Mission’s
4/15

Regarding the Force Intervention Brigade, efforts
are ongoing to train the units in jungle warfare with a
view to responding more effectively to the asymmetric
environment in which they operate. Steps are also
being undertaken to improve information gathering
and analysis.
Regarding the police component, the redeployment
of a Senegalese formed olice unit (FPU) from Goma to
Kinshasa is almost complete, and the unit is expected
to be fully operational by the end of this week. Some
forward bases have been closed, including in the Bunia
area, as the MONUSCO force continues to optimize its
presence on the ground. We are also working on the
review of statement of unit requirements for FPUs to
enable the swift redeployment of FPU elements to other
areas of operations based on the evolution of the situation
on the ground. I look forward to engaging closely with
Council Members and troop- and police-contributing
countries over the coming weeks and months to ensure
that MONUSCO continues to evolve in response to the
challenges on the ground.
On the political and electoral front, I should note
that MONUSCO continues to provide logistical and
technical support to the Electoral Commission for the
voter registration and other electoral activities. As
requested in the electoral calendar, MONUSCO has
submitted to the Electoral Commission its logistical
support plan for the upcoming presidential and national
and provincial legislative elections, which would be a
major undertaking requiring adequate resources.
Before concluding my remarks, I would like to
highlight the importance of the continued support of
Council members and Member States to MONUSCO.
While acknowledging the need to rationalize resources
by making better and more efficient use of available
18-00588

09/01/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

assets, it is vital that MONUSCO be afforded the
necessary means to effectively support the political
process and address the daunting security challenges
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues
to face.
The coming months will be critical in safeguarding
the collective investment made by international, regional
and national actors in stabilizing the Democratic
Republic of the Congo over the past two decades and
in preparing the ground for the consolidation of peace
and stability in the country and the wider region. The
United Nations, through the good offices of the newly
appointed Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, will continue to be fully
committed to working closely with all concerned actors
in achieving this objective.
In conclusion, I would like to thank Maman
Sidikou, who is completing his assignment as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his tireless
efforts in good offices initiatives and in supporting
the promotion of human rights and the protection of
civilians over the past two years.
The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations for his illuminating
briefing. We fully support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/16).
I would like to express, on behalf of France, our
firm condemnation of the violence utilized by the
security forces during the 31 December protests in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which claimed
several victims. France once again calls for respect for
fundamental human rights and freedoms, including
the freedom of expression and the right to information
and peaceful protest, which are essential components
of a democracy. We highlight the need for proportional
use of force in the context of law enforcement. In that
connection, we call on the Congolese authorities to fully
investigate the violence in order to hold its perpetrators
accountable before the law. The Congolese authorities
have already shown that they can be proactive in
fighting impunity, as seen recently in the conviction, in
South Kivu, of 12 individuals for sexual violence.

S/PV. 8153

Credible, transparent and peaceful elections
that ensure a peaceful and democratic transition are
necessary for the stability of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the entire region. In that regard, we
call for the effective holding of elections, as scheduled
in the electoral calendar published on 5 November 2017
and in line the Constitution and the spirit of consensus
that prevailed during the signing of the Comprehensive
and Inclusive political Agreement on 31 December 2016.
We call on the Congolese authorities and Independent
National Electoral Commission to take all necessary
measures, particularly those that would enable the rapid
deployment of a joint team of international experts to
support the electoral process in the Congo.
The 31 December 2016 agreement is more important
than ever, as it is the latest embodiment of Congolese
national consensus. Its full implementation is urgent,
as it contains the key measures to ease tension so as
to enable credible and peaceful elections. As the
Secretary-General points out, no credible electoral
process can take place in a context of repression.
It is therefore essential that all conditions be put in
place so that all candidates can run for office without
obstruction. This is all the more important given that
security and humanitarian situation remains troubling,
as Under-Secretary-General Lacroix noted, and that the
blocking of the political process would only exacerbate
the instability that threatens the region.
The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) is carrying out remarkable work in
this difficult context, and I commend the Mission’s
reconfiguration efforts in order to adapt to the security
situation and to the priorities of the mandate. MONUSCO
is facing significant challenges, such as the attack in
Semuliki. On behalf of France, I once again express our
condolences and our solidarity with Tanzania following
the tragedy that beset those Blue Helmets. That
incident makes it all the more important to reaffirm our
support for MONUSCO and its development. France is
encouraged, in that connection, by the clear guidelines
set in place, and I warmly commend the exceptional
work of Mr. Maman Sedikou. We also extend our full
support to his successor, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, with
whom we have worked closely in her previous position
and who we trust completely.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): Côte d’Ivoire commends Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping

18-005885/15

S/PV.8153

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Operations, for his exceptional briefing on the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that
connection, I would like to comment on two key issues
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo: the current
electoral process and the security situation.
With regard to the electoral process, my delegation
welcomes the publishing on 5 November, by the
Independent National Electoral Commission, of the
electoral calendar, thus setting the holding of general
presidential, legislative and provincial elections for
23 December 2018 in order to help the country emerge
from this ongoing and protracted sociopolitical crisis.
To that end, Côte d’Ivoire believes that it is now up to all
stakeholders in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and in particular the Commission, to do their utmost
to ensure adherence to the set date of 23 December
2018 for the holding of general elections, in accordance
with the commitments they freely entered into under
the Comprehensive and Inclusive Political Agreement
of 31 December 2016. All Congolese parties must, in
a spirit of peace and mutual trust, work towards the
establishment of conditions conducive to the holding
of peaceful, credible and democratic elections by
23 December 2018. In that regard, my delegation remains
concerned about recent demonstrations that resulted in
loss of life, major material damage and numerous arrests
of demonstrators. Côte d’Ivoire calls on the Congolese
Government to take all the appropriate measures to
calm the situation and defuse the sociopolitical climate.
We also call on all political actors to exercise restraint
and avoid violent demonstrations.
My delegation welcomes the unity among Council
members on this political track and the tireless efforts
of the Organization to enhance synergy in the efforts
of the United Nations and international and regional
organizations — in particular the African Union, the
European Union, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, the International Organization of
La Francophonie and the Southern African Development
Community — with a view to a speedy resolution of
the crisis.
With regard to the security situation, Côte d’Ivoire
expresses its concern about the growing insecurity in
the context of widespread human rights violations,
fuelled mainly by the proliferation of armed groups in
the east of the country, especially in North Kivu and
South Kivu, as well as in the west, specifically in the
Kasai region. Attacks by such groups led to the deaths
of 15 Tanzanian peacekeepers on 7 December 2017.
6/15

09/01/2018

Côte d’Ivoire once again expresses its condolences to
the Republic of Tanzania for the deaths of those soldiers
and pays tribute to their memory. My country condemns
this deadly attack and, as Chair of the Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations, looks forward to the
results of the investigation aimed at determining the
exact circumstances of this tragedy and to taking
appropriate measures so that such tragedies are not
repeated in future.
It goes without saying that the existence of such
armed groups poses a serious threat to stability
throughout the region and to the overall process for
ending the crisis. Taking appropriate measures to
deter those groups must therefore be a priority of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
in addition to its efforts to support the political process.
In my delegation’s view, those are the considerations
to be taken into account when it comes to renewing
MONUSCO’s mandate, which is scheduled for March.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
warmly congratulate Mr. Maman Sidikou, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and outgoing Head
of MONUSCO, for the quality of the work he has
carried out in an extremely difficult environment, as
well as to congratulate Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, on her
appointment to replace Mr. Sidikou. We wish her every
success in her new duties.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me, first of all, to express the
gratitude of the delegation of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea to Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations Jean-Pierre Lacroix and his team for their
comprehensive and detailed briefing this morning
on the situation and recent developments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the work of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). I
would also like to thank the Permanent Representative
of Côte d’Ivoire, Ambassador Bernard TanohBoutchoue, for his outstanding presentation as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. His contributions help us to
better understand the situation in the country.
18-00588

09/01/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

We in Equatorial Guinea have always closely
followed events taking place in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and all the more so now as a
member of the Security Council, because it is a brother
country whose problems we cannot stand by and watch
indifferently and because we experience its problems
almost as if they were ours. I therefore want to express
Equatorial Guinea’s full commitment to, and support
for, bringing about stability and peace in that country.
The delegation of Equatorial Guinea believes that
the different political and social actors in the country
should understand that the only possible way to overcome
the current complex situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is through a transparent, frank
and inclusive dialogue carried out in good faith. The
need for the different actors to understand one another
flows from the enormous responsibility they have to
lead the country to credible and transparent elections
and to avoid unnecessary delays, which generally lead
to more tension and violence. All of the country’s
groups must join the process of political dialogue with
a positive attitude and make their due contributions,
which in practice means honouring the agreements
signed by the Congolese parties on 18 October and
31 December 2016 on organizing peaceful, credible and
transparent elections, in order to pave the way towards
a peaceful solution to the political crisis in the country.
In that regard, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must play a leading and catalytic
role in the legislative and logistical aspects, especially
when it comes to supporting the Independent National
Electoral Commission so that it can conclude all its
preparatory work before the elections, despite the
challenges it faces.
The President of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea, Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, in his speech
on 29 January 2016 on the occasion of the twentysixth Summit of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union in Addis Ababa, said:
“At present, nobody can deny that our security
is facing a global terrorist threat and the risks it
represents for our societies, as well as the conflicts
suffered by certain brother countries. This situation
requires our collective mobilization, as well as
mutual collaboration and close consultation.”
International cooperation is the only way to be able
to effectively confront a threat that can no longer be
responded to from an exclusively national perspective.

S/PV. 8153

In that regard, Equatorial Guinea is convinced
that the contribution of various international bodies,
including the United Nations, in close cooperation with
the European Union, the African Union, the countries
of the region, the Southern African Development
Community, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the Economic Community of Central
African States, is essential in the search for a lasting
solution to the political situation in the country. To the
same end, Equatorial Guinea would like to echo the
call made by the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union for the establishment of a coordination
mechanism that would include all actors with a view
to ensuring effective and coherent support to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Despite the significant progress made in the country
in recent years with the stabilization of many regions,
which we must certainly welcome, the humanitarian
and security situation in the east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains worrying, with
persistent abuses and violations of the political and civil
rights of the civilian population, prevailing impunity,
and illegal exploitation of resources by militias and
other various armed groups still active in the area. In
that regard, Equatorial Guinea calls for ensuring the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, signed on 24 February 2013 in Addis
Ababa, and that its signatories and guarantors take the
necessary steps and redouble their efforts to guarantee
its full and effective implementation, for which the
neutralization of armed groups operating in the east
of the country is paramount. The constant incidents of
violence and human rights violations must cease, and
those responsible for them must be brought to justice.
Finally, I would like to express the deepest
condolences of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
to the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Secretary-General and Tanzania on the deaths
of 15 of that country’s peacekeepers. We commend
MONUSCO and support its commendable and tireless
efforts to promote peace, security and stability in this
brotherly country despite the challenges it faces and the
sacrifices and losses it has suffered, and not always in a
favourable environment. From this Chamber, we would
like to encourage the Mission to continue to support the
authorities and institutions of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in its stabilization and consolidation efforts

18-005887/15

S/PV.8153

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

in the country, while at the same time we recommend
strengthening the Mission so that it can face the great
challenges that will arise throughout 2018, until the
holding of the presidential, legislative and provincial
elections on 23 December.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his briefing. We also welcome the
appointment of Ms. Leila Zerrougui as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). We
are confident that her experience, technical knowledge
and leadership will be of great value to the Mission. We
would also like to thank Mr. Maman Sidikou for his
services as Head of MONUSCO.
We reiterate our concern about the unrelenting
environment of violence and serious insecurity. We
also regret that conflict is focused on disputes over
access to natural resources, clashes between armed
groups, intercommunity tensions and ethnic violence.
We strongly condemn such occurrences, including the
violent acts that took place during the 31 December
protests and, in particular, the threats being made by
armed groups in different areas of the country that have
led to the continued deterioration of the humanitarian
situation, as mentioned in the most recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/16). The report highlights
the fact that more than 4 million people were internally
displaced, including nearly 900,000 women and more
than 2 million children. Also, in recent years, more
than 620,000 Congolese sought refuge in neighbouring
countries, 100,000 of them in 2017. Approximately
8 million people face severe food insecurity, which
represents a 30 per cent increase over the same period
last year. An estimated 13 million people will need
protection and humanitarian assistance this year, a 50
percent increase over 2017.
We commend the efforts of humanitarian partners
and encourage them to continue their work. We also
urgently call on the international community and donor
countries to pay special attention to this situation,
which is now a level 3 emergency, the highest level of
emergency identified by the United Nations Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
Bolivia supports the Special Representative’s
initiatives and good offices with regard to the
8/15

09/01/2018

implementation of the Comprehensive and Inclusive
Political Agreement of 31 December 2016, in
particular its impact on the implementation of
the confidence-building measures enshrined in
the Agreement and its efforts to create a positive
atmosphere for the holding of peaceful and credible
elections. We also highlight MONUSCO’s work on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, as
well as the repatriation, resettlement and reintegration
of members of the various insurgent groups, both
Congolese and foreign, operating in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
We commend the intensification of the Mission’s
efforts to provide security to civilians through its earlywarning system, the reinforcement of its troops for its
projection strategy and by intensifying its presence
at the Semuliki base following the terrible attack on
peacekeepers on 7 December 2017. Bolivia associates
itself with the words expressed by various members of
the Security Council. We express not only our sorrow
and condolences, but also our solidarity with the families
of the Blue Helmets who died in those circumstances.
Similarly, we offer our support for local conflictresolution mechanisms that promote peaceful
coexistence between communities and joint monitoring
with the authorities regarding the spread of insurgent
groups in mining areas in the province of Maniema,
among other initiatives. We also encourage the Mission
to continue all these and other initiatives for peace
and stability in the region, in coordination with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its armed forces, in accordance with its mandate.
Bolivia welcomes the publication of the electoral
calendar by the Independent National Electoral
Commission on 5 November. We highlight the progress
made by that body with respect to voter registration and
call upon it to adhere to the timeline and to complete
the voter registration. The 31 December Agreement
must be respected and supported by all actors for the
effective conduct of peaceful, credible, inclusive and
timely elections leading to a peaceful transfer of power.
We urge the signatories of the Agreement to implement
the confidence-building measures enshrined in the
document. With this understanding, Bolivia takes
note of the prompt adoption of laws in Parliament to
revise electoral regulations and allocate a budget for
the elections.
18-00588

09/01/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

We commend the consensus of the region for the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework as well as the efforts of the Southern
African Development Community and the African
Union Peace and Security Council to provide the
Independent National Electoral Commission with the
necessary resources for the implementation of the
31 December Agreement. We welcome the meeting held
on 9 December among the Presidents of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Angola and the Republic of
the Congo, in which a communiqué was issued calling
on political actors to safeguard peace and work for
peaceful elections. Similarly, we believe that the joint
work of the Head of MONUSCO and the Special Envoy
for the Great Lakes Region in preparing the elections,
as well as their outreach to national political actors and
Government authorities, will be crucial in garnering
regional and subregional support.
Finally, the principles of preventive diplomacy and
good offices aimed at a negotiated political solution
should not be overlooked, while the Congolese people
and institutions should take the decisions regarding the
future of their country. We must support their decisions
on their sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity in order to achieve peace, stability and
development in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands) (spoke
in French): The Kingdom of the Netherlands thanks
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing. The
picture that he describes is bleak.
A year ago, faced with the threat of a crisis in the
Kasai region and in eastern Congo, the New Year’s Eve
agreement brought about a glimmer of hope. Today
the challenge is to revive hope for a way out of the
crisis. At a time when the Security Council will soon
have to consider the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
three aspects have priority: the political climate, the
protection of the civilian population and the serious
humanitarian crisis.
With regard to the first aspect, on the political
climate, we welcome the publication of the electoral
calendar and the concrete measures taken with regard
to holding the elections. Congolese citizens hope to
have an opportunity to express themselves at the polls
in 2018. However, that hope is continually threatened.
Following the violent incidents of 31 December 2017,

S/PV. 8153

the African Union and the European Union called for
respect for the fundamental rights and freedoms of the
Congolese people, for when peaceful political protests
are met with the use of lethal force and when religious
services are interrupted by tear gas, the goal of free and
fair elections becomes a mirage.
We wish to express our strong condemnation of the
violence committed by the security forces, and we call
for respect for human rights. The failure to implement
the agreed confidence-building measures undermines
the credibility of the electoral process. It is essential
to put an immediate end to the harassment of civil
society. All parties to the New Year’s Eve agreement
must reaffirm their commitment to the spirit of that
agreement and to the electoral calendar, which is the
only viable solution to that toxic political climate.
The second aspect is the protection of the civilian
population. The Kingdom of the Netherlands supports
the establishment of a special investigation into the
recent attacks on peacekeepers in North Kivu. I take
this opportunity to reiterate our condolences over the
deaths of the MONUSCO peacekeepers. The special
investigation will make it possible to assess the level of
overall readiness and response of MONUSCO, as well
as to identify and to prosecute the perpetrators. More
generally, in the context of the strategic review, the
Security Council should consider how to ensure that
the reform of MONUSCO strengthens its capacity to
protect civilians.
With regard to the third aspect, on the humanitarian
crisis, the suffering of the Congolese people has reached
unimaginable levels. The Inter-Agency Standing
Committee has classified the new conflict as a level
3 emergency. Approximately 7.7 million people face
a severe food shortage, and nearly 2 million children
suffer from malnutrition, which will affect them for life.
The famine in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
man-made — civilians must be protected from it. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands advocates an integrated
approach that includes humanitarian aid.
In conclusion, the current crisis is enormous. The
Security Council cannot resolve it alone. It must listen to
the countries and organizations of the region, promote
their involvement and engage with them. While those
countries and organizations are affected by the crisis,
they also have the means and the duty to mobilize the
political will for peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

18-005889/15

S/PV.8153

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

All the that requires unwavering determination
and tremendous efforts, as demonstrated by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. At the end of
his term, we would like to thank Mr. Sidikou for his
outstanding work at the Head of MONUSCO, which
today is the largest peacekeeping operation. We extend
our full support to Ms. Leila Zerrougui, who succeeds
him, and we are committed to working with her for
peace and stability for the Congolese people.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): First of all, let me thank
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his informative briefing.
Let me also take this opportunity to express my deep
appreciation for the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and its personnel for their
involvement in the stabilization and peace process.
Poland strongly condemns the latest attacks on
MONUSCO personnel. I would like to offer our sincere
condolences to the families of the victims and to the
authorities of Tanzania.
We are very concerned about the recent
developments in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We would like to underline that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must comply with
its international obligations and protect the rights to
free assembly and freedom of speech. It is crucial to
guarantee democratic space for all actors involved.
We take note of the long-awaited announcement by
the Independent National Electoral Commission of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo of the electoral
calendar. It is important to ensure that the election is
held on 23 December, since it is crucial to avoid further
tensions and the possible escalation of violence in the
country. The activities of the Electoral Commission
must be credible, as they constitute the basis for fair
elections. We would like to emphasize the importance
of the voter registration process and encourage women
to take part in it.
Poland encourages further political dialogue
among all parties in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We also express our full support for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as for
MONUSCO. We believe that regional organizations
can play a constructive role in the process of the
stabilization of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix for his briefing this morning. I would
10/15

09/01/2018

first like to acknowledge and very much welcome the
appointment of Ms. Leila Zerrougui as the new Special
Representative. Of course, we acknowledge and greatly
appreciate the services of Mr. Maman Sidikou.
Since our previous meeting (see S/PV.8067), the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has clearly continued to evolve — the establishment
of an electoral calendar, the election date set for
23 December, peaceful protests on New Year’s Eve,
met with repression and deadly violence, and the
deadly attack of 7 December on the base in Semuliki,
North Kivu, against the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO).
With the worsening overall security situation
throughout the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
particular in the east, surging humanitarian needs and
a political fragility, the key to changing that trajectory
is a democratic transition of power and the creation of
tolerant political space, based on the holding of credible,
transparent, inclusive and peaceful elections in the
spirit of the agreement of 31 December 2017. Important
building blocks for the elections — the calendar and
the electoral law, as well as a budget — are now in
place. The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the opposition and other key stakeholders
now need to contribute constructively to make sure that
the elections are held on 23 December of this year. The
international community has a role to play in supporting
those efforts. Dialogue and coordination with the region
will remain key, and we strongly support an active role
of the guarantors.
The Security Council should also continue to
follow the situation. For the elections to be credible, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
urgently needs to implement the confidence-building
measures agreed upon in the 31 December agreement.
In that regard, we remain deeply concerned about the
continued and recent reports of violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms, including those of
assembly, speech and peaceful protest. The violent
response to the events of New Year’s Eve represents an
unacceptable example of the lack of respect for human
rights regarding which there can be no impunity for
those responsible.
Ensuring women’s full and equal participation
in elections is also essential for a credible electoral
process, including their safe access to polling stations.
18-00588

09/01/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

We appreciate efforts to increase women’s voter
registration in the Kasai region. MONUSCO will
continue to play a vital role in supporting the electoral
process and in contributing to the protection of
civilians. I take this opportunity to express our deepest
condolences, of course, to Tanzania and MONUSCO
for the losses resulting from the horrendous attack on
7 December.
Lastly, with regard to the continuing deteriorating
humanitarian situation that others have also raised,
the lack of resilience among the Congolese population
makes it extremely vulnerable to conflict. In 2017,
more people were forced to flee their homes in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo than in any other
country in the world. We, Sweden, are proud to be
the third largest bilateral humanitarian donor, but we
are deeply concerned about the record-low levels of
funding to the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s
humanitarian appeal. I would therefore like to take
this opportunity to encourage all countries to consider
additional funding to that appeal.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his informative
briefing. We also welcome Ms. Leila Zerrougui of
Algeria as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), and pay tribute to Mr. Sidikou.
As this is the first time that we are taking the floor
to speak on the subject of MONUSCO, we would first
like to condemn in the strongest terms the attack on
the Blue Helmets of MONUSCO in December, which
led to the deaths of 15 peacekeepers and wounding
of 44 others. The safety of MONUSCO personnel is
absolutely essential to fulfilling its responsibilities,
without which it would be unable to protect civilians.
We therefore resolutely support the decisions adopted
by the Secretariat to implement a plan of action, as well
as the investigations led by Mr. Dmitry Titov, Assistant
Secretary-General for Rule of Law and Security
Institutions in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. We also look forward to the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s cooperation
in ensuring that those responsible are prosecuted
and convicted.
Secondly, concerning the political process, we
reiterate the importance of maintaining the date of

S/PV. 8153

23 December for the holding of elections, but we
also underscore that it is very important that there be
no further delays and to ensure that the process be
transparent and fair so that it will be acceptable to all
stakeholders. The events of late last year demonstrate
that the need to maintain the support and participation of
the international community to ensure calm conditions
allowing for the appropriate transition of power at the
end of this year continues to be very important.
Thirdly, from the perspective of sustainable
peace, like our colleagues who spoke before us we
stress the gravity of the ongoing humanitarian crisis,
which is primarily affecting children. The support of
the international community and donors is needed to
deal with the situation currently faced throughout the
Congo. We also draw attention to the consequences of
increasing political instability and the deteriorating
economic situation, which is reflected in the rate of
inflation affecting those most vulnerable. We believe
that it is therefore very important to ensure that we
decrease poverty and inequalities in a country that is
facing many challenges in that regard.
Lastly, we emphasize the role that women and
children can play in the political process currently
taking place in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and we will support all efforts of MONUSCO aimed at
involving them more substantially in that process.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, and like others who have spoken before me,
I thank Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing today.
We highly commend the pivotal and important role
played by the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) in fulfilling its mandate in the unstable
security situation prevailing in the country.
We also strongly condemn the repeated attacks
on the Mission, the latest of which took place in
December and was generally the worst of its kind
against peacekeeping operations over the past 25 years.
It resulted in the killing of 15 Tanzanian peacekeepers,
concerning whom we express our condolences to the
Government and the people of Tanzania, the families
of the victims, and the United Nations. Because such
attacks have occurred in the past, we call on the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
pursue and prosecute their perpetrators. We commend

18-0058811/15

S/PV.8153

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the Secretary-General’s appointment of Mr. Titov to
lead the investigation into the attack.
We followed with concern the protests that took
place late last year and coincided with the date set
for elections in the 31 December agreement, which
stipulates the holding of presidential elections at the
end of 2017, which unfortunately did not take place.
Following the publication of the new electoral calendar
by the Independent National Electoral Commission,
in which the elections were formally delayed until
23 December 2018, opposition forces and their leaders,
along with many civil society organizations, renewed
their calls for demonstrations against the Government,
which unfortunately led to casualties and more than
140 arrests.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, we
also express our concern with regard to the facts and
statistics contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/16) and the Under-Secretary-General’s
briefing in connection with displaced persons. The
Under-Secretary-General stated that those numbers
may increase, which would affect the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and neighbouring States. In
that regard, we commend the work of MONUSCO in
protecting and faciliating support for civilians, as well
as the role of regional organizations working in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo: the African Union,
the European Union, the Southern African Development
Community and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region. We pay tribute to their work to
ensuring stability and security in the country.
As Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, I sincerely thank Ambassador
Aboulatta, Permanent Representative of Egypt and
former Chair of the Committee, for developing its
working methods, following up diligently on the
political and security situation in the country, and
supporting the Group of Experts in fulfilling its
mandate, including following up on the investigation
into the attack against the two members of the group,
Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalán, in March 2017. We
also commend the steps taken by the Secretary-General
in November to establish a United Nations panel of
inquiry to investigate the killing of the two experts,
and hope that the arrest of all perpetrators will be
effectuated as soon as possible.
12/15

09/01/2018

Lastly, we congratulate the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, on her appointment as Head of MONUSCO,
and thank her predecessor, Mr. Maman Sidikou, for his
efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of January. We are
honoured to see the friendly country of Kazakhstan
presiding over the deliberations of the Council today. I
would like to thank you for taking my country’s situation
seriously and including it in your programme of work
for this month, thereby giving us an opportunity to
express our point of view on the issues under discussion.
I would also like to take this opportunity to once again
thank the Council on behalf of the Government and the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the
untiring efforts of the United Nations to find solutions
to the conflict that has prevailed in the eastern part of
our country for several years.
We have thoroughly studied the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2018/16) on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), which Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
has just briefed us on. While we are grateful for his
presentation, we believe that we can usefully improve
the Council’s understanding with some explanations on
various points brought up in the report. In order to do
that, we will touch on the political situation, the steps
being taken to lessen political tensions, the security
situation and, very briefly, on the strategic dialogue.
With regard to the political situation, during the
last three months of 2017 the attention of every political
stakeholder in our country was once again focused on
the electoral process. As we mentioned in October (see
S/PV.8067), the work of updating the electoral register,
which had entered its last phase with the enrolment of
voters in Kasai and Kasai Central provinces, as well as
in the Luilu and Kamiji territories of Lomami province,
will end this month. As of today, the registered voters
number 45,810,308, of whom 24,095,030 are men and
21,715,278 women. It is important to note that the work
of updating the electoral roll was entirely financed by
the Government at a cost of $400,821,569.
18-00588

09/01/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

As the Council can see, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo authorities are determined to see that
elections are held. On 31 December, President Joseph
Kabila Kabange emphasized in an address to the
nation that
“today’s adoption and promulgation of the Election
Act, the registration of the electoral rolls and the
subsequent distribution of seats and establishment
of polling stations, in accordance with the electoral
calendar published by the Independent National
Electoral Commission, will lead us ineluctably to
the holding of elections”.
All of the active stakeholders in the country, especially
the candidates, must work together to respect the
established timetable. After the publication of the
calendar, which, as we all know, fixed 23 December 2018
as the date for the elections, that part of the opposition
that still resists compromise and everything that is
being done to complete the process in an atmosphere of
calm has continued to make waves.
The Council will undoubtedly agree with me
that while we await the elections scheduled for
23 December 2018, the attitude we need from the
political stakeholders and our citizens generally is a
willingness to do everything possible to ensure that we
are well prepared for these deadlines in an atmosphere
of calm. It is therefore not helpful to be dealing with the
agitation and protests that gave rise to the events of the
kind that we experienced on 31 December organized
by the Secular Coordination Committee, which is part
of the Catholic Church, and supported by a fringe
opposition that has rejected all compromise since the
process began. The truth is that while agitating for
elections, this fringe opposition does not actually seem
to want to see them held.
Since we have to discuss the events of 31 December,
it is important to point out that we have a law in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo governing the
organization of public demonstrations that requires that
the relevant authorities be sent a request indicating the
time that the demonstration will start, the route it will
follow and the starting and ending points, in order to
enable the security forces to keep order and protect the
protesters if necessary. The information we have from
the relevant authorities shows that the demonstration
organizers did not comply with that legal procedure.
Indeed, the letter that the Secular Coordination
Committee sent to the Governor of Kinshasa on

S/PV. 8153

27 December contained none of the information I
have just described. Nor did it give the Committee’s
address so as to enable the city authorities to reach the
interested parties in order to get the necessary details.
In the circumstances, the Governor of the city could not
authorize the holding of the demonstrations.
In any case, the Committee is not part of the
official structures of the Catholic Church, which would
therefore not recognize it legally. This explains why
a large number of dioceses in the country and even
parishes in the capital did not support the demonstration
organizers. As for the results of these events, the
information we have from the relevant authorities is
that the Congolese National Police documented no
deaths in places of worship in the Catholic parishes
in two of the 49 dioceses in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo — that is, 10 parishes of 152 in the
Kinshasa diocese, and one parish in Kamina diocese in
Haut-Lomami province. However, five violent deaths
were recorded on 31 December for the entire country,
with no causal link to the events in question. Two of
the deaths were of thieves — one a motorbike taxi
driver by profession, José Fataki, a resident of No. 2
Kwenge quarter in Matete commune, and another who
is still unidentified — both killed by the guards of a
cold-storage room in the Mototo quarter in Matete
commune, which they were robbing. Their bodies
were brought by their accomplices to Saint Alphonse
parish, near the commercial establishment they
robbed. Father Hugues Ndongisila, the parish priest,
confirmed this version, saying that the two who died
were neither Christians nor demonstrators, and were
not killed within the parish. The third was a Kamuina
Nsapu terrorist, first name Arnolde, who was already
wanted by law enforcement for other previous criminal
activities and who had been mortally wounded during
his participation on 31 December in an armed attack
on two police stations at the Liberté market in Masina
commune in Kinshasa that took place around two
o’clock in the afternoon, long after public order had
been restored. The fourth death was of a Congolese
National Police officer named Mfufumba Latanase,
from the mobile operations squad at the police station
in Nsele commune, killed by Kamuina Nsapu terrorists
in an attack on the Masina community centre. The last
was an unidentified terrorist from a cell of the terrorist
organization Kamuina Nsapu who had attempted to
attack the offices of the military auditor in Kananga in
Kasai Central province and was killed in clashes with
security forces.

18-0058813/15

S/PV.8153

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

With regard to the law-enforcement personnel who
attempted to enter the churches, the city’s Governor, who
condemned the situation, indicated that an investigation
had been opened and that those found guilty would be
punished. Regarding MONUSCO’s other allegations,
the Government is prepared to share information with
it so as to ensure a full investigation of the situation on
the ground, in order to take the necessary measures.
In any case, the Government deplores this avoidable
situation, as an electoral register has already been
updated and an electoral calendar published, so the path
has already been cleared for the holding of elections
in December.
To conclude on this point, my country’s authorities
would like to thank the United Nations and all
international partners who continue to support the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to ensure
that the electoral process, which has been proceeding
smoothly to date, has a successful outcome for the
people of the country.
As far as the confidence-building measures set out
in the Comprehensive and Inclusive Political Agreement
of 31 December 2016, the report notes that 107 political
prisoners are still being detained. Information provided
by the Government indicates that all so-called political
prisoners have been released, except for two individuals
who were not detained for political reasons: Mr. Diomi
Ndongala and Mr. Claude Muyambo. As we have already
stated, these two individuals are being prosecuted for
violations of common law. The first was convicted of
the rape of two minor twin sisters and the second for
having illegally acquired privately owned buildings.
Mr. Moise Katumbi is being prosecuted for violations
that are similar to those committed by Mr. Muyambo.
I think that the Council will agree that the
Government, which is supposed to protect everyone
and ensure justice, cannot intervene in the affairs of
private citizens in such a way that the strongest would
be favoured over the weakest.
As noted in paragraph 13 of the report, the security
situation has improved in most conflict areas, in both
North and South Kivu and in Kasai. This is despite the
fact that, as underscored in the report, there has been
heightened activity by certain national and foreign
armed groups in North Kivu involving targeted attacks
against the civilian population, the Congolese security
forces and Blue Helmets.
14/15

09/01/2018

There is no need to recall here that in spite of all of
the efforts that we have undertaken together to restore
peace and security in that part of the country, these
attacks have already taken the lives of thousands of
Congolese people, members of the security forces and
several peacekeepers. Here I would like, on behalf of
my Government, to strongly condemn these attacks and
to pay tribute to the memory of the brave Tanzanian
peacekeepers who lost their lives on 6 December 2017,
at a time when we still very much needed them. This
sad and unacceptable situation forces us to review
our methods of work by strengthening our strategic
measures so as to achieve better outcomes and avoid
having to deplore any further loss of life.
As far as the presence of various foreign armed
groups such as the Allied Democratic Forces, the
Lord’s Resistance Army and the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda (FDLR), as we have always
underscored, our armed forces, which have made
tremendous sacrifices in combating these criminals,
will continue their efforts in cooperation with
MONUSCO to completely eradicate these groups, in
order to allow our people to live in lasting peace.
In connection with the operations being conducted
to eradicate these groups, my Government appreciates
the repatriation efforts undertaken by MONUSCO in
cooperation with the Governments of the countries
whose nationals are members of these groups. That is
the case, as mentioned in the report, of the repatriation
to Rwanda of members of the FDLR and the resettlement
in Ethiopia, Kenya, the Sudan and the United States of
219 combatants of the Sudanese People’s Liberation
Movement/Sudanese People’s Liberation Army in
Opposition. My Government would like to see these
efforts continue until the repatriation or resettlement
in third countries of all combatants who are still in
transit camps.
In the same context, I would like to focus once again
on the case of the 340 FDLR combatants who have been
awaiting repatriation in transit camps in Kanybayonga,
North Kivu; Walungu, in South Kivu; and Kisangani,
in Tshopo. I would like to reiterate once again to the
international community my Government’s call for
their repatriation to their countries of origin or, failing
that, to a third country outside the Great Lakes region.
I cannot conclude without mentioning the Kasai
provinces and Kasai Central, which were the targets
of terrorist attacks by the Kamuina Nsapu militia.
18-00588

09/01/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

As the Council is aware, calm has been restored, and
investigations are under way to determine the exact
circumstances of the crimes committed and to prosecute
and punish those responsible.
Before concluding, it is important to note that my
Government would like to see the strategic dialogue
accelerated, in accordance with resolution 2348 (2017),
so that the next report of the Secretary-General on
MONUSCO, which will be a reference document in
the context of the upcoming renewal of the mandate
of MONUSCO, will provide a coordinated vision that
includes the views of both parties.
I would like also to express the deep appreciation of
my Government to Mr. Maman Samba Sidikou, former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
the work he did during his term as Head of MONUSCO
to ensure that peace was restored in my country. My
Government is very grateful to him.

S/PV. 8153

In the same context, my Government welcomes
the appointment of Ms. Leila Zerrougui as the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and we assure her
that we will cooperate fully with her, as we did with
her predecessor, in order to enable her to successfully
discharge her mandate.
Finally, my delegation would like, as we begin this
new year, to convey to all members of the Council its
best wishes for a successful 2018.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

18-0058815/15
