UNITEDNiT'QNS

SEC.URsTY COUNCIL.
THIRTY-FOURTH

NEW

YEAR

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2 184) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Letter dated 22 Deceniber 1979‘from the Permanent’ Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13705) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*....................

1
1
1

.
.,

.

sIPV.2184

I

.

,

’ I
: .

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
::.1 Nations document.

:.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/...) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Oflcial Record of the Security Coun& The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

. a^.
,

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance tvith a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resohttions and Decisions of the
Securiry Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

.

.

: ,‘.’
A
‘.’

.”

‘,
:

8.’
,.

;
:,,

.;:’

.‘
*

.I’
i”

: : . :
.’

:

2184th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 31 December 1979, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

urnentlv called on “the Government of Iran to release
immediately
the personnel ‘of the Embassy of the
United States of America being held at Teheran, to provide them with protection and to allow them to leave the
country*‘, and despite the Order’ by which the Intemational Court of Justice has indicated provisional measures in the matter before us-is of deep concern to my
delegation.
4. The grave situation created by the state of relations
between the United States and Iran constitutes, in my
delegation’s view, such a serious threat to international
peace and security that my delegation supported the holding of an urgent meeting of the Security Council.

Mr. CHEN Chu (China).

The representatives of the following States:
Present:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gab&, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agein/ZlM)
I.

Adoption

of the agenda

.

2.

Letter dated 22 December 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the ,President of the
Security Council (S/13705)
_

5. ’ Of course, the Council had already considered the
matter at hand and had unanimously adopted resolution
457 (1979). On that.occasion my delegation had defined
its position clearly. It can be summed upas follows. First,
total disapproval of the act of taking American diplomatic personnel hostage, in flagrant violation of international law and universally accepted diplomatic practice.
Thus, as I declared on 1 December:
“despite our sympathy for the cause defended by the
Iranians, we are bound to regret the fact that the diplomatic personnel of a mission, as well as its premises,
should be the object of aggression and violation,
because, need we recall, article 22 of the Vienna Convention of 1961 stipulates that ‘The premises of a mission shall be inviolable. The agents of the receiving
State may not enter them, except with the consent of
the head of the mission.* ** [2275th meeting, para. 61.1
Secondly, scrupulous respect by all Sates for international
law. Indeed, respect for international law is the best protection and defence for us small States. Thirdly, the
imperative need for the immediate, unconditional release
of all the hostages and for thei; protection. Fourthly, the
use by all States of peaceful means in the settlement of
disputes.
6. In view of all that, if the Security Council is called
upon today-once
again, less than a month later-to
reopen this dossier, it is because the Iranian Government
has not deigned to react positively to the request made by
the Council in resolution 457 (1979). Furthermore, the
Secretary-General correctly stated in his report that

The meeting was called to order at 11.55 a.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 22 December 1979from tbe PermanentRepresentative of tbe United States of America to tbe United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security COUIIcil (S/13705)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretarion from Chinese): In
accordance with decisions taken at previous meetings, I
invite the representatives of Australia, Canada, the Federal Republic of Germany, Japan and Singapore to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Anderson (Australia), Mr. Barton (Canada), Mr. von Wechmar (FederaI
Republic of Germany), Mr. Nisiborf (Japan) and Mr. Koh
, (Singapore) took the places reservedfor them at the side of
the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT
(intemretation
from Chinese):
Members of the Council have before them document
S/137l,l/Rev.l,
which contains the revised text of the
draft resolution submitted by the United States of
America.

“the expectation which had previously arisen for early
progress towards a settlement of the crisis could, for the
time being, not be fulfilled.‘* [S/13704, para. II]

3. Mr. N’DONG (Gabon) (interpretation from French):
The continued holding of American diplomatic personnel
at Teheran-despite
the repeated appeals of the international community, despite resolution 457 (1979), which

’ United StatesDiplomaticand Constdar Stagin Teheran, Provisional
Measures,
Or&r of I5 December
1979,I.C.V. Reports1979.9.7.

1

7. This negative attitude on the part of Iran,is all the
more cause-for concern since the situation thus created
continues, unfortunately, to be a dangerous threat to
international peace and security. Therein lies the important problem of the limits of ourorganization with regard
to the effective implementation
of its decisions. When a
State refuses to co-operate in implementing our decisions,
the Council, unlike individual States, does not have the
means to enforce its decisions. Must the Council then
content itself with noting its own paralysis and therefore
remain ‘inactive in a deadlock such as the one with which
we are now confronted7

the quest for consensus remains the golden rule. ,It is
perhaps this method of work that constitutes and always
will constitute the strength of the Council.
14. Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): It has been the ‘constant
endeavour of Bangladesh to uphold the Charter of the
United Nations and also to honour all international commitments and obligations. Accordingly, Bangladesh supported the resolution .calling for the release of the
American diplomatic personnel being held at Teheran, in
accordance with the principles of immunity asassured to
such personnel under international law and conventions.
Bangladesh understands the natural concern and anxiety
of the United States Government for the early release of
the Americans held at Teheran. -Bangladesh also appreciates the desire of the United States Goveniment for
diction within the framework of international law and
under the auspices ‘of the United Nations. .Bkhgladesh
firmly believes that respect for international law and
international institutions is the best way to promote the
1’
cause of international peace.
,‘.
15. Bangladesh considers that the invitation’ extended
by the Iranian Government to the Secretary-General to
visit Iran is a development that should be welcomed.by
everyone. We hope that the Secretary-General’s visit will
lead to a peaceful and satisfactory solution of the existing
problem acceptable to all parties. We feel that it is imperative that the international community, in particular the
Security Council, should extend its full support to the visit
of the Secretary-General and his efforts to seeka peaceful
solution to the problem. It is therefore essential that we
avoid any action that may in any way complicate the
chances for a peaceful solution to the problem or aggravate matters any further. We request the: SecretaryGeneral to assure the Government of Iran -that Iran’s
case, when presented to the Council, will receive a full and
fair consideration under international law.. I ,
I I*. .
16. Bangladesh has already made an appeal to the
Government of the United States to allow the intemational community some more time with,a view to finding
an alternative and peaceful solution to the problem.
Bangladesh has also made an appeal to the Government
of Iran to respond favourably to rhe call of, the lntemational community for the immediate release of the diplo?,
matic personnel being held at Teheran.

8. In this connexjon, my,. delegation believes that the
Charter has provided for a whole gamut of sanctions to be
used in an attempt to change the positionof recalcitrant
States or entities. -The case of Rhodesia is so recent that I
do not think I need to dwell on it.
9. The Security Council should never allow its prestige,
its credibility or its authority to be undermined by States
Members which refuse to abide by its decisions. Thus, my
delegation supports the idea that the Secretary-General
should go to Teheran to continued to lend his good offices
and should intensify his efforts to ensure that Iran finally
heeds the appeals of the international community and
complies with them.
10. In this connexion, I wish to pay ‘a well-deserved
tribute to the Secretary-General for the efforts he has
already made in the quest for a solution acceptable to the
parties. We firmly support his efforts; we thank him and
assure him of our support.
11. In this last stage, it is not difficult to recognize that in
the absence of effective co-operation by Iran and a specific manifestion of its goodwill in the quest for a final
solution to this situation,. the Council -would have no
other course but to re-examine the question and-why
not say so?-consider the adoption of specific and more
appropriate measures undetthe relevant provisions of ihe
Charter.
12. Before I conclude, since it is almost certain that this
will be my last statement as a member of the Council, I
wish to take this opportunity, Mr. President, to thank you
all-my
colleagues, th.e Secretary-General and the
members of the secretarrat of the Council, including of
course the .interpreters-for
the understanding and the
persistent support you have always given the delegation
of Gabon during these past two years; this has enabled us
to fulfil our duty as a member of the Council..

171 It is against that background that we.have carefully
studied the reformulated draft resolution submitted by
the United States delegation. It appears to us that the
objective of securing the release-of the hostages would be
better served by postponing consideration of this matter
until the Secretary-General reports back to the Council
after his visit to. Iran. Consequently, we feel that reference
at this stage to Articles 39 and 41 of the Charter and the
decision to use sanctions on a specified.date would result
only in dividing the international community and might
be prejudicial to the Secretary-General’s ,mission.
I
18. Bangladesh believes it is essential that the solution
found to the problem be a peaceful one and that in the
search for such a solution all parties exercise maximum

13. Although we do not leave with a feeling of complete
satisfaction with the work that has been done on all the
problems considered, the delegation of Gabon is comforted by the fact that it has been able to work with you all
and to benefit from your experience. In particular, we
appreciate the fact that, despite the difference in size of
their respective countries and delegations and despite
their ideological differences and their varied degrees of
commitment
to the problems being considered, the
members of the Council work as a small family in which
2
..

27. It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution submitted by
the United States and contained in document S/1371 l/
Rev.1.

possible restraint. The need for restraint has become all
the greater in the wake of recent developments in Afghanistan, which constitute a grave threat to intematioinal
peace and stability. It is imperative that we proceed with
caution and avoid any action that may in any way
increase tension in the region.
L’
I
19. It is’ for these reasons that Bangladesh proposes to
abstain bn the draft resolution before
..a. us.
.
-.
20. The PRESIDENT
(interpre&rion from Chinese):
Now I should like to make a statement as the representative of CHINA.

28. I shall first call on those representatives who wish to
make statements before the vote.
29. Mr. TROYAN-OVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interprefution from Russian): The Soviet delegation has already explained in the Council the position
of principle of the Soviet Union with regard to the
Iranian-American conflict. As representatives know, the
Soviet delegation supported the statement of the President of the Council with regard to the need for the observance of the principle of the inviolability of diplomatic
personnel and premises and for the immediate freeing of
the American diPlomatic personnel held in Iran.

21. Almost a month has eiapsed‘since the adoption of
resolution 457 (1979) on the question of Iranian-United
States’ relations. However, this resolution has not been
implemfhted.thus far. The Chinese,delegation cannot but
expressits, regret at this.
,.’ I
22. With regard to the events which have occurred
between Iran and the United States, the Chinese delegation.already expounded its position in its statement at the
Councit’s meeting of 1 December .[2175zh meering3. We
always maintain that the principles guiding international
relations and the accepted diplomatic immunities should
be universally respected. We stand for the implementation of the provisions of resolution 457 (1979), in which
the Council called on Iran to release immediately the
personnel of the Embassy of the United States being held
at Teheran, and other relevant provisions.

30. At previous meetings of the Council on this question, we confirmed the position of the Soviet -Union that
violations of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations by anyone at all represents an act which is contrary
to international law, and we expressed the hope that the
conflict which has arisen between the United States and
,Iran would be settled to the mutual satisfaction of both
parties, on the basis of respect for the Convention.
3 1. On the basis of that position, the Soviet delegation
supported resolution 457 (1979). That resolution contains, as representatives will recall, along with an appeal
to the Government of Iran immediately to release the
personnel of the Embassy of the United States of America
being held at Teheran, an appeal to the Governments of
Iran and the United States to take steps to resolve peacefully the remaining issues between them to their mutual
satisfaction in accordance with the purposes and principles of,the United Nations, and to exercise the utmost
restraint in the prevailing situation, The resolution
expressed the .profound concern which existed with
regard to the dangerous’level of tension between Iran and
the United States, which could have grave consequences
for international peace and security, and attention was
drawn to the obligation of States to settle iheir international disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that
international peace and security, and justice, would not
be endangered. In that iesolution the Council requested
the Secretary-General to lend his good of&es for its
immediate implementation.

.‘.
! -;

3

‘t.

23. The.Chinese delegation appreciates the efforts made
by the’secretary-General
in seeking a solution to this
question and supports him in continuing his unrelenting
efforts -*iit this respect. We sincerely hope that the
Secretary-General’s efforts and his forthcoming visit to
Iran will lead to an early and peaceful solution of this
question:.:
x.4, :
24. Wewish to appeal to the parties concerned to exercise res.ttaint and to render active co-operation in the
implementation
of the relevant Security Council resolution, so that it can be put into effect speedily. It is our
earnest’hope that a reasonable and appropriate solution
to this event can be reached at an early date through
peaceful negotiations in strict accordance with theprinciples of international law and diplomatic practice.

l

32. The .Soviet delegation has studied attentively the
report on this question which the Secretary-General submitted to the Council on 22 December, and we should like
to express to him our gratitude for his efforts to promote a
settlement of the Iranian-American
conflict. We would
like to draw attention to the conclusion of the report,
where the Secretary-General says:
‘6 ..* the expectation which had previously arisen for
early progress towards a settlement of the crisis could,
for the time being, not be fulfilled. The Foreign Minister has, however, assured me of the safety of,the hostages and of Iran’s intention to seek a peaceful
settlement.*’ [S/13704, para. II.].

25. The, Chinese delegation will vote in -favour of the
draft resolution contained in document S/1371/Rev.l.
However;.- we deem it necessary to state the following:
with regard to operative paragraph 6, the Chinese
Government is of the opinion that, should it be necessary
for the Security Council to review the situation and adopt
measures in accordance with the said paragraph, it should
take a prudent attitude. The decision which the Council
might take should really be conducive to the relaxation of
the prevailing tension and the release of the hostages.
26. Now I resume my capacity as PRESIDENT
Council.

of the
3

We also welcome the statement of the Secretary-General
to the effect that he is resolved, for his part, to pursue his
endeavours, in exercise of the mandate entrusted to him
by resolution 457 (1979), “with the determination to fmd
a means for achieving a mutually acceptable solution to
this most serious situat.ion” [ibid, .para. ZZJ.
33. At this stage of our consideration of the IranianAmerican conflict, the Soviet delegation would like to
confirm once again that the Soviet Union recognizes the
existence of a problem created by the holding of personnel
‘of the United States Embassy at Teheran as hostages. ‘At
the same time, we believe it to be necessary to stress that
assertions to the effect that, as a result of the actions of
Iran, a threat has been posed to international peace and
security are wrong. Attempts torepresent matters in this
light actually distort the true state of affairs and are not in
keeping’ -with the spirit and content of resolution
457 (1979).
34. The dispute between the United States and Iran is a
bilateral dispute which does not fall within the ambit of
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. It is
unjustified to attach to this dispute the question of some
kind of sanctions. The application of sanctions-some
kind of physical action.with regard to Iran-could
only
serve to exacerbate the situation’and create a threat to
peace.
35. The Soviet Union is firmly in favour of settling the
dispute between the United States and Iran on a basis
mutually acceptable to both parties. What we need here is
the exercise of restraint and cool-headedness. We are
convinced that there is not only a need to resolve but
actually a possibility of resolving this Rroblem by peaceful
means. To those ends, we have by no means exhausted the
existing resources available for bringing about a peaceful
settlement of a bilateral dispute, including those available
to the United Nations.
36. So far as the. Security Council .is concerned, it
should act in such a way as to seek ways of easing the
tension existing in connexion with the question of the
holding of diplomatic personnel of the United States at
Teheran and thus make a real contribution to,the peaceful
settlement of the dispute. Ifthe Council chooses any other
dourse of action, it will actually be taking the course of
exacerbating, rather than easing, the situation and will
only make more difficult the achievement of the’goal of a
peaceful settlement, at which it should be aiming.
37. That position,determines
the attitude of the Soviet
delegation to the draft resolution which has been submitted by the delegation of the United States.
38. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): On 2 December I had the
honour to express the. policy of the Government of
Kuwait on this complicated issue. I said that:
“It is important first, and above all, to strengthen the
‘hand of the Secretary-General in his unflagging efforts
to ensure a peaceful settlement. He has established a
line of communication
with the Government of Iran

and has succeeded in containing the crisis in many
ways.” [217&h meeting, para. 6.1
We still hold that view. We do not believe that allavenues
for a peaceful settlement of the crisis have been exhausted.
In this respect, it is gratifying that the Secretary-General
is already on his way to ,Teheran in order to have discussions with the Iranianauthorities
about the problem in all
its aspects. We welcome this step.
39. My Government has supported, and it will continue
to support, any call for the immediate release of the
hostages detained at Teheran. We believe that this
demand is overriding on moral, legal and political
grounds. We do not -waver in our support for ,such a
demand.
40. My delegation has constantly called for patience in
solving this problem. When emotions are charged, old
scars are opened andold wounds surface, it is necessary to
think of the unconventional
in order to resolve the
extraordinary. Conventional approaches use or resort to
conventional ways, to articles of conventions, to tradii
tionally accepted norms or charters or treaties. Theproblem the Council is now facing is totally divorced from the
conventional. No doubt the situation baffles the usual
norms of logic. But what is urgent now is to acquire time
for a breathing spell that soothes and calms.fhe high
passions. We should forestall and abort the escalation
towards confrontation. We should try to inject sense into
a situation that defies the usual pattern of sense.
41. My delegation is a staunch believer in;patience,
which by definition rejects haste. Undue haste is not the
right answer to an abnormal situation. One should under
the circumstances ask what is the objective. My.answer is
that it isthe release of the hostages. The question is howto
secure this objective. My delegation believes. that that
could be done by quiet, tranquil and non-sensational
approaches. The question of sanctions against, Iran, in
accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter, so strongly
advocated in many statements here, is in essencecontrary
to the spirit in which this problem should be solved.
42. The Secretary-General’s visit to Iran should not be
‘overshadowed by the provisions of Chapter VII;,such a
visit will be undermined by the clear reference to punitive
measures against a party whose co-operation is needed
for the solution of the problem. The visit by the SecretaryGeneral and his efforts should not be encumbered by the
unnecessary introduction of Chapter VII. We have strong
reservations on operative paragraph 6 of the draft resolution submitted by the United States. In our opinion, the
Council should not brandish the notion of punitive measures against a party whose goodwill and co-operation are
needed to overcome the problem and to whoseland the
Secretary-General is proceeding at this very moment. The
-glimpses of hope should not be unnecessarily quashed.
We are certain that the references to Chapter VII and
punitive measures is bound to increase the suspicion of
the side with which the Secretary-General is going to
engage in talks on -this problem. We have serious doubts.
and reservations concerning the reference to Chapter VII
in this draft resolution.

50. Mr. MUTUKWA
(Zambia): I wish on behalf of the
delegation of Zambia to explain our vote before the voting which is scheduled to take place shortly.

43. This brings home to all of us the necessity of reconciling the legitimate demand of the United States with the
stability of my area. We in Kuwait believe that a reference
to Chapter VII, under the present circumstances and in
our area is, from the vantage-point ‘of a Kuwaiti, a
threat to the stability of our region. Under no circumstan.cescan I be a party to a document that is bound further to
destabilize our region. My delegation therefore cannot
accept a call that in our view would add flames to the
already inflammable situation.

51. I said in our statement yesterday and I repeat here
now that Zambia does not want to see the Security Council divided in its approach to this crisis, as we have succeeded
in avoi,ding division since this crisis erupted in November.
We have always advocated the view that the Council
should speak with one voice. We have unanimously
agreed to use the authority of the Council to secure
the safe release of the American diplomatic personnel
who have been held hostage at Teheran for nearly two
months now.

44. On 4 December Kuwait joined others in the adoption of resolution 457 (1979). The Council adopted that
resolution unanimously. On the question of the hostages
the United States enjoys the international consensus on its
side. It is also clear that the legitimate grievances of Iran
enjoy international recognition. In this debate my delegation has’ heard strong words about the prestige of the
Council The objective here is not to restore the prestige of
the Council but to restore the freedom of the hostages.
This cannot be obtained by language that implies a threat.
We hold the view that it is better to’light a candle than to
curse the ,darkness.

52. In Zambia’s view, it would be unfortunate to adopt
a resolution which -in effect closes peaceful diplomatic
channels towards seeking thesafe release of the American
hostages. We believe that it is important to leave room for
negotiations. It would have been more rational to review
the situation after the Secretary-General’s mission and
not before. In ,this regard, it is significant that the Iranian
authorities have agreed ‘to the visit by the SecretaryGeneral at this point in time.

45. Du’ring the two years of Kuwait’s membership in the
Council; ’ my delegation has laboured seriously and
worked hard to vote in favour of all resolutions adopted
by the Council during this period. We have never
abstained and we have never opposed any resolution that
has been adopted; we have acted in ‘this way out of our
spirit of responsibility.
We have taken a positive
approach to every issue simply because we believe that
positive’participation
is the best means of discharging
responsibility. However, on this occasion, for the reasons
that I ‘have just stated, we cannot vote for the draft
resolution submitted by the United States. We shall not be
able to’csupport it chiefly because of operative paragraph 6 .and because of other minor objections.
.‘. .
46. Nevertheless, we wish the Secretary-General every
success in his visit, and we wish him good luck in his
historic’,endeavour on the last day of the year and in the
last hours and minutes of a decade that has been full of
convulsions and uncertainties.

53. The United Nations has not come to the’end of the
road in seeking to have the hostages released by peaceful
means and we wish our American friends to realize this
position;
.54. Zambia has strong reservations on operative paragraph 6 of the draft resolution submitted to the Council
by the delegation of the United States. If a separate vote
were taken on that operative paragraph, Zambia would
not go along with it. We have carefully examined the
paragraph and reached the inescapable conclusion that it
pours cold water on the two:stage,approach to this issue.

47. We are leaving the Council; our term is nearing its
end. We shall, no doubt, miss the spirit of togetherness,
notwithstanding divergent views. We believe that the
Council is a unique body; its uniqueness arises from its
capacity to underscore human oneness, which is by far
stronger than political considerations.

55. Members of the‘Counci1 are being asked to make
prior commitments to .evoke sanctions against Iran even
before we have determined that Iran has failed to comply.
Would it not be prudent to make such a determination
after the other options have-been tried7 As a matter of
principle and procedure Zambia, as a non-aligned country, does not wish to commit itself in advance on issues
which it should have an opportunity to assessat an opportune time. However, because Zambia views the holding of
hostages as an affront to the principles of international
law and wishes to see these hostages released without
delay, we shall go along with this draft resolution. Our
going along is in the hope that the Council’s action will
yield the intended results.
‘,

48. To all members we day a sincere tribute and express
our gratitude for their understanding and sense of accommodation:It
is a strange part of life that human beings
always benefit from one another, regardless of their political postures, and the power of the Council indeed not
only emanates from its diversity-which
sometimes
creates some sense of confusion-but
is also derived from
its drive in its search for oneness.

56. Operative paragraph 6 of the draft resolution will
require the Council to meet in a week’s time to adopt
measures under Articles 39 and 41 of the Charter in the
event of non-compliance. We hope this will not be necessary. By going along with this draft resolution, Zambia
does not commit itself to the adoption of the measures
proposed in paragraph 6. We shall consider the issue on
its own merits at an appropriate time.

49. We thank all the members of the Council and of the
Secretariat-including
the interpreters-and
we wish
everybody a very happy new year.

57. In conclusion, let me offer Zambia’s prayers for the
Secretary-General in his delicate mission of peace on
behalf of mankind and in the service of mankind.
5

59. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese):
There are no further speakers. The Security Council has
thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of
the item on the agenda.

58. The PRESIDENT
(intermetation from Chinese): I
shall now put to the vote the draft resoluiion contained in
document S/i371 11Rev.l.
.

1

A vote was taken by show of hands.
60. Before adjourning the meeting, which is the last for
this year, I should like to express, on behalf of theCouncil
and on my own behalf, gratitude to the representatives of
the delegations of the five non-permanent members who
will be leaving the Council at the-end of this year-for the
contributions that they have made to the work of the
Council. They are Bolivia, Czechoslovakia, Gabon,
Kuwait and Nigeria.

In favour: Bolivia, China, France, Gabon, Jamaica,
Nigeria, Norway, Portugal, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Zambia.
Against: None.
Abstaining: Bangladesh, Czechoslovakia,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

Kuwait,

61. I wish a happy, new year to the Secretary-General
and to representatives on the Council andtheir fmilies.

The draft ;esoJution FTasadoptedby 11 votes to none, with
4 abstentions.2 ’

The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

2See resobtion 461 (1979).

--

-

6
Liiho in United Nations, New York

00300

79-70002-October

1982-2.250
