64,

General Allsem.bly-Eleventh Session

II) of 9 November 1956, and 1127 (XI) and 1128
(XI) of 21 November 1956 relating to the tragic events
in Hungary,

sions of the General Assernbly which refer to a withdrawal of troops or related f:olitical matters, and the
note of the Secretary-General 8 of 7 December 1956,

H a.ving received and noted the report of the Secretary-General22 that United Nations observers have not
been permitted to enter Hungary,

a reply to the latest appeal of the General Assembly for

Noting with deep concern that the Government of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has failed to comply with the provisions of the United Nations resolutions calling upon it to desist from its intervention in
the internai affairs of Hungary, to cease its deportations
of Hungarian citizens and to return promptly to their
homes those it has already deported, to withdraw its
armed forces from Hungary and to cease its repressîon
of the Hungarian people,
1. Reiterates its call upon the Government of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Hungarian
authorities to comply with the above resolutîons and
to permit United Nations observers to enter the territory of Hungary, to travel freely therein and to report
their findings to the Secretary-General ;

2. Requests the Government of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the Hungarian authorities to
communicate to the Secretary-General, not latei: than
7 December 1956, their consent to receive United
Nations observers;
3. Recommends that in the meantime the SecretaryGeneral arrange for the immediate dispatch to Hungary, and other countries as appropriate, of observers
named by him pursuant to paragraph 4 of General
Assembly resolution 1004 (ES-II) of 4 November
1956;
4. Requests the Governments of all Member States
to co-operate with the representatives named by the
Secretary-General by extending such assistance and
providing such facilities as may be necessary for the
effective discharge of their responsihilities.

N oting with grave concern that there has not been
the admission of United Nations .observers to Hungary,
as contained in its resolution 1130 (XI),

Considering that recent events have clearly demonstrated the will of the Hungarian people to recover
their liberty and independence,

N oting the overwhelming demand of the Hungarian
people for the cessation of intervention of foreign
armed forces and the withdrawal of foreign troops,
1. Declares that, by using its armed force against
the. Hungarian people, the Government of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics is violating the political
independence of Hungary;

2. Condemns the violation of the Charter of the
United Nations by the Government of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics in depriving Hungary of
its liberty and independence and the Hungarian people
of the exercise of their fundamental rights ;

3. Reiterates its call upon the Governnrent of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to desist forthwith
from any form of intervention in the internal affaîrs of
Hungary;
4; Calls upon the Government of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics to make immediate arrangements
for the withdrawal, under United Nations observation,
of its armed forces from Hungary and to permit the
re7establishment of the political independence of Hungary;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to take any initiative that he deems helpful in relation to the Hungarian
problem, in conformity with the principles of the
Charter and the resolutions of the General Assembly.

608th plenary meeting,
4 December 1956.

Resolution 1131 (XI)
The General Assembly,

Deeply concerned over the tragic events in Hungary,
Recaliing those provisions of its resolutions 1004
(ES-II) of 4 November 1956, 1005 (ES-II) of 9
November 1956, 1127 (XI) of 21 November 1956 and
1130 (XI) of 4 December 1956, calling upon the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to
desist from its intervention in the interna! affairs of
Hungary, to withdraw its forces from Hungary and to
cease its repression of the Hungarîan people,

Recalling also those provisions of its resolutions 1904
(ES-II) and 1127 (XI), calling for permission for
United Nations observers to enter the territory of
Hungary, to travel freely therein and to report their
findings to the Secretary-General,
Having received the report of the Secretary-General22 of 30 November 1956, stating that no information
is available to the Secretary-Ge.neral concerning steps
taken in order to establish compliance with the deci-

618th plenary meeting,
12 December 1956.
Resolution 1132 (XI)

The General .Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the Hungarian
problem,

Reaffirming the objectives contained therein and the
continuing concern of the United Nations in ~his matter,
Having received the report of the Secretary-General of S January 1957,24

Desiring to ensure that the General Assembly and
all Member States shall be in possession of the fullest
and best available information regarding the situation
created by the intervention of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, through its use of armed force and
other means, in the internai affairs of Hungary, as
well as regarding developrnents relating to the recommendations of the General Assembly on this subject,
1. Estciblishes, for the above-mentioned purposes, a
Spedal Committee, composed of representatives of
Australia, Ceylon, Denmark, Tunisia and Uruguay, to
111

11

Ibid., document A/3403.

14

Ibid., document A/3435.
lbid., document A/3485.

65

Reeolutions adopted without relerence to a Committee

investigate, and to establish and maintain direct observation in Hungary and elsewhere, taking testimony,
collecting evidence and receiving information, as appropriate, in order to report its findings to the General
Assembly at its eleventh session, and thereafter from
tirne to time to prepare additional reports for the information of Member States and of the Generat Assembly if it is in session;

and evidence, which Members may possess, and assisting ît in securing such information;

2. Calls upon the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and Hungary to co-operate in every way with the
Cornmittee and, in particular, to permit the Committee
and its staff to enter the territory of Hupgary and to
travel freely therein ;

6. Reaffirms its request that the Secretary-General
continue to take any initiative that he deems helpful
in relation to the Hungarian problem, in conformity
with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and the resolutions of the General Assembly.

4. Invites the Secretary-General to render the Committee all appropriate assistance and facilities;

5. Calls Hpon all Member States promptly to give
effect to the present and previous resolutions of the
General Assembly on the Hungarian problem;

3. Requests all Member States to assist the Committee in any way appropriate in its task, making
available to it relevant information, including testimony

*

636th plenary meeting,
10 lanuary 1957.

*

*

Other decisions taken by the General ÂBBembly
without reference to a Committee
Question of amending the United Nations Charter, in accordance with the
procedure laid down in Article 108 of the Charter, to increase the
number of non-permanent members of the Seeurity Council and the
numher of votes required for decisions of the Council ( item 56)
Question of amending the United Nations Charter, in accordance with the
procedure laid down in Article 108 of the Charter, to increase the
membership of the Economie and Social Council (item 57)
Question of amending the Statute of the International Court of Justice,
in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 108 of the
Chart,er of the United Nations and Article 69 of the Statute of the
Court, with respect to an inerease in the number of judges of the
International Court of Justice ( item 58)
The General Assembly, at its 661st plenary meeting on 26 February 1957,
decided to postpone consideration of items 56, 57 and 58 to its twelfth session.
