60

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

2. Requests the Secretary-General, in preparing the
above-mentioned report, to consult and co-operate with
the Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative of the Palestinian people;
3. Urges all States to co-operate with the Secretary-General in this matter.
JO I st plenary session
16 December 1976
31/111.

Report of the Governing Council of
the United Nations Environment Programme

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on
the work of its fourth session, 24 and the statement of
the Executive Director introducing the report, 25
Recalling its resolution 2997 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972,
Recalling also the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International
Economic Order 26 as well as the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States,27 which laid down the
foundations of the new international economic order,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 2013 (LXI) of 3 August 1976 relating to the
report of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme on its fourth session,
Reaffirming that there can be no sustained development or meaningful growth without a clear commitment at the same time to preserving the environment
and promoting the rational use of natural resources,
with an eye to the needs of future generations,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme on the work of its fourth session;
2. Endorses paragraph 3 of Economic and Social
Council resolution 2013 (LXI) inviting attention to
decision 55 (IV) of 13 April 1976 of the Governing
Council, 28 concerning the active participation of the
United Nations Environment Programme in the preparations for the United Nations Water Conference;
3. Reaffirms the belief expressed by the Governing
Council in section III, paragraphs 1 and 2, of its decision 47 (IV) of 14 April 197628 that the environment
should be a major consideration in international discussions on development;
4. Notes with satisfaction the report of the Executive Director on the status of the Fund of the United
Nations Environment Programme29 and urges Governments to extend their continuing financial support to
the Fund;
5. Notes the report of the Secretary-General transmitting the interim report of the Executive Director
24 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first
Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/31/25).
.
.
25 Jbid., Thirty-first Session, Second Committee, 19th rneetmg,
paras. 1-20.
26Resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI).
21 Resolution 3281 (XXIX).
28 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtyfirst Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/31/25), annex I.
29 UNEP/GC.57 and Corr. I.

on the study of the problem of the material remnants
of war, particularly mines, and their e~ect on th~ environment30 and requests the Govermng Counc~ to
ensure its completion, taking into ac.count_ the vie":'s
expressed in the course of the consideration of this
matter;
6. Notes the report of the Secretary-General on international conventions and protocols in the field of
the environment31 and reiterates the concern expressed
in General Assembly resolution 3436 (XXX) of 9 December 1975 that existing international conventions
and protocols in the field of the environmen~ h~ve
not yet received the wide acceptance and appltcatton
they deserve.
JOI st plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/112.

Institutional arrangements for international environmental co-operation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2997 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, particularly section IV thereof, in which
it decided to review as appropriate, at the thirty-first
session, the institutional arrangements for international
environmental co-operation,
Taking note of decision 78 (IV) of 14 April 1976
of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme, 32
Recalling that in its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 it established the Ad Hoe Committee
on the Restructuring of the Economic and Social Sectors of the United Nations System,
1. Endorses the view of the Governing Council of
the United Nations Environment Programme that the institutional arrangements for international environmental
co-operation, as stipulated in General Assembly resolution 2997 (XXVII), namely, the Governing Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme, the
environment secretariat, the Fund of the United Nations Environment Programme and the Environment
Co-ordination Board, appear adequate and sound;
2. Endorses also the view expressed by the Governing Council in its decision 78 B (IV) that, in any
decision about the restructuring of the economic and
social sectors of the United Nations system, the following elements relating to the place of environmental
considerations within the system should be observed,
strengthened and given institutional visibility:
The United Nations system should maintain, within
a clearly identified institutional arrangement focused
on the essential catalytic and co-ordinating role in
the field of the environment, the capacity:
(a) To take responsibility for environmental issues of a global nature;
(b) To provide guidance and leadership in international environmental affairs;
(c) To offer suitable forums and facilities for
treaty-making in the field of the environment at
the global and regional levels;
30 A/31/210.

31 A/311211.
32 See Official Records of tlze General Assembly, Thirtyfirst Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/31/25), annex I.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

(d) To identify, through the programmatic approach, emerging environmental problems and to
propose solutions;
(e) To manage a separate environment fund as
an integral part of the programmatic process;
(f) To advocate and articulate the interdependence of environment and development;
(g) To respond to the environmental problems
of both developed and developing countries;
( h) To respond to the environmental problems
of human settlements, which are an integral part of
the human environment;
3. Decides to maintain at this stage the present
arrangements, without prejudice to any decision the
General Assembly might take as regards the restructuring of the economic and social sectors of the United
Nations system.
101 st plenary meeting
16 December 1976

31/113.

Specific measures to meet the need for
a decent living environment for the
most vulnerable groups of society

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human Settlements, in its recommendations
A.4, B.3, B.12, C.4, C.14, C.15 and E.4, called for
specific measures to be taken to meet the need for a
decent living environment for the most vulnerable
groups of society, 33
Considering that human settlement policies are inseparable from the goals of the social and economic
sectors, and that consequently solutions to the problems
of such settlements must be conceived as an integral
part of the development process of individual nations
and the world community,
1. Requests Member States and the SecretaryGeneral, when planning the implementation of the
aforementioned recommendations adopted at Habitat:
United Nations Conference on Human Settlements, to
bear in mind the measures that protect the decent living environment of the most vulnerable social groups,
such as children, youth, the elderly and the handicapped, so that they may live in an environment which
is equally accessible to all individuals;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session,
through the Economic and Social Council, on the
measures taken and the results obtained.
101 st plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/114.

Collaboration
between
the
United
Nations and non-governmental organizations with regard to world-wide intercommunal co-operation

The General Assembly,
Recalling the results of Habitat: United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements,
33 See Report of Habitat: United Nations Conference on
Human Settlements (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.7 and corrigendum), chap. II.

61

Aware of the importance and global nature of the
phenomenon of urbanization,
Noting that uncontrolled urbanization is one of the
causes of the deterioration in living conditions in human
settlements,
Stressing the need for harmonization of intergovernmental action and intereommunal action with regard
to human settlements,
Recognizing the role that the competent non-governmental organizations can play in solving the problems
facing local communities,
Noting that non-governmental organizations such as
the United Towns Organization and the International
Union of Local Authorities, which are in consultative
status, in category I, with the Economic and Social
Council, have offered their collaboration with the United
Nations in the field of human settlements,
Recalling its resolution 2861 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971 concerning world-wide intercommunal cooperation, which stressed the role played in that sphere
by the United Towns Organization,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1738 (LIV) of 4 May 1973 on international
co-operation between municipalities,
I. Invites the Secretary-General to ensure that the
international bodies responsible for implementing the
relevant recommendations of Habitat: United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements:
(a) Study the specific possibilities and effective
conditions for collaboration between the United Nations
and the non-governmental organizations concerned;
( b) Draw up with those organizations programmes
of collaboration;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Economic and Social Council at its sixty-fifth session
on the evolution of those programmes.
101st plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31; 115.

United Nations Audio-Visual Information Centre on Human Settlements

The General Assembly,
Noting resolution 5 of Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human Settlements on post-Conference use
of audio-visual material, 34
Expressing its appreciation for the support and assistance in preparing the audio-visual material for the
Conference provided by national and international organizations, particularly the United Nations Environment Programme,
Convinced that the audio-visual and related material
prepared for the Conference constitutes an information
resource of continuing value for the effective implementation of recommendations for national action, programmes for international co-operation and the realization of goals in the field of human settlements
established by the Conference,
Recognizing that prompt and effective utilization of
the information resource created for the Conference is
:;4 I bid., chap. 111.
