S/PRST/2013/10

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 July 2013
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7001st meeting of the Security Council, held on 16 July 2013, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Peace and security
in Africa”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its concern about the alarming situation
in the Sahel region and its commitment to address the complex security and
political challenges in this region that are interrelated with humanitarian and
developmental issues as well as adverse effects of climate and ecological
changes. The Security Council welcomes, in this context, the deployment of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) following the transfer of authority from the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali to MINUSMA on 1 July 2013.
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong commitment to the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and unity of countries of the Sahel
region.
“The Security Council continues to be gravely concerned about the
activities in the Sahel region of terrorist organizations, including Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb and the Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa and
reiterates its strong condemnation of the recent terrorist attacks perpetrated in
the region. The Security Council considers sanctions an important tool in
countering terrorism, and underlines the importance of prompt and effective
implementation of its relevant resolutions, in particular, Security Council
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) as key instruments in the fight
against terrorism. The Security Council also expresses its continued concern
over the serious threats to peace and security posed by armed conflict,
proliferation of arms, transnational organized crime including illicit activities
such as drug trafficking in the Sahel region and its increasing links, in some
cases, with terrorism. In this regard, the Security Council reiterates its call for
a full implementation of its resolution 2017(2011).
“The Security Council strongly condemns the abuses of human rights and
violence against civilians, notably women and children, committed in the
region by terrorist and other extremist groups.
“The Security Council recognizes that the strengthening of State
institutions, inclusive economic and social development, respect for human

13-39645 (E) 170713

*1339645*

S/PRST/2013/10

rights and the rule of law are necessary to ensure long-term security,
development and stability in the Sahel region.
“The Security Council underscores the importance of a coherent,
comprehensive and coordinated approach encompassing governance, security,
humanitarian, human rights and developmental aspects to resolve the threats to
peace and security across the Sahel region as well as to address the root causes
of these challenges and welcomes, in this regard, the development of the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel as requested by its resolution
2056 (2012) and the three strategic goals defining the strategy.
“The Security Council welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General’s
Special Envoy for the Sahel region in the development of the United Nations
Strategy and in drawing attention on the situation in the Sahel region as well as
in mobilizing resources and support for the Sahel region’s immediate and longterm needs. The Security Council also welcomes the Special Envoy’s proposal
to partner with relevant international and regional financial institutions to
promote innovative approaches and initiatives for the Sahel region and, in this
regard, encourages the Special Envoy to foster more coherent and coordinated
United Nations support for the Sahel region. The Security Council also
encourages the Special Envoy to pursue his efforts and good offices in order to
enhance trans-regional and interregional cooperation and international
assistance toward the Sahel region.
“The Security Council also welcomes the efforts undertaken by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa and the
United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) in support of States of the
Sahel region.
“The Security Council stresses the importance of a coordinated approach
by all concerned United Nations entities involved in the implementation of the
United Nations Strategy for enhanced cooperation with a view of maximizing
synergies. The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to ensure
effective implementation of the United Nations Strategy through close
collaboration between the Office of the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for
the Sahel region, UNOWA and relevant United Nations entities working in the
Sahel region, including the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. The
Security Council further requests UNOWA to establish an effective and
detailed coordination mechanism to prioritize activities and to ensure
coordinated implementation by the United Nations System of the United
Nations Strategy.
“The Security Council stresses the importance of national and regional
ownership of the United Nations strategy and recognizes the importance for
the United Nations Strategy to be implemented in close consultation with
States of the Sahel, West Africa and the Maghreb as well as with the African
Union (AU), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
West African Economic and Monetary Union (UEMOA), the Arab Maghreb
Union (AMU), the Community of Sahelo-Saharan States (CENSAD), the
European Union (EU), regional financial institutions, including the African
Development Bank (ADB) and the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), and
other bilateral donors and partners. The Security Council stresses further the

2

13-39645

S/PRST/2013/10

importance of avoiding duplication of efforts and the need for strengthening
collective engagement across the Sahel region.
“The Security Council calls on Sahel, West African and Maghreb States
to enhance interregional cooperation and coordination in order to develop
inclusive and effective strategies to combat in a comprehensive and integrated
manner the activities of terrorist groups, to prevent the proliferation of all arms
and to curb transnational organized crime including illicit activities such as
drug trafficking. The Security Council encourages, in this regard, the holding
of follow up activities building on the conclusions of the United Nations
Conference on Border Control and Cooperation in the Sahel and the Maghreb
organized in Rabat. The Security Council emphasizes the importance of
regional and international coordination in addressing the threat of terrorism in
the Sahel region, including information sharing and close cooperation between
the United Nations, the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, the AU and other
relevant organizations and initiatives.
“The Security Council commends the efforts undertaken by Sahel States
and relevant regional organizations in addressing the humanitarian challenges
in the region as well as in strengthening resilience. The Security Council also
commends the support provided by countries in the region and by other donors
and calls for their continued assistance to Sahel States to this end. The Security
Council applauds the efforts of the Regional Humanitarian Coordinator for the
Sahel, with the support of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, other humanitarian actors and agencies, to draw attention to the scale
of the challenges facing the Sahel region, provide humanitarian assistance to
the affected populations and build and strengthen resilience at local, national,
and regional levels with the aim of reducing the impact of disasters.
“The Security Council welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General
to hold a High Level Meeting on the Sahel on the margins of the 68th General
Assembly of the United Nations. The Security Council welcomes the intention
of the Secretary-General to visit the Sahel region, later this year, with the
President of the World Bank Group and looks forward to a briefing to the
Security Council following this visit.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to keep it informed
of the progress toward the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel no later than 31 December 2013, and to present a written
report no later than 30 June 2014.”

13-39645

3
