S/PV.7147

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7147th meeting

Monday, 24 March 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Lucas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Luxembourg)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Mr. Hmoud
Mrs. Kazragienė
Mr. Sarki
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Tatham
Ms. Power

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2014/162)

14-27334 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1427334*

S/PV.7147

The question concerning Haiti

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2014/162)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the representatives of Brazil, Canada, Colombia,
Guatemala, Haiti, Jamaica, Japan, Mexico, Peru, Spain
and Uruguay to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Sandra
Honoré, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mays-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/162, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.
I now give the floor to Ms. Honoré.
Ms. Honoré (spoke in French): I would like to
express my gratitude to Luxembourg as President of
the Security Council and to all of the members of the
Council for convening this meeting to consider the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (S/2014/162). I also
take this opportunity to welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Haiti.
(spoke in Spanish)
I wish to thank in particular all of the countries that
contribute troops and police to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the
Member States that have collaborated in the stabilization
and reconstruction process for their valuable support to
the consolidation of peace and democracy in Haiti.
(spoke in English)
Since my last briefing to the Security Council
in August 2013 (see S/PV.7024), the overall security
2/35

24/03/2014

situation in Haiti has remained relatively stable. As
compared to 2012, the year 2013 saw a decrease in
major crimes, including homicides and kidnappings, by
21 and 53 per cent, respectively. While the first half of
the reporting period witnessed a 57 per cent increase
in demonstrations, notably in the metropolitan area
of Port-au-Prince and other urban areas across the
country, most were peaceful and largely triggered by
socioeconomic grievances.
The performance of the Haitian National Police
continued to improve and the security situation
in the five departments vacated by MINUSTAH’s
military component remained stable. However, when
the capacity of the National Police was put to severe
test, operational support by MINUSTAH forces was
often necessary. Further strengthening of the police
therefore remains a critical stabilization benchmark for
MINUSTAH.
Turning to the political situation, I would first
like to commend Haiti’s political leaders for choosing
the path of dialogue and reaching an agreement on
holding elections this year. I would furthermore like
to congratulate the Conférence Episcopale d’Haïti
and its President, Cardinal Chibly Langlois, for
successfully mediating an agreement resulting from a
step unprecedented in Haitian political history when,
on 24 January, an inter-Haitian dialogue between the
executive branch, Parliament and political parties was
launched to discuss issues of democratic governance,
elections and amending the Constitution. The formal
signing of the El Rancho accord by the executive, the
legislature and participating political parties was finally
accomplished on 14 March. The accord stipulates that
one election will be held this year, combining the longdelayed local, municipal and partial senatorial elections
with those foreseen for the end of 2014, that is, for a
second third of the Senate and for the entire Chamber
of Deputies.
As outlined in the accord, key provisions to be
implemented within a 10-day time frame include
amending the electoral law to confer the appropriate
mandate on the Electoral Council; replacing up to
one member of the Electoral Council by each of the
three State powers; and a Cabinet reshuffle to include
individuals drawn from interested political parties.
A commission has been established to monitor the
implementation of those provisions. A number of
signatories to the accord expressed reservations about
certain provisions, signalling the likelihood that

14-27334

24/03/2014

The question concerning Haiti

S/PV.7147

further negotiations will be necessary to facilitate their
implementation.

coordinated implementation of the cholera response
measures, as outlined in the national plan.

The long-awaited adoption and promulgation of an
electoral law in December 2013, along with the accord
of 14 March emanating from the inter-Haitian dialogue,
have prepared a path towards inclusive and transparent
elections to be held later this year, a sine qua non for
Parliament’s continuous functioning in January 2015. It
is now critically important that the Haitian authorities
implement the provisions of the accord, including the
amendment of the electoral law, in a timely manner.
To that end, MINUSTAH, along with members of
the international community represented in Haiti, are
engaging Haiti’s key political actors.

In accordance with resolution 2119 (2013),
regarding MINUSTAH’s further conditions-based
consolidation, the Mission is on target to achieve a
15 per cent reduction of its uniformed strength and reach
the mandated strength of 5,021 military troops by the
end of June 2014. The strength of the police component
remains at 2,601. Given the gains in stabilization since
2004, the Secretary-General is confident that Haiti
and its partners can continue moving forward with the
ongoing consolidation process. Furthermore, in his
August 2013 report (S/2013/493), the Secretary-General
indicated his intention to explore the best way for the
United Nations to continue contributing to greater
stability and development in Haiti beyond 2016.

With regard to the economic situation, there is
reason for cautious optimism and renewed hope, owing
to the economic growth rate of 4.3 per cent in 2013,
which has provided the Haitian Government with an
important building block for more sustainable and
equitable development. Post-earthquake reconstruction
and rehabilitation has continued, and of the 1.5 million
people housed in camps in the aftermath of the tragedy
of January 2010, only an estimated 146,573 people
remain in temporary camps. Notwithstanding that
achievement, it is a humanitarian imperative that the
Government follow through its commitment to ensuring
the orderly closure of those camps and finding durable
solutions for the displaced, who continue to live under
adverse conditions or to face forced evictions.
The fact that some 600,000 Haitians still face
severe food insecurity is cause for concern, as is the
prevalence of acute malnutrition among children,
which increased from 5.1 per cent in 2012 to 6.5 per
cent in 2013.
While the number of suspected cholera cases has
been reduced significantly every year, falling from
352,033 cases in 2011 to 58,608 in 2013, more must be
done, since Haiti still has the highest number of cholera
cases in the world. Delivering and sustaining better
health requires an urgent, scaled-up effort to combat
the disease and address decades of underinvestment
in basic systems for safe water, hygiene, sanitation
and health care. The United Nations system in Haiti
has developed a two-year, $68 million initiative in
support of the Government’s 10-year national plan
for the elimination of cholera. In addition, the United
Nations and the Government of Haiti are finalizing the
establishment of a high-level committee to oversee the

On the basis of an initial review and the activities of
MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team, five
broad options have been identified and proposed in the
Secretary-General’s latest report. They include, first,
designating a United Nations special envoy for Haiti
to deliver political good offices; secondly, establishing
a special political mission with continued support for
police development through individual police officers
and assistance to rule-of-law and human-rights
efforts; thirdly, establishing a smaller, more focused
peacekeeping mission without a military presence and a
continued and possibly increased country-wide United
Nations police presence. It is important to note that no
United Nations military presence is envisioned under
the first three options. A fourth option would establish
a smaller, more focused peacekeeping mission with
United Nations police and a small military presence;
a fifth would adjust MINUSTAH’s current mandate
to reflect a reduced scope of its activities, achieved
through the completion of the consolidation plan.
The United Nations remains firmly committed to
including key national and international stakeholders
in the consultative process, leading ultimately to
determining which option is the most appropriate
to ensure not only that Haiti benefits in every way
from a successful transition to a newly configured
United Nations presence beyond 2016, but also that the
stabilization achievements are preserved and sustained.
Obviously, consultations will also take place with the
Government of Haiti. To this end, a full scale, United
Nations-wide strategic assessment should be conducted
to provide the Council with an updated, in-depth
evaluation of conditions on the ground.

14-273343/35

S/PV.7147

The question concerning Haiti

In parallel with the process just described, a revision
of the 2013-2016 United Nations integrated strategic
framework for Haiti is being envisaged, in coordination
with Haitian Government counterparts and the donor
community, to identify priority areas for the United
Nations country team’s strategic engagement as the
Mission consolidates. In the meantime, it is important
that the Government and MINUSTAH continue to work
on multiple fronts to attain the stabilization benchmarks
outlined in the MINUSTAH consolidation plan.
Concerning the development of the Haitian National
Police, MINUSTAH, together with our international
partners, continues to support the Haitian Government
and the police in the implementation of the HNP
development plan for 2012-2016. With the objective of
achieving a minimum of 15,000 active police officers
by 2016, the twenty-fourth promotion graduated 1,058
cadets, including 111 women, in December 2013. The
twenty-fifth promotion, set to start soon, will have an
expected 1,250 cadets and will be completed by the end
of 2014. The current strength of the Haitian National
Police is 11,228 active police officers, including 950
women.
The further development of the Haitian police
is vital to ensure enduring stability in Haiti.
Notwithstanding the progress achieved in the buildup of a professional and accountable police force and
the important contributions made by bilateral partners
to the police development plan, resources are still
insufficient to achieve all the targets of this plan. The
sustained commitment of the Haitian Government
and the continuous generous assistance of the
international community will remain critical not only
to enabling the National Police to progressively assume
full responsibility for internal security, but also to
strengthening required management and administrative
capacity, oversight mechanisms and the development of
specialized units.
Progress in the professionalization of the HNP
needs to be complemented by similar improvements
in other areas of the rule of law, notably in the justice
and corrections sector. The Mission is supporting the
presidential commission on judicial reform and a law
reform working group with a view to finalizeing a new
criminal code. Updating Haiti’s antiquated criminal code
and criminal procedure is a preoccupation for Haitian
jurists, human rights advocates and MINUSTAH.
Similarly, the Mission continues to work with Haitian
authorities and international partners to reduce lengthy

4/35

24/03/2014

periods of pre-trial detention and to improve deplorable
prison conditions. However, the Government of Haiti
needs to develop a more strategic, comprehensive and
sustained approach to reforming the justice system as
a whole. Concerning respect for the rule of law, it is
equally important that key oversight and accountability
mechanisms be rendered operational and allowed to
operate independently.
With respect to the forthcoming electoral process,
the United Nations continues to provide technical
advice and capacity-building support to the Electoral
Council, which has the constitutional responsibility for
the organization of the elections. However, the Mission’s
consolidation implies a more focused and strategic use
of available assets in support of the national electoral
authorities.
In relation to governance, MINUSTAH has
concentrated its good offices on promoting dialogue
among national stakeholders to overcome the electoral
impasse. During the reporting period, despite the
lingering stalemate between the executive branch
and Parliament, Haiti saw the adoption of important
legislation beyond the electoral law, such as the law
on the financing of political parties, the law against
money-laundering and terrorism financing, and the
anti-corruption law for which MINUSTAH had been
advocating.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, Haiti is at a turning point where
progress on peace, security and stability must be
sustained through the consolidation of the democratic
process, the rule of law, good governance and better
support for the needs of the entire population. The
promulgation of the electoral law and the recent
signing of the El Rancho agreement, arising from the
inter-Haitian dialogue process, mark important steps
towards the holding of elections in 2014.
The commitment shown by national stakeholders to
dialogue as a means of agreement is a victory for Haiti.
I hope that the dialogue will continue and deepen so as
to respond to the many challenges the country faces. It
is in the national interest that Haitian political actors
adhere to the spirit of the agreement in order to ensure
that the country continues to move forward on the path
towards the democracy and stabilization necessary
for the sustainable socioeconomic development of the
Haitian people.

14-27334

24/03/2014

The question concerning Haiti

The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Honoré
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Honoré for her briefing, which, together with the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2014/162), illuminates
the impressive strides Haiti has made, as well as the
challenges it continues to face.
Today, I should like to focus on three areas that
are essential for the Council, the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the
international community to consider as we work with
Haitians to build for the future. These are deepening
security and the rule of law, ensuring consistent
political progress, and finding the right scope and size
for the United Nations presence in the country.
First, with respect to security, the United States
welcomes the ongoing expansion and development of
the Haitian National Police (HNP), and in particular
its growing and demonstrated capacity to take on
responsibility for Haiti’s security. The relatively stable
security situation reported by the Secretary-General,
including in areas of the country that the MINUSTAH
military component has already vacated, indicates
strong progress on this front. While a larger professional
police force remains necessary if sustained stability
and the rule of law are to take root throughout Haiti,
the Government of Haiti and its partners, including
MINUSTAH, must also prioritize the development
of the judiciary, the corrections system and oversight
mechanisms. Further minimizing the number of
prisoners held in pre-trial detention, for example, would
be a key indicator of the Government’s commitment to
strengthening due process in the legal and corrections
systems.
Like strong institutions, a democratic, functioning
political process featuring regular elections is critical
to Haiti’s long-term stability. The gains made since
the Council last met on Haiti in August 2013 (see
S/PV.7024), culminating in this month’s signing of
the El Rancho agreement, are encouraging, and we
commend Haiti’s political leaders for making the
difficult but necessary compromises to move the process
forward so that the Haitian people can freely exercise
their right to choose their Government representatives.
The United States urges those same leaders to act

S/PV.7147

without delay to amend the electoral law, as needed,
and to stand up the provisional Electoral Council so
that Haiti’s election adminstrators will have sufficient
time to organize — with the strong support of Haiti’s
partners, including MINUSTAH — elections in 2014
that are free, fair, credible and inclusive.
The United States also encourages Special
Representative Honoré to continue to facilitate dialogue
among political leaders and with civil society to ensure
that disagreements about the electoral process or other
areas of civic life are resolved swiftly so that they do
not threaten Haiti’s hard-won gains.
In the light of Haiti’s progress, the United States
welcomes the Secretary-General’s presentation of
possible alternate designs for the United Nations
presence in Haiti beyond 2016, and we agree with
the Secretary-General that an accelerated transition
to a new United Nations configuration in Haiti could
be considered if conditions on the ground permit.
The United States urges the Secretary-General to
conduct, as soon as possible, a strategic assessment
that evaluates whether conditions, including expected
election support requirements, warrant accelerating the
transition to a new Mission structure or continuing the
conditions of the base drawdown under way. We urge
the Secretary-General to report his findings in his next
report on Haiti to the Security Council.
The Council must continue to ensure that
MINUSTAH’s mandate, structure and size remain
appropriate to Haiti’s evolving circumstances. In that
regard, we hope that the United Nations can provide
more detailed reporting on the declining role of
MINUSTAH forces in ensuring security in Haiti. For
example, specific information over time on the number
and type of incidents in which the HNP requested
and received operational support, also organized by
location and the type and number of MINUSTAH
forces that responded, would be useful to determining
where the HNP stands in progressing towards being
able to assume full responsibility for Haiti’s security.
More information about the frequency of, and need
for, independent MINUSTAH patrols, particularly by
military elements, also would be useful to the Council’s
deliberations. We expect that such patrols would already
be in steady decline, given the expansion of the HNP
and the fact that they need to test their capacity while
robust MINUSTAH operational support and advice
remain available. At a minimum, those patrols should
be conducted with the HNP, not independent of them.

14-273345/35

S/PV.7147

The question concerning Haiti

Finally, the United States expresses its deep
gratitude to two Brazilians. First, we thank Lieutenant
General Pujol for his dedicated service as Force
Commander. Secondly, we congratulate Lieutenant
General Jaborandy on his appointment. The dedicated
men and women of MINUSTAH have the utmost
admiration and support of the United States as they
work together with the Haitian people to build a more
peaceful and prosperous future in Haiti.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Ms. Sandra Honoré, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), for her
briefing on MINUSTAH’s work in Haiti.
The context of the establishment of MINUSTAH
is complex — from the very precarious sociopolitical
situation to the 2010 earthquake and the ravages of
hurricane Sandy, which left more than 500,000 dead and
thousands of wounded, as well as 1.2 million internally
displaced and major physical and psychological damage.
Under those conditions, reconstruction and stabilization
is slow and painful. Stabilization will only be possible
with the will and efforts of the Haitians themselves.
We commend the work of the United Nations team and
their commitment to support Haitians.
Chad notes with satisfaction the progress made in
the national dialogue that began in January under the
auspices of the Episcopal Conference of Haiti.
We are pleased at the consensus that all the parties
reached in order to hold free, transparent senatorial and
local elections. We thank the Mission for the technical
support to strengthen the instruments needed for
holding the upcoming elections.
On the security front, the Mission has effectively
completed its mandate to strengthen the capacity of the
Haitian National Police. Chad actively contributes to
the Mission with six trainers of trainers. We are pleased
that there has been a greater inclusion and promotion of
women in the police force with the objective of leading
to a further decrease in the high crime rate, trafficking
and the networks of organized crime in Haiti.
The humanitarian situation continues to be of
concern, with more than 600,000 people needing
humanitarian and food assistance, as well as aid in the
areas of housing and basic sanitation. We are pleased
that MINUSTAH has chosen to pursue lasting solutions
and the creation of income-generating opportunities so

6/35

24/03/2014

that those people can be reintegrated into social and
economic life of Haiti.
Immigration is another sensitive element in Haiti’s
development. Owing to the great number of immigrants
in the region, promoting regional dialogue will be
important for more humane and effective management
of migration issues. We also encourage the Government
of Haiti to invest in the diaspora, as it is a factor in
encouraging and energizing the country’s development.
Chad commends the progress made by the Haitian
Government and MINUSTAH in terms of human
rights. We note with satisfaction the efforts made
by the Haitian justice system to bring to justice the
perpetrators of abuses and violations committed under
the previous regime, which has made it possible to reduce
impunity considerably and to give more legitimacy and
independence to the Haitian justice system.
In conclusion, I would like to say that MINUSTAH
has carried out its mission. However, the holding of
elections continues to be an essential challenge on the
path to the democratic stabilization of Haiti. We call on
all parties to continue the dialogue and to work for the
social and economic stabilization of Haiti. Chad calls
on the international community, through the Security
Council, to provide all the necessary humanitarian
assistance to the vulnerable population to bring about
the stabilization of Haiti.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Honoré for her briefing. China appreciates the
vigorous efforts of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and, in particular,
those of Ms. Honoré herself in maintaining peace and
stability in Haiti.
In the recent period, the political and stabilization
process in Haiti has registered continued progress.
A new electoral law was enacted late last year, and
the national dialogue process was launched earlier
this year. The capacity of the Haitian National Police
force continues to improve, and the security situation
across the country, in particular the situation in the
five departments vacated by the Mission, has remained
stable. At the same time, tensions exist between
the executive and legislative branches, coupled
with sluggish economic growth and a precarious
humanitarian situation. The peaceful reconstruction of
the country remains an uphill battle. The improvement
of the situation in Haiti requires first and foremost

14-27334

24/03/2014

The question concerning Haiti

concrete measures on the part of all stakeholders in
Haiti. At the same time, the international community
should actively provide assistance. China is of the view
that, in the way forward, efforts must be made in the
following three areas.
First, we must actively facilitate relevant election
processes. We hope that all parties in Haiti will
resolve their differences through dialogue and reach
a consensus as early as possible on electoral matters,
with a view to ensuring a smooth general election later
this year and further consolidating national stability.
Secondly, the international community should take
concrete steps to honour its pledges to Haiti and actively
participate in the reconstruction process of Haiti. Haiti
has the highest occurrence of cholera in the world, and
the scale of the epidemic is alarming. China welcomes
the efforts of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for the
elimination of cholera and welcomes the appointment
of the Secretary-General’s Senior Coordinator for
Cholera Response. China calls on all Member States to
continue to provide financial and technical support to
Haiti’s cholera control programme.
Thirdly, we hope that MINUSTAH, in accordance
with the mandate given to the Mission by the Security
Council, continues to assist Haiti in maintaining security
and stability, promoting the political process and
strengthening the rule of law and institutional capacitybuilding in order to provide a stable environment for
the economic and social development of Haiti.
China has taken note of the preliminary options
outlined by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon with
regard to the United Nations configuration in Haiti
beyond 2016. We hope that the Secretariat, on the basis
of the Secretary-General’s proposals and on the basis
of careful study of the situation on the ground, will
prepare a more detailed plan accordingly.
China stands ready to maintain close contact with
other members of the Council in that regard.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra Honoré, for presenting
the latest report (S/2014/162) of the Secretary-General
on the work of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
There have been many signs of stabilization in
Haiti lately. Despite the civil unrest and the further
exacerbation of tensions between the legislative and

S/PV.7147

executive branches of Government late last year,
the leadership of the country and the main political
forces appear to have reached significant agreements
in normalizing the political process. As a result of the
inter-Haitian dialogue, it has been possible not only
make those positive developments more sustainable,
but also to move towards resolving the most acute issue,
namely, the organization of elections, which we hope
will take place in October. The successful holding of
elections will be very important for stabilizing of public
institutions and creating conditions that are favourable
to the socioeconomic development of the country.
There has also been progress in many other key
areas. The security situation remains relatively calm
and the level of crime has been falling. There are also
positive trends in the humanitarian sphere, although
much remains to be done in terms of resolving the
situation of internally displaced persons, ensuring food
security and combating cholera. In that regard, we note
the very positive efforts of the Haitian Government,
including in coordinating donor assistance and the
assistance provided through United Nations funds and
programmes.
We also take note of the Secretary-General’s data
on the increased professionalism and manpower of the
Haitian National Police. A significant contribution was
made by the United Nations Mission, for which police
training is one of the key components of its mandate.
We consider that MINUSTAH should continue to
provide assistance to Haiti in developing its law
enforcement bodies and in strengthening law and
order so that ultimately the country’s security is being
ensured by its own national police forces. However, it is
also important for peacekeepers to provide operational
support, if necessary, until the operation is completed.
We note with satisfaction the efforts of the Mission
in other areas provided for under the mandate. It is
hard to underestimate the long-standing contribution of
the Mission in stabilizing the situation. An important
role in stabilizing the country has also been played by
regional integration bodies.
Overall, we share the assessment of the SecretaryGeneral on the need to develop a holistic vision
for MINUSTAH for the period after 2016. At the
same time, the breadth of the various options for
reconfiguration — from the full and practical retention
of the peacekeeping mission in its form under the
current mandate to its full withdrawal — clearly points
to the fact that we should discuss concrete options very

14-273347/35

S/PV.7147

The question concerning Haiti

carefully. Given the specific situation, it is important
to be guided not only by an in-depth analysis of the
situation this year, but also by the degree to which
sustainable trends continue. It is also important to
understand the extent to which it will be necessary to
retain a significant military contingent. One important
factor will be the pace at which responsibility for all
aspects of stabilization and development is transferred
to local authorities. Of particular importance will be
their view on the most preferred forms of cooperation
with the United Nations after 2016.
For the time being, the Government of the country
and the international community, led by the United
Nations, have a broad range of complex issues to address,
a lead role in which should be played by the Haitian
Government. It is the Government that is responsible
for the effective use of the assistance provided by the
international community and should play a very active
role in coordinating that assistance.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank Ms. Sandra Honoré for her briefing. I align
myself with the statements to be made on behalf of the
European Union and the Group of Friends of Haiti.
Since the arrival of United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Haiti has made
enormous progress. The adoption of an electoral law
last October is evidence of the ongoing normalization
and progressive strengthening of the rule of law. We
look forward also to the forthcoming partial local and
senatorial elections that have been postponed several
times.
In addition, the progress made by the Haitian
National Police is encouraging. The significant decline
in crime noted in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/162) is an important step forward. We are also
pleased to note that an increasing number of cadets
are graduating every year and that a growing number
women are joining their ranks. Cooperation between
the police component of MINUSTAH and the Haitian
National Police is fruitful and useful. In a context of
reflection on the size and mandate of the peacekeeping
operations, the example of Haiti gives us food for
thought.
We also note with satisfaction the progress made in
the humanitarian sphere. The return of refugees to their
areas of origin and the drop in the number of people
affected by food insecurity are encouraging signs.
The wounds opened by the earthquake are gradually

8/35

24/03/2014

disappearing, thanks to the joint work of the Haitian
Government, the people, MINUSTAH and the United
Nations country team.
Much remains to be done, nonetheless. The rule
of law and the country’s institutions need to improve
their efficiency, transparency and accessibility. The
many protests by the civilian population illustrate the
frustration, even exasperation, of the citizens who care
to participate in the political life of their country. The
launch of an inter-Haitian political dialogue in January,
which is a praiseworthy initiative, should lead to an
inclusive agreement. We therefore welcome the signing
of the memorandum of understanding on 19 March. We
call on all parties to engage resolutely in the road map
it defines.
In the field of human rights, we welcome the
appointment of a human rights ombudsman on
4 December, the authorities’ willingness to renew the
mandate of the independent expert of the Human Rights
Council and the denial of the appeal of Jean-Claude
Duvalier, accused of crimes against humanity. Those
decisions are encouraging, but violations of human
rights continue. It is the responsibility of the State to
pursue a proactive policy in that area.
Finally, the remaining humanitarian challenges are
substantial. We are very concerned about a possible
resurgence of the cholera epidemic during the next
rainy season. We fully support the action and the
commitment of the United Nations in its efforts to
completely eradicate the disease. For those challenges
that persist, the United Nations should support and
complement the action of the Haitian State, but it
cannot and should not replace it. The Haitian State
must mobilize more resolutely to exercise its regulatory
functions independently.
MINUSTAH was deployed in 2004 in a context of
acute crisis. That crisis was exacerbated a few years
later by the earthquake. Ten years later, as described
by the Secretary-General in his report, the progress is
real. MINUSTAH must therefore adapt and reflect the
positive developments, which are proof of its success.
A consolidation plan already oversees the reduction
process initiated since 2013. That process will be
completed in 2016.
We must go further and more quickly. Starting
today, we must reflect on the post-MINUSTAH period
and on the future of the United Nations presence in Haiti.
In that regard, we welcome the five scenarios presented

14-27334

24/03/2014

The question concerning Haiti

by the Secretary-General for the reconfiguration of the
Mission beyond 2016. We consider them to provide the
framework for the reflection that we want to undertake.
In that context, a strategic review conducted by the
Secretariat as soon as possible will be invaluable to the
Council. Based on an accurate assessment of needs on
the ground and presented to the Security Council by
August 2014, such a review will allow members of the
Council to define what type of mission is best suited
after 2016 to the political and security situation in Haiti.
Moreover, between now and 2016, it could also tells us
whether it is possible to adapt the Mission more quickly
and more radically.
Beyond its mission of good political offices
policies, it seems essential at this point that the future
United Nations mission in Haiti will maintain a strong
police component. Needs in terms of public order and
of training and support of the Haitian National Police
and, more broadly, the building of the rule of law, are
indeed the main challenges Haiti is facing and for which
a response of the United Nations is the most relevant. It
will be the heart of the future mission. We will therefore
have to determine its contours in close coordination
with the Haitian authorities and the Friends of Haiti.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Sandra Honoré, for her briefing today. We
recognize the continued contribution of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to
stability and progress in Haiti, and I would like to thank
the departing Force Commander, Lieutenant General
Edson Leal Pujol, for his service in MINUSTAH. We
would also like to welcome Lieutenant General Jose
Luiz Jaborandy Jr. as the new Force Commander.
Haiti stands in a stronger position today than it
has for some time in recent history. As we see from
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/162), notable
progress has been made in areas such as rehousing
internally displaced persons, building the capacity of
the Haitian National Police, who are taking greater
responsibility for security throughout the country,
and the striking downward trend in major crimes. We
also welcome the economic growth reported by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the building block that that provides for sustainable
development.
However, those gains can be threatened by a lack
of political progress in holding elections. In order to

S/PV.7147

ensure Haiti’s future development and stability, longoverdue local, municipal and partial senatorial elections
must be held. Dialogue between the executive and
parliamentary branches of Government and the political
parties in Haiti is essential to resolve the political
impasse. We urge all parties to address democratic
governance, elections and constitutional amendments
through the national dialogue process. As the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General said, a path
has been prepared towards inclusive and transparent
elections. It is essential that that path be followed in
2014, leading to a clear destination in the form of the
holding of elections.
We are pleased to see that the benchmarks laid out
in the consolidation plan are on track, and we welcome
the Secretary-General’s assessment that those could be
accelerated, given the progress in Haiti to date. The
Haitian National Police are more visible, more proactive
and more in the lead of security operations across Haiti.
We applaud the advances made in recruitment, training
and operational responsibility.
At the same time, in order to complement
improvements in the Haitian National Police, the
judicial and prison sectors must make similar advances.
More work is necessary, in particular on the part
of the Government of Haiti, to develop justice and
accountability institutions. Today, those institutions
provide limited access to justice, are weak and open to
influence and maintain pre-trial detention periods that
are unacceptable, and that must change.
We agree with the report of the Secretary-General
that the functions likely to remain relevant beyond
2016 will be continued support for the development of
the Haitian National Police, consolidation of political
stabilization gains through good offices, continued
strengthening of the rule of law through security
sector and legislative reforms, and the promotion and
protection of human rights.
With those tasks in mind, we agree with the report’s
assessment that the future United Nations presence in
Haiti will need to have a more tailored mandate and a
lighter footprint so as to ensure that the United Nations
presence is appropriate to Haiti’s needs today. We now
await the outcomes of the strategic assessment and
urge that to be conducted as soon as possible. We look
forward to hearing the outcomes of that assessment in
the next report of the Secretary-General.
We welcome the fact that the Secretary-General’s
recent report sets out a broad range of options,

14-273349/35

S/PV.7147

The question concerning Haiti

particularly given what we have just heard about
political progress and continued improvement in the
performance of the Haitian National Police, and if those
welcome trends are sustained, we believe we should
be ready to consider ambitious options for the United
Nations presence post-2016 that prioritize Haitian
ownership.
The future of Haiti is in the hands of the national
authorities. Only they can build on MINUSTAH’s
efforts and consolidate the gains of the past few years.
As the Council begins to consider how best to support
the Haitian authorities after the end of the consolidation
plan, now is the time for them to assume the
responsibilities conferred on them by Haitian people.
The Government cannot rely on MINUSTAH to be in
Haiti forever, and cannot shirk their obligations in the
hope that the international community will fill the gap.
Lastly, we echo the Secretary-General’s view that
it has become imperative for the national authorities
to assume greater responsibility in establishing the
rule of law and in preparations for the next elections.
Doing so will provide the political stability necessary
for economic investment, and we urge the Haitian
authorities to fulfil those responsibilities to safeguard
Haiti’s future.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank Ms. Sandra Honoré, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for her
comprehensive briefing.
Over the past several decades, the international
community has exerted great efforts to provide
assistance to Haiti and support it in overcoming the
humanitarian, political and security challenges facing
it. The international presence in Haiti has involved
great sacrifices on the part of the countries that have
participated in peacekeeping in Haiti, as well as those
that have contributed substantially to relief efforts and
efforts to alleviate the humanitarian suffering of the
Haitian people, which on many occasions has resulted
from sudden natural catastrophes.
Today, we are pleased to see that those international
efforts have resulted in new and recent progress in
the main aspects of life in Haiti. The country is now
relative stable in terms of security and a there has
been a noticeable improvement in the performance of
the national police. There has also been progress on
the humanitarian front and economic indicators have

10/35

24/03/2014

improved. The international community must continue
its support for Haiti on its path towards stability.
However, the primary responsibility for maintaining the
gains that have already been achieved and accelerating
their achievement falls to the Government of Haiti and
its political leaders.
Foremost among those responsibilities is the need
to improve the overall political climate and address
popular tensions, which are primarily a result of the
continued delays in holding local, municipal and partial
senate elections. In that context, Jordan welcomes the
launch of the national dialogue process and its focus
on the most urgent issues in Haiti’s political life. We
call on all principal stakeholders to cooperate and to
be involved in that dialogue. Jordan calls upon the
Government of Haiti to continue the preparations for
the holding of free, fair, transparent and inclusive
elections without delay, given the importance of that
democratic task and of easing tensions throughout the
country. In that context, we look forward to having the
United Nations provide the necessary support for the
forthcoming electoral process.
The Government of Haiti must also deal seriously
with social and economic grievances and the gaps
in basic services, which lead to escalating popular
frustrations and thus threaten the entire political
process. It is important to continue providing assistance
to Haiti to achieve progress in other important areas,
in particular the rule of law and the development of
the judicial and security sectors. It is also important
to promote and enhance the international response to
urgent humanitarian needs in Haiti, including severe
shortages in foodstuffs and the need to combat cholera.
I would like to address the following points
concerning the future presence of the United Nations
in Haiti.
First, the reduction of the military component by
15 per cent during the reporting period is cause for
concern for us, because this is a very delicate stage,
in the light of the upcoming elections. By the end of
June, the total number of troops that will have been
withdrawn is 1,249 infantrymen and engineers. Also,
there will not be a maritime capacity to transport
a rapid intervention force, should the need arise, to
support local and international police in areas outside
Port-au-Prince.
Secondly, we emphasize the need to launch a
comprehensive planning process for the post-2016

14-27334

24/03/2014

The question concerning Haiti

United Nations presence in Haiti. We look forward
to identifying the most suitable format for the United
Nations presence to enable it to provide assistance to
the Government and people of Haiti following that date,
in particular support for the development of the Haitian
National Police and consolidation of the gains made in
political stability, the ongoing promotion of the rule of
law and the protection of human rights.
The five options proposed by the Secretary-General
in his report (S/2014/162) for the achievement of such
tasks were discussed very generally and not in sufficient
detail to enable us to identify all the relevant facts. They
therefore require a comprehensive strategic assessment
by the United Nations system. We hope that the next
report of the Secretary-General will include further
details on the options and will present an in-depth
assessment of the conditions on the ground and their
impact on each option, as well as recommendations for
the most suitable option.
Thirdly, any fundamental change in the current
United Nations presence in Haiti must be made only
following the full implementation of the main mandate
and verification of the achievement of its original and
primary objective, namely, to help the people of Haiti
to build a stable, secure and politically active State,
Government institutions and a system that promotes the
rule of law and protects human rights.
In conclusion, I would like to mention that at the end
of the month the last Jordanian troops participating in
MINUSTAH will return home after broad participation
in Haiti for an entire decade, during which time 14
Jordanian personnel gave their lives. We would like
to emphasize that Jordan stands ready to continue to
contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security wherever there is or will be an international
presence in future.
Mrs. Kazragienė (Lithuania): I would like to thank
Special Representative Sandra Honoré for her briefing
and for her efforts. I also thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2014/162). We reaffirm our continuing
support for the Mission.
Lithuania associates itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.
We are pleased with the advancement of the political
process in Haiti. We commend the decision to conduct
local and national elections no later than 26 October and
presidential elections in 2015. The elections should be

S/PV.7147

inclusive and transparent. The United Nations presence
in Haiti should be ready to provide its support to the
electoral processes. The consolidation of democracy
and institutions remains an important pillar of the
United Nations support to Haiti. We welcome President
Martelly’s call for national unity and dialogue and a
more collaborative relationship between Parliament
and the executive branch, as demonstrated in the
inter-Haitian dialogue that was launched in January.
We commend the progress made during the
reporting period in implementing the conditions-based
consolidation plan of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). The plan has shown
tangible results in meeting the professionalization target
of the Haitian National Police as the national authorities
assume greater responsibility in establishing the rule
of law. Local authorities should assume even greater
ownership of security and safety in Haiti. An effective
National Police is essential to the long-term peace and
security solutions for the country. The misconduct
and human rights violations of police officers should
therefore be immediately addressed. Further progress
is needed to improve pre-trial detention conditions so
as to resolve cases of illegal detention. The rule of law
is absolutely critical to good governance and stability.
As stated in the Secretary-General’s report, we
note with satisfaction that Haiti’s commitment to
international cooperation, in particular on human rights
issues, has strengthened, We commend Haitian efforts
to enhance gender equality and to set the conditions for
greater opportunities for women. We note, for example,
that gender considerations have been taken into
account in the recruitment of new student magistrates.
However, gender-based violence and increased violence
against women in Haiti remain deeply troubling. That
is a security concern for the nation, whose women are
an intrinsic part of the process towards reconstructing
Haiti. In that regard, Lithuania recalls resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), which reaffirm the
important role of women in peacekeeping. We call for
the incorporation of gender perspectives in all United
Nations peace and security efforts, including within
MINUSTAH.
We remain concerned about the cholera situation
in Haiti. There were fewer cholera cases during the
reporting period, with the Pan-American Health
Organization forecasting 45,000 infections in 2014,
down from nearly 700,000 cases from October
2010 to 31 January 2013. At the same time, the number

14-2733411/35

S/PV.7147

The question concerning Haiti

of cholera cases in Haiti is the highest in the world.
Additional efforts should be taken in line with the
United Nations system’s commitment to supporting the
10-year National Plan for the Elimination of Cholera in
Haiti 2013-2022.
We are pleased that the M1NUSTAH presence
is continuously adjusted in line with the progress
achieved in the country. With regard to the future of
MINUSTAH, we are analysing the five options put
forward by the Secretary-General for the new United
Nations configuration following the completion of the
consolidation process in 2016. We look forward to the
results of the planned full-scale United Nations-wide
strategic assessment in order to form our informed
position. At this stage, we are of the view that any
decision should reflect the balance between the scope
of the mandates of all peacekeeping missions and the
resources allocated to them. We note that MINUSTAH
has progressively disengaged from operational support
activities and that further progress is needed in the areas
of the rule of law, such as justice and accountability.
At the same time, we underline the importance of
consolidating the achievements in Haiti and of ensuring
their sustainability by both the Government of Haiti
and the United Nations community.
In conclusion, Lithuania wishes once again to
express its gratitude to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and the MINUSTAH troop- and
police-contributing countries, as well as the United
Nations country office in Haiti. We remain committed
to continuing our support to the Haitian Government
in its efforts to promote a national dialogue, peace and
security and to build a stable future for its people.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, Ambassador Sandra
Honoré, for her briefing on the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2014/162). I would also like to recognize her
work, her efforts and the results she is achieving as
she contributes to strengthening dialogue and, through
dialogue, Haiti’s institutions.
I would like to welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of Haiti and his active
delegation. We would also like to acknowledge the work
of Lieutenant General Pujol as the head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and welcome Lieutenant General José Luiz Jaborandy.
We would also like to thank General Guerrero for his
12/35

24/03/2014

performance as Deputy Force Commander for the
Mission over the recent years.
On 14 March, we saw the conclusion of a historic
agreement in Haiti that could have a significant
impact on the institutional stability of Haiti and the
strengthening of democracy. It was an agreement
that was reached between Haitian men and women
and coordinated by the women and men of Haiti. We
welcome the expression of political will for the holding
of legislative, municipal and local elections in 2014.
We trust that MINUSTAH will provide the necessary
support for the elections to be held this year, and that the
holding of those elections will take place in a context
of safety and security and be free, fair and transparent.
We also note the progress of recent months in
the area of human rights. In that regard, we wish to
underscore the decision of the Port-au-Prince Court
of Appeal ordering investigations into charges of
crimes against humanity committed during Duvalier’s
presidency. We understand that this is an important
step forward on the path towards justice, truth and
reparation for the victims. We are also encouraged
by the international accreditation on 4 December
2013 of the Haitian Office of the Ombudsperson as a
national human rights institution by the International
Coordinating Committee of National Institutions for
the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, as
well as the coming into force of the interministerial
commission on human rights.
At the same time, we understand that Haiti
continues to face major challenges in that area. In
particular, we are concerned by the situation in the area
of sexual violence, violence against women and genderbased violence, and the response of the judiciary and
the police to those cases. It is a fundamental issue in the
context of the training of the Haitian National Police,
among other institutions. We hope that the international
community will continue to support Haiti in building
the necessary capacity to ensure the appropriate
investigation of all cases and the necessary assistance
and follow-up for the victims.
We also wish to underscore that this is not a new
situation. Sexual violence, gender-based violence and
violence against women are not new or exclusive to
Haiti, but they also exist in Haiti. It is therefore a shared
challenge to train the people who are in or will become
part of the police force, as well as those in the justice
system and the prison system. All public institutions
must maintain a comprehensive and holistic view
14-27334

24/03/2014

The question concerning Haiti

that incorporates a focus on human rights and gender
equality. To that end, the democratic stabilization and
sustainable human development must prioritize the
economic, social, cultural and political independence
of women and youth — an institutional cultural change
that is needed in order to eradicate all forms of violence,
not only in Haiti, but in Haiti as well.
I would also like to underscore the progress made on
the humanitarian front as 90 per cent of the population
displaced by the earthquake of 2010 had left the camps
by late 2013 as a result of the return and relocation
programmes. Despite that, although we recognize that
the incidence of cholera has been reduced in the past
year, we are concerned that Haiti has the highest number
of cholera cases in the world. We call on the United
Nations and the international community to continue
supporting the Government of Haiti in its fight against
the epidemic.
The Secretary-General’s report recognizes that
MINUSTAH has continued to assist the Haitian
Government in ensuring a secure and stable
environment, in addition to enabling the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and preparing for disaster
response, supporting the Haitian National Police and
conducting the tasks that the Council has entrusted it
with. The Secretary-General also highlights that work
has continued to be done with the Government of Haiti
to advance progress towards the four jointly agreed
stabilization benchmarks outlined in the Mission’s
conditions-based consolidation plan.
We are therefore grateful to the Secretary-General
for his presentation of a series of options for the United
Nations presence in Haiti as elements for the discussion
on the future of the Mission, depending on conditions
on the ground. We understand that it is important to
consolidate the progress made in terms of security and
stability and to avoid jeopardizing those achievements
with hasty decisions that might be based solely on
budgetary considerations. In our region of Latin
America and the Caribbean, we know that when the
possibility of progress is considered from the viewpoint
of adjustments, we do not need to make adjustments;
rather, we need to consolidate and continue to make
progress in strengthening the institutions and the
political and security context in Haiti.
In conclusion, we are convinced that the future
presence of the United Nations in Haiti must be based
on a detailed assessment of the Mission’s capacity and
should be carefully planned after we have analysed

S/PV.7147

the impact on the ground of any potential decision.
We understand that any future debate on the Mission
should enjoy the full participation of the Government,
as it is essential to take into account the position of any
country in which the United Nations is carrying out its
activities.
With regard to popular demonstrations, we are
seeing those throughout the world — in developed
countries, in emerging countries, in countries in
crisis, and in countries with stable institutions. These
demonstrations are calling for economic and social
rights and the right to education, so they do not have a
special significance in Haiti. But what should be taken
into account in Haiti is that legitimate demonstrations
in which citizens call for the exercise of their rights
must take place in a safe environment and settled
democratically, and that the institutions of the rule of
law must be respected.
When I was a national senator in 2005, after the
Security Council adopted resolution 1542 (2004)
establishing MINUSTAH, I accompanied our first
troop contingent to Port-au-Prince and Gonaïves.
Clearly, progress has been made by the people of Haiti
and MINUSTAH, and it should be recognized. It was a
major challenge for the region. A peace force went to
work in cooperation and solidarity with the people of
Haiti. It was a group formed in solidarity by the peoples
of the region. I believe that is one of the lessons learned.
Not everything has been resolved. The strategy of the
Mission was not to remain there forever, however. The
shared plan was to go to help to stabilize the country
and gradually withdraw, but also not prematurely.
The earthquake and the health problems have
without a doubt created difficulties for the Mission.
However, we Latin Americans and Caribbeans share
with the Haitian people two major passions: soccer
and democracy. Haiti was the first democracy in
Latin America. With that passion for football and for
democracy, I am sure that the United Nations and the
Council will, when the time is right, neither remain
forever nor withdraw too early but do so gradually,
thereby showing that it is possible for a United Nations
mission, working with the people and the Government
of the country in question, to achieve its goals:
democracy, human rights, security and peace — if it
also achieves equality, all the better.
Ms. King (Australia): We thank Special
Representative Sandra Honoré for her briefing. We
also welcome the Permanent Representative of Haiti

14-2733413/35

S/PV.7147

The question concerning Haiti

to the Council. We recently had an opportunity to
engage directly with personnel of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) on the
ground in the country and to see first-hand the work being
done by the Mission. We recognize their unwavering
commitment to the stability and reconstruction of the
country.
Of the four stabilization benchmarks of
MINUSTAH’s consolidation plan, we would like to
welcome in particular the progress that is being made
in strengthening the capacity of the Haitian National
Police, which is increasingly visible and proactive,
resulting in a decrease of all major crime indices
over the past year. While the Haitian National Police
is on track to meet its target of 15,000 officers by
2016, we would encourage greater efforts to recruit
female cadets. We look forward to the continued
implementation of community-orientated policing
strategies and strengthened resourcing and reform to
support a professional and autonomous force.
We commend the establishment of a sexual and
gender-based violence specialized team by the United
Nations police, with the assistance of the Governments
of Norway and Canada, which is working with the
Haitian National Police to support investigations and
build capacity to address those very serious crimes.
Despite these improvements, progress on the
rule of law is lagging behind, which could jeopardize
progress in other areas. The Government of Haiti
must remain committed to strengthening the rule of
law and promoting the independence of the judiciary.
We remain concerned about prison overcrowding and
prolonged pre-trial detention periods. The fact that
many of those arrested face years of incarceration
before their cases are heard is unacceptable. We urge
MINUSTAH to redouble its efforts in working with the
Government of Haiti to implement effective strategies
to address the management of pre-trial detention and
prison sentences, to increase investigative expertise
and apply legislative reform through the adoption of
draft criminal and criminal procedure codes.
With regard to other human rights issues, we
acknowledge the positive and constructive steps that
the Government of Haiti has taken recently, including
its ratification of some important international human
rights instruments. Notably, in December, the Haitian
Office of the Ombudsperson was internationally
accredited as a national human rights institution and

14/35

24/03/2014

the Inter-Ministerial Commission on Human Rights
became operational during the period. Those are
important developments.
While there has been some improvement in the
humanitarian situation, the people of Haiti continue to
face numerous challenges. Continued food insecurity
and increases in child malnutrition are of great concern,
which are exacerbated by the ongoing drought in the
north-west of the country. We commend the efforts
of the World Food Programme, which has begun to
distribute food to those affected.
It remains a matter of great concern that longoverdue local, municipal and partial senatorial
elections have not been held. Since the Council last
discussed Haiti (see S/PV.7040), some much-needed
steps towards holding long-overdue elections have been
taken. The enacting of the Electoral Act and Political
Parties Act are both very welcome. The recent national
dialogue process demonstrated the commitment and
determination of political leaders, and we welcome the
signing of the El Rancho agreement, which should pave
the way for planning of elections later this year. While
such breakthroughs are encouraging, it is essential that
all political leaders continue to work towards consensus
on holding elections in 2014, and for MINUSTAH to
continue to provide electoral assistance and logistical
support for those elections.
We welcome the options presented by the SecretaryGeneral for the United Nations future engagement in
Haiti post-2016. The considerable progress made in
the stabilization of Haiti since MINUSTAH’s initial
deployment, in 2004, leads us to consider that it is
time for the Council to give MINUSTAH’s transition
some thoughtful consideration. We remain open to
an accelerated transition to a new United Nations
configuration in Haiti, while cautioning that it needs to
be carefully calibrated to the situation on the ground.
Haiti remains fragile in many areas, and we must
be sure to persevere and sustain the gains that have
been made. We look forward to receiving the strategic
assessment foreshadowed in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2014/162) and recommendations on the most
appropriate option for the United Nations’ future
engagement in Haiti.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank Special Representative Sandra Honoré for her
briefing. During last week’s discussion on post-conflict
peacebuilding (see S/PV.7143), we deliberated on some

14-27334

24/03/2014

The question concerning Haiti

core elements that also apply to today’s debate. Today
I would like to make three points, focusing on mutual
responsibility among all parties concerned. This
factor will be all the more important in consolidating
the achievements made to date and expediting the
remaining process.
First, with regard to the political process, the
recent agreement signed by all political stakeholders
to hold combined elections this year is encouraging.
The growing impatience among the population must
be addressed without further delay. The political
leadership in Haiti should step up preparations for the
long-delayed elections while providing a level playing
field for all participants. Addressing the socioeconomic
grievances of citizens should be a top priority for the
Haitian Government. In that regard, we commend
the supporting role played by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and
international partners.
Secondly, with regard to institution-building,
we would like to stress that the establishment of
national institutions should be accompanied by
strong political will, otherwise their legitimacy
and effectiveness, which constitute a solid basis for
national unity and the credibility of authorities, cannot
be ensured. Political consensus on that aspect is
another indispensable ingredient for the success of the
upcoming elections. In that context, we welcome the
continued professionalization of the Haitian National
Police and hope that that impetus can spread to other
equally important institutions ensuring the rule of law
in Haitian society. MINUSTAH, the United Nations
Development Programme and other partners need to
continuously seek greater synergy to assist the Haitian
Government in its capacity-building efforts through
effective coordination.
Lastly, on the reconfiguration of MINUSTAH, we
appreciate the Secretary-General’s forward-looking
approach to reconfiguring MINUSTAH beyond 2016.
The five options presented in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2014/162) provide a good basis for the Security
Council possible alternatives given the evolving
situation. We support the Secretary-General regularly
reviewing and reporting on his strategic assessment to
the Council as the Council seeks the most appropriate
course of action in the years ahead.
We hope that the Haitian people and their leadership
will take all of those challenges more proactively, in

S/PV.7147

close cooperation with international partners. The
Republic of Korea extends its full support to Special
Representative Honoré and MINUSTAH in assisting
Haiti’s stabilization and capacity-building in this
consolidation process.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank Ms. Sandra
Honoré, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Haiti and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), for her
briefing on the current developments in the country.
I appreciate in particular her intensive engagement
with the political decision-makers in Haiti, advocating
for the continuity of democratic institutions, national
dialogue, a consensual legislative agenda and progress
towards the holding of free and fair elections.
Rwanda would like to congratulate the leadership
and the people of Haiti for their incredible resilience and
for the spirit they have exhibited in the search for peace,
stability, security and development, in particular since
the 2010 earthquake. As indicated in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2014/162), Haiti has recorded
remarkable progress in almost all areas — including
in the political, security, humanitarian spheres and in
the rule of law — despite the challenges that Haiti and
its people continue to face. We are also encouraged by
the Government’s commitment to fostering a greater
alignment of international assistance with national
priorities, increased transparency and strengthened
mutual accountability. Those efforts have contributed
to the Haitian economy’s fast recovery.
Regarding the political situation, Rwanda
congratulates
the
Haitian
Parliament
and
President Michel Martelly on the adoption and
promulgation on 10 December of an electoral law
that has significantly de-escalated political tensions.
We particularly commend Haiti’s political actors,
civil society and the Conférence Episcopale de Haïti
for launching an inter-Haitian dialogue focusing on
the three areas of concern: democratic governance,
elections and amending the Constitution. We encourage
all political actors in Haiti to consider this as a historic
opportunity for building their State that they must
commit to making work, however difficult that may be.
The international community should continue to help
Haiti as it prepares for the forthcoming elections.
We are encouraged by the improved security
situation in the country throughout the reporting
period, as indicated by the crime statistics collected by

14-2733415/35

S/PV.7147

The question concerning Haiti

the National Police and MINUSTAH. The year 2013
saw a stable marginal downward trend in major crimes
compared to the previous year. However, it is worrying
that cases of rape continued to increase. We call on
the Government, with MINUSTAH’s support, to put
in place strategies to ensure the protection of women
and girls and reverse this trend. That said, we commend
the National Police for its performance, which, with the
support of MINUSTAH, has significantly improved the
security situation in the country.
Regarding promotion of the rule of law, we note
that the National Police is increasingly proactive and
visible. Its work has resulted in the dismantling of
several criminal gangs. The Secretary-General’s report
indicates, however, that the vast majority of reported
rapes are never properly adjudicated, due to weaknesses
in the courts, prosecution offices and police stations,
but we have also taken note of the initiatives being
taken to address the issue, including through capacitybuilding for judicial officers and putting proper
structures in place within the police, with the support
of MINUSTAH and the United Nations Development
Programme.
Regarding the humanitarian situation, although
there are still more than 140,000 Haitians displaced
by the 2010 earthquake, it is encouraging to hear that
by the end of last year 90 per cent of the population
displaced by the earthquake had left the internally
displaced persons (IDP) camps. We commend the
collaboration of the Government, the United Nations
and non-governmental partners in that effort. We
believe that with the support of international partners,
all the survivors of the earthquake will soon be resettled.
We also welcome the fact that the overall incidence of
cholera has been halved since the disease first broke
out in late 2010, and that severe food insecurity was
brought down from 1.5 million people affected in early
2013 to 600,000 by the end of the year.
We welcome the continued United Nations efforts
to eliminate the cholera epidemic, and call on all
stakeholders to continue to mobilize the necessary
resources and assist in the efforts to treat and eliminate
cholera in Haiti. In that regard, we note that the
Haitian humanitarian action plan for 2014 identifies
a need for $169 million — intended to provide basic
services for the remaining IDPs living in camps, and to
address critical needs related to the cholera epidemic,
food insecurity, nutrition, protection and disaster
preparedness — of which only $6 million have been

16/35

24/03/2014

received. We call particularly on the Government and
all partners to ensure reduction of the prevalence of
acute malnutrition among children aged under five,
which continues to affect more than 500,000 children.
Concerning MINUSTAH’s status, we take note of
the five options presented by the Secretary-General
for the Mission’s reconfiguration after 2016. We
believe that its reconfiguration should be based on
the dynamics on the ground, in line with the security
and political conditions in the country. In that regard,
Rwanda welcomes the Secretary-General’s intention
to undertake a full-scale strategic assessment, aimed
at providing an updated and in-depth evaluation of
conditions on the ground, on the recommendations of
which the Security Council should base its decision
about options for the drawdown.
To conclude, I would like to say that Rwanda will
continue to support the Government of Haiti in its
reconstruction period, and, as a police-contributing
country to MINUSTAH, we remain committed and stand
ready to assist the Government in professionalizing its
police forces.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Sandra Honoré, for her briefing, and
encourage her to continue to contribute to the process of
Haiti’s restoration through her leadership of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
We also thank the Luxembourg presidency, which has
convened us to discuss the question concerning Haiti, a
topic of interest for Latin America and the Caribbean,
as has been reflected in the Organization of American
States and in successive summits of the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States and other
regional forums.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by the Permanent Representative of
Uruguay on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti.
Chile’s commitment to and solidarity with the
people and authorities of Haiti, on both a bilateral
and multilateral level, is long-standing. Exactly
10 years ago, when, as we do today, we held a seat
as a non-permanent member of the Security Council,
we supported and participated in the deployment of a
multinational interim force in Haiti. That same year, we
strongly supported the creation of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, aimed at supporting the
political process and promoting and protecting human

14-27334

24/03/2014

The question concerning Haiti

rights. Since then, Chile has contributed more than
11,000 men and women to its contingent there. Chile’s
commitment to Haiti has also been reflected in the
leadership of MINUSTAH, in which two of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General have been
Chilean.
MINUSTAH’s presence and multidimensional
nature have been shown to have made a positive
contribution to achieving a relatively stable and secure,
if fragile, environment in Haiti over the years. In
particular, its presence has enabled the country to deal
with the enormous challenges of the 2010 earthquake
and its continuing vulnerability to natural disasters.
Today, improving the political environment in
Haiti is a priority, and in that regard we commend the
Special Representative’s efforts to facilitate a climate
of dialogue among all national stakeholders so as to
strengthen democratic institutions and address pending
processes. Special emphasis should be given to the
electoral arena. We share the Secretary-General’s
findings regarding the importance of holding elections
in 2014 as a critical component in the continuity of
democratic institutions. In that regard, the enactment of
a new electoral law and the start of a national dialogue
process are positive developments, and we urge
Haitian political actors to participate in the dialogue
in a constructive spirit and a democratic approach.
However, there are areas that need special attention,
which is why we call on the authorities to make decisive
efforts to strengthen the rule of law, including in the
judicial and human-rights sectors.
We also urge MINUSTAH to continue its efforts to
include civil society in the political dialogue.
My delegation acknowledges the achievements in
the humanitarian field, in particular the permanent
relocation of over 90 per cent of internally displaced
persons. The efforts of the Haitian authorities, together
with the United Nations and non-governmental
partners, to respond to the challenge led to a positive
synergy that should be replicated in other areas. We
must recall that Haiti represents a clear example of
what the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs has called a forgotten humanitarian crisis; my
country therefore urges the major donors to continue to
finance the humanitarian appeals.
MINUSTAH’s consolidation plan should be
implemented on the basis of ongoing assessments of
needs on the ground. It is also important that future

S/PV.7147

efforts to strengthen Haiti’s institutional capacity be
based on the principle of national ownership in order
to enable the Haitian people to gradually assume the
various responsibilities. It is essential that the plan be
supported by strengthening capacities of the Haitian
National Police within a democratic framework of
respect for human rights.
My delegation welcomes the achievements of the
Haitian National Police strategic development plan
for 2012-2016, especially those of 2013, including the
promotion of over 1,000 police officers, allowing it to
reach the goal of 15,000 police officers by 2016. We
also highlight the graduation of female cadets among
the group. That has been reflected by a decrease in the
crime rate in sensitive urban areas and the disbanding
of several criminal gangs. Focused prevention
efforts carried out at the community level have
been fundamental to that end. We share the concern
of the Secretary-General that progress in police
professionalization has taken place without similar
progress in justice and accountability, thus affecting
the establishment of the rule of law.
The United Nations presence in Haiti in support
of the local authorities remains essential. In that
respect, we note the options offered in the report of
the Secretary-General regarding the United Nations
presence after 2016. It is our belief that those options
represent an initial basis of discussion. They are being
carefully studied by Chile’s Government authorities,
which are also awaiting the strategic assessment to be
provided by the Secretariat.
During her recent visit to Chile, Ms. Honoré
was able to assess with Government authorities the
importance we attach to and our vision for MINUSTAH.
In recent years, the participation of new countries of
Latin America and Caribbean in contributing police or
troop contingents to MINUSTAH has been important
in expressing the region’s commitment to Haiti. In that
respect, Chile also considers it important to increase
the presence of Latin American and Caribbean officials
among MINUSTAH’s civilian component.
Since 1996, my country has maintained a
consistent and firm position on the link between
security and development in achieving peace. That is
why we will continue to support quick-impact projects
and programmes to reduce community violence. We
consider it worth mentioning that the report covers the
development of quick-impact projects to contain the

14-2733417/35

S/PV.7147

The question concerning Haiti

cholera epidemic and prevent water-borne diseases.
That in particular is fully consistent with the United
Nations two-year plan in support of the 10-year
National Plan for the Elimination of Cholera in Haiti,
which is supported by my country. We also welcome
the appointment by the Secretary-General of Mr. Pedro
Medrano Rojas as Senior Coordinator for Cholera
Response in Haiti.
We understand that the financing requirements for
peacekeeping operations are growing worldwide in the
face of scarce resources. Nevertheless, a balance must
be struck within the United Nations in the allocation
of resources in order not to jeopardize the progress
made. Chile reiterates the need for the United Nations
to continue to support the Haitian authorities through
its funds and programmes and through MINUSTAH
and its civilian component, in particular based on the
integrated strategic framework for 2013-2016.
Finally, I wish to reiterate Chile’s commitment to
the Haitian people and authorities and to MINUSTAH.
Chile will continue to support strengthening the rule
of law, democracy and the development of Haiti’s
capacities, which will foster a political culture that is
committed to the country’s stability and the progress of
the Haitian people.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): Ms. Sandra Honoré, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti,
has provided the Council with a very important and
informative briefing on the situation in Haiti. My
comments will focus on political developments,
the security situation, humanitarian issues, and the
drawdown and reconfiguration of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
On political developments, we are pleased to note
that the tensions of the early part of the reporting period
in Haiti were reduced by the promulgation of a new
electoral law and the launch of a national dialogue. We
commend the civil society groups and religious leaders
involved in facilitating the dialogue. We also commend
His Excellency Mr. Michel Martelly, President of Haiti,
for accommodating various shades of opinion in the
spirit of fostering genuine democracy in his country.
That has contributed significantly to lessening political
tensions. We urge the executive branch and Parliament
to strengthen their cooperation in the interest of good
governance and the supremacy of the law.
We note with appreciation the engagement of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General

18/35

24/03/2014

Honoré with political actors in Haiti and her advocacy
for democracy, national dialogue and progress towards
the holding of elections. We also note the support
provided by MINUSTAH to the Government of Haiti
in the registration of new voters, the distribution of
national identity cards, and the training of police and
electoral officers.
On security, we are pleased to note that the situation
was relatively stable during the reporting period. In
particular we note the downward trend in major crimes,
such as homicide and kidnapping. We also welcome the
expansion and improved performance of the Haitian
National Police during the reporting period.
On the humanitarian front, we are pleased with the
progress that Haiti has made so far. We take particular
note of the fact that 90 per cent of those displaced
by the earthquake of 2010 have left the camps. We
commend the Government of Haiti, the United Nations
and non-governmental partners for that significant
achievement. We are also pleased to note the reduction
of cholera infections by half since 2010 and of the
number of people affected by severe food insecurity
from 1.5 million in early 2013 to 600,000 by the end of
the year. We sincerely hope that efforts will be made to
reduce that number further — to zero, if possible.
Concerning MINUSTAH’s consolidation and
reconfiguration beyond 2016, we note the five options
presented by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2014/162) as they pertain to the Mission’s political
and peacekeeping functions. We look forward to the
full-scale United Nations-wide strategic assessment
that will be carried out with a view to studying
conditions on the ground as they relate to the five
options. MINUSTAH has done a splendid job in Haiti.
We commend the officers and men and women of the
Mission for their courage, commitment and sense of
duty and for enabling Haiti to be where it is today after
its terrible misfortune.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, especially for her astute leadership
of MINUSTAH. She has upheld the values and
integrity of the United Nations in difficult and trying
circumstances. In doing so, she has confirmed to us
the soundness of the Secretary-General’s judgement in
appointing women to important positions in the United
Nations system. Only last week, Ms. Karin Lundgren
addressed the Council on the situation in Liberia (see
S/PV.7145). Previously, Ms. Helen Clark addressed us

14-27334

24/03/2014

The question concerning Haiti

on the United Nations Development Programme (see
S/PV.7143), and before that Ms. Mary Robinson on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes region of Africa (see S/PV.7137). All of them
demonstrate the importance of the appointment of
women to key positions.
Finally, we would like to suggest that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General compare notes
with the Peacebuilding Commission on best practices
and lessons learned in various fields of operation in
Africa, particularly in such areas as disaster reduction
and resilience strategies and building quick-response
strategies in order to mitigate disaster situations such
as those faced in Haiti, and in developing quick-impact
projects, such as with respect to women’s empowerment,
grass-roots participation in national dialogue and
political processes, and civil society involvement in
national development efforts.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as Permanent Representative
of Luxembourg.
I, too, should like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
Ms. Sandra Honoré, for her briefing and for her efforts
in a crucial period for the country’s future.
Luxembourg associates itself with the statement to
be made by the observer of the European Union.
We recognize the significant progress made in Haiti
since the January 2010 earthquake. Nevertheless, like
Ms. Honoré, we are also aware of the challenges that the
country continues to face. While security conditions
have remained relatively stable and the figures collected
indicate a decline in serious crime, the intensification of
demonstrations during the second half of 2013 attested
to the growing discontent of the Haitian population,
which faces socioeconomic problems and persistent
institutional impasses. To respond to the demands of
Haitian citizens, it is essential that the various elections,
which have been postponed for more than two years, be
finally held. In that regard, the Parliament’s adoption of
an electoral law, promulgated by President Martelly in
10 December last year, are positive developments.
It is now important to speed up preparation for
elections. We welcome the national dialogue process
initiated on 24 January between the executive branch,
Parliament and the political parties under the auspices

S/PV.7147

of the Episcopal Conference of Haiti. The signature of
the agreement on 14 March in the framework of the
inter-Haitian dialogue was an important step towards
national consensus. That consensus is essential to
strengthening democratic institutions through the
holding of elections in 2014 and to establishing
governance conducive to socioeconomic development
for the benefit of all Haitians.
The general improvement of the humanitarian
situation in recent months has been encouraging.
However, the living conditions of the 146,000 displaced
persons still living in camps following the January
2010 earthquake are deplorable, and the improved food
security situation could be set back in the event of a
future hurricane. We are particularly concerned about
the plight of nearly 100,000 children under the age of
five who suffer from malnutrition, including 20,000
who suffer from acute, severe malnutrition. Similarly,
while the total number of people infected with cholera
has been cut in half since the outbreak of epidemic
at the end 2010, the mortality rate from cholera has
risen. The international community must address those
challenges.
For its part, Luxembourg remains committed
to assisting Haiti in overcoming the challenges of
socioeconomic development and reconstruction of the
country.
Progress has also been achieved in the protection
of human rights and the rule of law. In the report
published on 7 February, the independent expert
mandated by the Human Rights Council, Mr. Gustavo
GallÔn, highlighted the deplorable conditions in the
prisons and drew attention to the problem of prolonged
pre-trial detention0 in Haiti. We encourage the Haitian
authorities to redouble their efforts, with the support of
MINUSTAH, to find solutions to those problems.
On a positive note, we welcome the decision of
the Court of Appeals in Port-au-Prince validating the
judicial proceedings against former President JeanClaude Duvalier for crimes against humanity.
A professional police force is a key component of
the rule of law. We commend the progress made in the
capacity-building of the Haitian National Police. As
the Special Representative noted, the staff currently
consists of 11,228 police officers, including 950
women. In December 2013, 1,058 students, including
111 women, received their diplomas as police officers.
The next announced graduating class is also quite

14-2733419/35

S/PV.7147

The question concerning Haiti

promising, so Haiti is well on its way to achieving the
goal of 15,000 active police officers by 2016.
The progress that has been made towards the
stabilization of the situation in Haiti since the
initial deployment of MINUSTAH in 2004 has been
considerable. Certainly, the presence of the United
Nations is still necessary, also in view of the upcoming
elections. I am thinking especially of the presidential
elections scheduled for November 2015, but we should
now begin preparations for the post-2016 period.
We thank the Secretary-General for providing five
options for a post-2016 United Nations presence. In
general, Luxembourg supports the goal of progressive
assumption of MINUSTAH’s authority by the Haitian
Government, especially the Haitian National Police, in
the maintenance of law and order and ensuring a stable
environment. If conditions on the ground permit, we
believe that an accelerated transition towards a new
configuration of the United Nations presence in Haiti
should be pursued.
We look forward with interest to the comprehensive
strategic review that the Secretary-General will present
to us in a future report so that the Security Council
may make an informed decision, in close cooperation
with the Haitian authorities, with regard to the future
presence of the United Nations that will best suit the
aspirations and needs of the Haitian people and to
ensure the sustainable stability of the country.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Régis (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I should like on behalf of the Government of the
Republic of Haiti to thank the Secretary-General for his
excellent report (S/2014/162), submitted to the Security
Council pursuant to resolution 2119 (2013), extending
to 15 October 2014 the mandate of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
The Haitian Government has examined with great
interest the content of that report, which provides clear,
balanced and objective observations of the political
and security situation in Haiti; the status of economic,
humanitarian and recovery plans; and an update on the
various aspects of MINUSTAH activities through the
primary pillars of its 10-year-old mandate.
The Haitian Government also takes note of the
various options for reconfiguring MINUSTAH,
20/35

24/03/2014

desired from all sides, that are being considered. On
those issues, I would like to voice the position of the
Haitian Government and, if necessary, provide some
clarification and new information that will complete the
data contained in the report and allow for an evaluation
of recent developments in the situation in Haiti.
First of all, however, let me express the gratitude
of the Haitian Government to all Member States
that, through their generous contribution of human,
financial, technical and material resources since 2004,
have provided unwavering support to MINUSTAH,
thereby accompanying the Haitian people in its march
towards the establishment of the rule of law and a truly
democratic society.
The Haitian Government welcomes the general
observation made by the Secretary-General on the
evolution of the situation in Haiti. Despite the problems,
he writes, progress towards stabilizing the situation in
Haiti since the first initial deployment of MINUSTAH,
in 2004, has been considerable.
We have taken note of the remaining issues and
certain concerns mentioned in the report, for example,
the “slowness of the political process”, the “tensions”
between the Parliament and the executive branch and
the “delays in holding elections”. In that regard, I wish
to emphasize that the call by the Secretary-General for
elections in 2014 as being essential for the continuity
of democratic institutions was heard and has had deep
resonance among the country’s political stakeholders in
particular and in Haitian society in general.
A major turning point has just occurred on the
political scene in Haiti. An important agreement, the
El Rancho agreement, was signed on 14 March by
the main stakeholders in Haitian political life as a
culmination of the process of political dialogue launched
two months ago by President Michel Joseph Martelly,
under the auspices of the President of the Haitian
Episcopal Conference, Cardinal Chibly Langlois.
The horizon has now become much clearer. From
now on, the political obstacles that were holding back the
elections have been removed. The agreement expressly
provides for the establishment of a “Government of
openness, capable of creating the conditions necessary
to achieve free, fair and democratic elections”. The
already enacted electoral law should be subject to
some agreed amendments. Other provisions of the
agreement are aimed at governance, the separation of
powers, judicial and institutional guarantees and the

14-27334

24/03/2014

The question concerning Haiti

settlement of all contentious issues, all of which were
factors that led to the deadlock. The consensus that
was reached should allow us to make up the time lost
and hold elections in 2014 for the renewal of two thirds
of the Senate, the entire House of Representatives, all
municipalities and other local authorities.
The Head of State has made a solemn commitment:
the Government will fully assume its responsibility
with regard to the electoral process and the national
institutions responsible for carrying it out.
MINUSTAH’s support, indirect though it may have
been, in the successful process of political dialogue,
deserves special mention. The Government of Haiti can
only welcome the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral that the Mission should undertake “a more
focused and strategic use of available assets in support
of efforts by the national authorities” (S/2014/162,
para. 26) with a view to holding the next election.
At a different level, the Government of the
Republic of Haiti expressed its deep appreciation for
the remarkable support that the United Nations and
other international and regional organizations, such
as Caribbean Community, have given to Haiti in
connection with the decision of the Constitutional Court
of the Dominican Republic of 23 September 2013 on the
nationality of more than 200,000 Dominicans of Haitian
descent. We reiterate our deepest gratitude. Haiti, like
the international community, awaits the supplementary
law promised by the Dominican Government that will
ensure the rights of citizens who are at risk of finding
themselves stateless.
With respect to security, the report of the
Secretary-General indicates “relatively stable” security
conditions, illustrated by a number of positive elements
that I will now stress. There was a significant downward
trend in the crime rate — the number of homicides
in 2013 was 21 per cent lower than in 2012, thereby
reversing the trend over the past five years in terms of
crime — and the total number of kidnappings in 2013
was 53 per cent lower than in 2012. There is no doubt
that the MINUSTAH forces’ operational support for
the Haitian National Police contributed to those results.
The Secretary-General is also right to welcome the
achievements in terms of the professionalization of the
Haitian Police, which has been a priority area in the
consolidation plan.
I am also pleased that the Secretary-General
mentions in his report the progress made and the long

S/PV.7147

series of measures taken by the Haitian Government
in terms of improving human rights in the country.
Besides the establishment of the Haitian Office of the
Ombudsperson as a national human rights institution
and the operationalization of the interministerial
commission on human rights, the Government of Haiti
signed, on 16 August 2013, the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment. It has also acceded to the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and ratified The Hague Convention on
the Protection of Children and Cooperation in respect
of Intercountry Adoption.
Quite appropriately, the Haitian Government just
completed, on 21 March — three days ago — here in
New York, the signing of the Arms Trade Treaty, that
major legal instrument first open for signature by States
on 3 June 2013. In so doing, the Government remains
deeply concerned about the proliferation and spread of
conventional weapons and ammunition, having always
wished for a treaty that regulates trade in weapons in
order to improve the overall human security by reducing
losses of life resulting from a strict control of shipments
of arms and ammunition. The Haitian Government
welcomed the conclusion of a legally binding treaty
that takes into account human rights and international
humanitarian law.
The foregoing are all measures that demonstrate the
unequivocal commitment of the Haitian Government in
the promotion of human rights and respect for the shared
democratic values of
​​ freedom, political pluralism, the
rule of law and a balance of power as the foundation of
our democracy under construction.
In the same vein, the report of the SecretaryGeneral notes the progress made on the humanitarian
front, in particular the resettlement of the vast
majority of people displaced by the 2010 earthquake,
largely through return and resettlement programmes
implemented by the Government, the United Nations,
the Canadian Government and non-governmental
partners. The decline in the total number of people
suffering from severe food insecurity fell 1.5 million in
early 2013 to 600,000 by the end of the year.
At the same time, despite the many constraints,
gaps and structural handicaps in infrastructure, the
Haitian economy has begun to recover after decades of
stagnation, with 4.3 per cent growth for 2012-2013. In
addition, despite the limited resources, sustained efforts

14-2733421/35

S/PV.7147

The question concerning Haiti

have been made ​​by the Government in the social sphere,
including programmes to reduce poverty and to combat
hunger, violence against women, marginalization and
exclusion.
Furthermore, the Government welcomes the fact that
MINUSTAH, under the wise leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra
Honoré, has been actively involved in those efforts and
continues to provide highly appreciated support in all
areas covered by the Mission. That support is reflected
not only in terms of security and stability, but also
in areas as varied as technical and logistical support
to the Government to launch various programmes;
interventions aimed at improving the living conditions
of the population; technical support to the Parliament,
the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Health and
several other ministries and Government agencies;
support for civil society and various local partners;
and, finally, participation in various humanitarian,
rehabilitation and development activities. We are
encouraged by the United Nations efforts to contribute
directly to the implementation of the 10-year National
Plan for the Elimination of Cholera in Haiti, as the
cholera epidemic continues afflict the population.
Ten years after the creation of MINUSTAH, it is
widely recognized that undeniable successes have
been achieved in the priority areas assigned to the
Mission. Those successes, however, do not obscure the
magnitude of the tasks that remain or the challenges
still facing Haiti. For example, the Secretary-General’s
report highlights, in its security assessment, that
further progress is needed before the Haitian National
Police is able to provide the same level of security as
MINUSTAH. That is only one of the elements that
illustrate the need for a redefinition of the objectives,
nature and components of the Mission.
The time has thus come for a calm review of
MINUSTAH’s work over the past decade. As we
approach the end of the mandate entrusted to the Mission
by the Security Council, the time seems particularly
ripe for the necessary examination and re-evaluation, of
which the principles are already accepted. For its part,
the Haitian Government is ready to participate in such
an exercise on the basis of the preliminary elements for
reflection that it has submitted to the Security Council
and in the light of the five reconfiguration options
presented by the Secretary-General in his report.
Any reconfiguration of the Mission should, in
the opinion of the Government, take into account the
22/35

24/03/2014

requirements of the times, which are no longer those
of 2004, and reflect the particular needs of Haiti at
this stage in its development. As Haiti has reached the
milestone of a democratic transition, it is important to
identify its new priorities and the means necessary to
sustainably consolidate the indivisible foundations of
democracy, the rule of law, security and economic and
social development. Haitian national institutions, of
course, must fully shoulder their responsibilities and
their role in that new configuration.
In that vein, the Government will carefully consider
the proposals advanced and give its full support to
the Security Council and the Secretariat with a view
to consolidating the gains made ​​over the past decade,
pursuing a renewed and wider vision of the objectives
and scope of MINUSTAH, and looking forward to
the new momentum expected for 2016. I thank the
Secretary-General for his report, which will certainly
inspire and guide the work of the Security Council in
the coming months, and I reiterate the determination
of the Haitian Government to continue to work with
the Council for the full realization of the mandate of
MINUSTAH.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jamaica.
Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): I would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Sandra Honoré, for her comprehensive
briefing. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/162), together with Special Representative
Honoré’s briefing, clearly shows that although there has
been significant progress at various levels, a number of
formidable and fundamental challenges remain.
Jamaica notes with keen interest the political
milestones that emanated from the inter-Haitian
dialogue mediated by the Episcopal Conference of
Haiti. We further note that that dialogue culminated in a
groundbreaking preliminary consensus on the holding of
combined elections in 2014 for two-thirds of the Senate,
the Chamber of Deputies, municipal administrations
and local councils. That accomplishment symbolizes a
turning point in Haitian governance and signals what
can best be described as a new direction in political
practice in Haiti. We urge all stakeholders to capitalize
on the momentum gained to date with a view to the
holding of free and fair elections.
Jamaica recognizes that political stability and
the solidifying of development gains are inextricably

14-27334

24/03/2014

The question concerning Haiti

linked to sustained citizen security. We note with some
concern, however, that while the statistics reflect a
downward trend in major crimes, including kidnapping,
the figures associated with reported rapes have risen.
We thank the Mission for its August 2013 study on the
subject and, in that regard, encourage continued efforts
to bolster the capacity of courts, prosecution offices
and police stations to properly handle those types of
cases.
It is unfortunate that the scourge of sexual and
gender-based violence persists in Haiti. Jamaica
takes note of and commends the uniquely tailored
programme that serves to train police personnel in
methods used to prevent and respond to such crimes.
For Jamaica, the issue of sexual exploitation and
abuse within the Mission is of paramount importance.
Such cases unacceptably mar the image of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
What is more, they stain the international image of the
United Nations and that of countless other personnel
in the field who are dedicated to the cause of fostering
and maintaining peace. Jamaica strongly supports the
application of a zero-tolerance approach to such cases.
In that connection, we laud efforts to launch thorough
and timely investigations into all allegations of abuse
and encourage the continuing and determined work to
prevent future incidents.
Jamaica notes with satisfaction the significant
growth in the size of the Haitian National Police, from
5,000 officers at the start of the Mission to the current
force complement of 11,228 officers. We encourage
MINUSTAH to continue building the capacity of the
Haitian National Police as a high priority. That should
include strong recruitment campaigns and unrelenting
efforts to ensure that the goal of 15,000 officers in
service by the end of the police development plan for
2012-2016 is attained. Special emphasis should also
be placed on the recruitment of women and skilled
personnel capable of contributing to the development
of Haiti at the highest level.
MINUSTAH’s community violence reduction
programme is being increasingly recognized for its
impact on public safety and community development.
By supporting community-based labour intensive
infrastructure and environmental projects, MINUSTAH
has effectively provided a viable and innovative
alternative for at-risk youth. With the tremendous
success of that programme in mind, we welcome

S/PV.7147

the 29 projects that were initiated for the 2013-2014
financial year.
We note the progress made in upholding the rule
of law in Haiti, as exemplified in the Government’s
“5 E” policy programme. Jamaica therefore strongly
supports the assistance provided by MINUSTAH to the
Haitian institutions responsible for ensuring the rule of
law. In particular, we note the work done in the area
of pre-trial detention and that carried out through the
legal aid offices, as well as the success encountered
in the processing of more than 2,000 cases during the
reporting period.
With regard to the Haitian economy, the SecretaryGeneral’s report notes an increase of 4.3 per cent in the
economic growth rate. That accomplishment, coupled
with the growing levels of innovation and industry across
the country, speaks to the resilience and determination
of the Haitian people in overcoming the many obstacles
to social and economic development. While we share
in the hope for and expectation of a more prosperous
Haiti, we are mindful of existing constraints, including
the poor infrastructure and unstable electricity supply,
which, as the Secretary-General notes in his report,
continue to hinder economic growth. It is clear that the
persistence of those constraints will inevitably have a
negative effect on Haiti’s ability to continue along its
positive path.
Jamaica continues to maintain its support for the
four jointly agreed stabilization benchmarks outlined in
the conditions-based consolidation plan. We welcome
the updates on achievements and challenges provided
by the Secretary-General and look forward to receiving
additional information on how the United Nations can
further continue to contribute to Haiti’s stabilization
and development.
At the same time, we support the efforts geared
towards the responsible and carefully planned
drawdown. We call for a post-2016 reconfiguration
that is in keeping with the needs of the Haitian people.
The five options outlined in the report all present their
own challenges and advantages. We look forward with
anticipation to further discussion on those and related
matters.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Jamaica’s
support for the Government and people of Haiti. I wish
to express the my country’s sincere appreciation to those
serving in MINUSTAH and applaud the commitment

14-2733423/35

S/PV.7147

The question concerning Haiti

that they have shown to improving the lives of the
Haitian people.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I would first like to thank Ms. Sandra Honoré,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(S/2014/162). Spain aligns itself with the statement to
be made by the observer of the European Union, and
wishes to add a number of observations in its national
capacity.
Spain shares the Secretary-General’s relatively
positive evaluation of the political situation in Haiti.
We welcome the progress in the inter-Haitian dialogue
among the various political actors, namely, the
executive and legislative branches and the political
parties, fostered by the Episcopal Conference of Haiti.
We call on all political actors to pursue and strengthen
that path of dialogue in order to address the country’s
political agenda in a climate of consensus.
We believe that holding the upcoming elections
is a fundamental step in Haiti’s stabilization, the
consolidation of its institutions and the promotion
of democracy and the rule of law. We trust that the
elections will take place this year.
Spain appreciates the efforts of the Club de Madrid’s
first high-level mission on political consultation/
dialogue, funded by the European Union and led by the
twice former President of the Republic of Mauritius,
Mr. Cassam Uteem, and the Secretary-General of the
Club, the Spanish Ambassador Mr. Carlos Westendorp.
The mission’s goal is the promotion of dialogue in
discussing Haiti’s stabilization and political reform.
With regard to security, we are pleased at the
developments in 2013 as a result of MINUSTAH’s
remarkable work and the ongoing process of the
institutional strengthening of the Haitian National
Police. Spain believes that, in the area of security,
there must be greater support for measures that foster
reform in the judicial and corrections systems, in
particular with regard to preventive detention. The
results achieved in the security sector encourage us to
support the work being undertaken in the training and
increasing deployment of the national police force.
We support the current process of reflection on the
MINUSTAH’s future towards a progressive reduction
24/35

24/03/2014

in its personnel. That will allow it, in the medium
term, to focus on assisting civilians, in particular in
emergency situations. In any case, Spain understands
that such reflection must go hand in hand with an
effective strengthening of the capacities of the Haitian
National Police in order to enable it to increasingly
assume MINUSTAH’s functions.
With regard to the judiciary/justice sector, we
welcome the decision of the Court of Appeal in the case
of ex-President Jean-Claude Duvalier as testament to
strengthening and developing the rule of law in Haiti.
Turning to the humanitarian situation, Spain views
with satisfaction the progress noted in the SecretaryGeneral’s report with regard to the reduced number of
internal displacements. We support the United Nations
in its efforts to eliminate cholera in the context of its
two-year plan and in support of the Haitian national plan.
As one of the country’s main donors, Spain continues
and reaffirms its commitment to Haiti’s development
through cooperation focused, in particular, on access
to clean water, which is crucial to the eradication of
cholera, education, rural development and the fight
against malnutrition.
Finally, we would like to express our support and
confidence in the high-level talks between Haiti and
the Dominican Republic. We believe that the high-level
bilateral commission is the ideal forum for discussing
the common agendas of both countries for their
mutually beneficial development.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Rodríguez Pineda (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): We welcome Ambassador Sandra Honoré and
thank her for presenting the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2014/162). We would also like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Haiti for his valuable
comments.
I have five brief points. First, the current situation
in Haiti continues to be characterized by enormous
challenges, and being able to overcome them will
depend largely on the holding of the long-awaited local,
municipal and legislative elections and the success with
which they are carried out. We welcome the recent
political agreement reached in Haiti to hold elections in
October this year. We recognize the Haitian leadership
for forging that consensus, which marks a step forward
in the political culture of the country. Its implementation
will now be important. We also commend the technical
14-27334

24/03/2014

The question concerning Haiti

and legislative preparations to make the elections
viable, including the required budget, which is under
way.
Secondly, I want to refer to the reform of the Haitian
National Police, which is the main criterion for assessing
the performance of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). We have indicated
on several occasions that the professionalization of
the police is not enough on its own. We are concerned
about the slow progress in other areas, which, as the
Secretary-General’s report warns, could jeopardize
some of the significant progress made so far. Progress
in the judiciary and penal areas is also necessary for
the consolidation of the rule of law, as well as being a
key indicator in strengthening the quality of the police
force.
Thirdly, we believe that the socioeconomic
dimension cannot be ignored. The axis of the problems
of instability in Haiti does not exclusively have
military solutions. We must seek the root causes of
the instability — poverty, unemployment and social
inequality.
In the humanitarian context, we must recognize
that, after long delays, today almost 90 per cent of the
population displaced by the earthquake have returned
to their neighbourhoods or have been relocated. There
continues to be a pressing need to normalize the
situation of people displaced by the disaster four years
ago.
Fourthly, experience has shown that the United
Nations must maintain an adequate presence in the
country, through both MINUSTAH and the United
Nations country team. We therefore reiterate that our
withdrawal from the country must be responsible and
gradual to ensure that, when that time comes, the
Mission will never have to return.
We note the five post-2016 configuration options
outlined by the Secretary General. We believe that, at
this time, current levels must be maintained and actions
that could jeopardize the proper holding of elections
must be avoided. Both the report of the SecretaryGeneral and the recent meeting with the troopcontributing countries show the need for the continued
operational support of MINUSTAH forces.
In that regard, we believe that this is just the
beginning of the discussion and it would be premature
to discuss the appropriateness, merits or suitability of

S/PV.7147

the options presented. We are in the consolidation phase
of the Mission, and it is only when that process comes to
an end that we can begin the reconfiguration progress.
We must act in a calculated manner and on the basis of
the strategic assessment to be presented by SecretaryGeneral at a later date and in close consultation with
the Government of Haiti and the troop-contributing
countries.
Finally, we congratulate the Special Representative
Sandra Honoré for her tireless efforts leading the
Mission. She has our full support and admiration.
Haiti has a special place on the agenda of the United
Nations. Now more than ever, the Organization’s role is
of unparalleled importance to ensure the continuity of
an irreversible process of stabilization.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (spoke in French): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union and
its member States.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2014/162) and the Special Representative
for her presentation. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of Haiti for his presentation today.
The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland
and Serbia; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.
The European Union shares the assessment of
the Secretary-General in his report with regard to
the relative improvement in the political situation in
Haiti. During the recent visit of President Martelly
to Brussels, the European Union expressed to him its
satisfaction with the progress achieved in the context of
the inter-Haitian dialogue, which has made it possible
to reach significant compromises with regard to the
electoral and institutional disputes. We are pleased to
note that our calls and those of other partners for the
continuation of that dialogue have been heard and that
an agreement on the date of the upcoming elections
has finally been reached by the parties concerned. The
Government’s commitment to cover one third of the
costs for the organization of the upcoming elections is
also an encouraging sign.

14-2733425/35

S/PV.7147

The question concerning Haiti

The consolidation of democracy and its institutions
remains an important pillar in our cooperation with
Haiti. With that in mind, the European Union and the
Government of Haiti decided in December 2013 to
launch a political dialogue, as provided for in article 8
of the Cotonou Agreement. That framework will make
it possible to support the political and economic reforms
necessary for sustainable socioeсonomic development
in Haiti, but also to have a constructive exchange of
views on subjects of common concern. The political
dialogue is further complemented by a programme of
support to the Haitian Parliament aimed at improving
dialogue among political parties and a more efficient
management of the legislative agenda. We also asked
the Club de Madrid to carry out another high-level
political advisory mission, which is already under way.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, the
European Union first of all welcomes the progress
mentioned by the Secretary-General, in particular the
ongoing reduction in the number of displaced people
still living in camps. However, we remain concerned
about the precarious living conditions of those families,
most of whom do not have access to basic services.
The European Union would like to underscore once
again its concern with regard to the cases of forced and
sometimes violent evictions reported by several civil
society organizations. The Haitian authorities must
ensure that the rights of the persons concerned are
respected and find humane and sustainable solutions to
help them in their relocation.
The European Union also welcomes the efforts to
find a coordinated response to the cholera epidemic
in Haiti and welcomes the two-year plan of the United
Nations, which supports the National Plan for the
Elimination of Cholera in Haiti. I am pleased to confirm
that the European Union will continue its humanitarian
efforts in Haiti in 2014 with a programme in the amount
of €18 million euros, which will include our continued
support for the eradication of the epidemic.
Finally, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
we would like to express our dismay at the number
of Haitian children under the age of five that suffer
from malnutrition. As stated in paragraph 18 of the
Secretary-General’s report, approximately 100,000
children are affected, of whom 20,000 suffer from
severe acute malnutrition, which will have irreversible
consequences for their growth. This is truly a national
tragedy that should mobilize all the political forces in
Haiti. We reiterate our request to the Haitian authorities

26/35

24/03/2014

and political forces to put issues related to combatting
poverty and malnutrition at the top of the Government’s
agenda.
The European Union takes note of the proposals
made in
​​ the report of the Secretary-General with
regard to the future reconfiguration of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
Determining the most appropriate option will require
in-depth analysis of the security situation and progress
on the four key benchmarks of stabilization.
The European Union supports the goal of a gradual
and conditional handover from MINUSTAH to the
Haitian Government. The pace of that transition will
depend upon the political will and determination
of the Haitian authorities to implement legislative
and administrative reforms needed to carry out
the tasks delegated at present to MINUSTAH. The
European Union, through its development cooperation
programmes, aimed at, among other things, important
support for the reform of State administration,
will continue to support the process of mission
reconfiguration.
As we did in prior debates, we reiterate our concern
at the limited progress in the field of judicial and prison
reform. In our view, it is essential that the Haitian
authorities undertake reform of the security sector as a
whole, including the police, the border control regime
and the judicial and prison systems. To that end, we
are working in cooperation with the United Nations
Development Programme to support the capacitybuilding of the Superior Council of the Judiciary, for
which a specific programme funded by the European
Union has just been launched. Furthermore, we
welcome the decision of the Court of Appeal confirming
the judicial proceedings against former President JeanClaude Duvalier for crimes against humanity.
The binational high-level dialogue begun between
Haiti and the Dominican Republic represents an excellent
opportunity to find consensual solutions on crossborder issues of common interest. We congratulate the
two Governments for their constructive engagement.
The European Union will continue to actively support
that process through its participation as an observer
in the dialogue and through its regional cooperation
programmes.
In conclusion, the European Union would like to
express its appreciation of the excellent cooperation
between our delegation in Port-au-Prince and the Special

14-27334

24/03/2014

The question concerning Haiti

Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra
Honoré, and the United Nations country office in Haiti.
We will remain engaged and continue our support to
Haiti and MINUSTAH so as to strengthen the reform
efforts under way.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
First, I wish to thank you, Madam President, for
having convened this debate on the situation in Haiti. I
recognize and thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra Honoré, for the detailed
report she presented to the Security Council today
(S/2014/162).
Colombia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Uruguay on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Haiti recognizing the progress
made in strengthening democracy in the country.
The enactment of the Electoral Act and the
collaboration among the various parties and the
Government of President Martelly with a view to
holding legislative, municipal and local elections are
encouraging signs. The elections represent a significant
challenge that will require support and assistance
from the international community, primarily through
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH).
However, it is clear that Haiti still faces multiple
challenges. That is why I take this opportunity to
reiterate Colombia’s continuous support to Ms. Honoré
and the valuable work of MINUSTAH to ensure the
lasting well-being of the Haitian people, to whom we
South Americans owe a historic debt as they help us
towards our own national independence.
Colombia participates in MINUSTAH. Our
police are supporting the fight against the global drug
problem, transnational organized crime, extortion
and kidnapping. Since 2013, following calls from the
Council to broaden the role of women in peacekeeping,
our schools have trained Haitian women police
officers in Colombia and, in the field of development
cooperation, we support training in the areas of
coffee production, food and nutritional security,
the refurbishment of housing and basic sanitation,
neighbourhood regeneration and support for technical
training.
Security, stability, better living conditions for the
Haitian people and strengthened democratic institutions

S/PV.7147

must continue to be the focus of the international
community’s commitment to Haiti. It is clear that
MINUSTAH cannot continue indefinitely, but we must
be cautious when considering its gradual drawdown,
because the achievements attained must not be put at
risk.
Colombia calls for the responsible gradual
drawdown of MINUSTAH, taking into account the
points raised in the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral, which notes that there are still important
gaps when it comes to institutions and security. The
upcoming legislative, municipal and local elections
and the presidential elections of 2015 represent a
challenge in the consolidation of democracy in Haiti
requiring appropriate support and assistance from
the international community, primarily through
MINUSTAH.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of Friends of
Haiti, which includes Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, France, Guatemala, Peru, the United States
of America and my country, Uruguay.
I would like to commend you, Madam President,
for having organized this debate to discuss the latest
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (S/2014/162).
The Group of Friends welcomes the presence
of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Sandra Honoré, and thanks her for her
comprehensive briefing and for her tireless work.
We also welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Haiti.
Strengthening the rule of law and democratic
institutions, establishing a political environment
conducive to democratic stability and improving
socioeconomic conditions are key elements for
achieving broader and more sustainable stability and
prosperity in Haiti. In that regard, the Group of Friends
strongly encourages all political actors in Haiti to
continue deepening their dialogue and cooperation with
a view to strengthening democracy in their country,
and reiterates the importance of the holding free and
fair legislative, municipal and local elections this year
as an essential and urgent step towards lasting stability,
recovery and development in Haiti.

14-2733427/35

S/PV.7147

The question concerning Haiti

The Group welcomes the efforts devoted by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Haiti
to facilitate dialogue among all national actors with a
view to strengthening Haitian democratic institutions.
The signing of the El Rancho agreement marks
an important milestone in a Haitian-led process and
represents the will of Haitian political stakeholders
to move forward with the planning of elections. That
momentum must not be lost. We encourage Haiti’s
political leaders to keep up that spirit of cooperation
and act promptly to uphold the provisions of the
agreement regarding the reform of the electoral law, the
establishment of a transitional Electoral Council and
the fixing of an electoral timetable.
The Group of Friends notes that, since the latest
report by the Secretary-General, the overall security
situation in Haiti has remained relatively stable,
although it has been marked by an increase in civil
unrest during the first part of the reporting period. That
has allowed the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to implement the drawdown
established in resolutions 2070 (2012) and 2119 (2013)
without undermining the security and stability of Haiti.
The Group of Friends takes note of the progress in the
execution of MINUSTAH’s 2013-2016 consolidation
plan, aimed at allowing the Haitian authorities to
assume full responsibility for their country’s security
as soon as conditions permit. The Group of Friends
commends this calibrated approach and reiterates the
importance of making decisions on future actions
based on conditions on the ground.

24/03/2014

strengthening, professionalization and reform so that
it can assume full responsibility for security in Haiti.
In that context, the Group of Friends emphasizes the
importance of building up the Haitian National Police’s
capacity outside Port-au-Prince, and ensuring its
adherence to the highest standards of respect for human
rights.
The Group of Friends of Haiti reiterates its
commitment to the United Nations policy of zero
tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse, and in that
regard expects all United Nations personnel to abide by
the highest standards of conduct. The Group urges all
actors involved to assume their responsibilities in order
to prevent such cases, investigate allegations and hold
those responsible accountable.
The Group welcomes the significant progress made
during 2013 regarding the resettlement of persons
displaced by the 2010 earthquake. However, we are
also concerned about living conditions in the remaining
camps, particularly for women and children, an
example of the persistent humanitarian challenges that
Haiti continues to face. The Group of Friends notes the
ongoing work being done by the Government of Haiti,
MINUSTAH and others to protect vulnerable groups
and encourages all actors to pay as much attention
as possible to preventing and reducing violent crime,
particularly against women and children, including
rape and other crimes of sexual violence.

The Group of Friends takes note of the five
options presented in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2014/162) as a basis for future discussions on
how best to carry out the political and peacekeeping
functions that remain crucial to Haiti’s progress. The
Group also welcomes the Secretary-General’s intention
to conduct a comprehensive strategic assessment with
a view to making a recommendation to the Council,
and underlines the importance of maintaining close
cooperation with the Government of Haiti in that regard.

The ongoing efforts to eliminate the cholera
epidemic are a reminder of the importance of sustaining
cooperation between the international community and
the Government of Haiti in order to meet the needs of
the Haitian people. In that regard, the Group welcomes
the two-year plan developed by the United Nations and
focused on short-term actions in support of the 10-year
national plan for the elimination of cholera in Haiti,
and takes note of the Secretary-General’s appointment
of a Senior Coordinator for Cholera Response in Haiti.
Similarly, we acknowledge the efforts of the donor
community and calls on them to fulfil the pledges they
have made without delay.

The Group of Friends reiterates the importance of
the Government of Haiti’s commitment to strengthening
the rule of law and making further progress in the
judiciary and security sectors. In that regard, the
Group would like to emphasize the Haitian National
Police’s critical role in Haiti’s security and stability
and to stress the importance of completing its ongoing

The Group of Friends of Haiti believes that security,
respect for human rights, rule of law and development
are closely interlinked and mutually strengthen stability.
We therefore underscore the need to systematically
address unemployment, education and the delivery of
basic social services, and to ensure the economic and
political empowerment of women.

28/35

14-27334

24/03/2014

The question concerning Haiti

At the same time, the Group stresses that there can
be no genuine stability or sustainable development in
Haiti without strengthening democratic institutions
and a credible democratic process. In that context, the
Group emphasizes the importance of promoting the rule
of law through the strengthening of Haitian institutions
and further reaffirms the responsibility of MINUSTAH
for supporting the Haitian State by promoting improved
governance structures, the extension of State authority
and the promotion and protection of human rights, in
accordance with its mandate.
Finally, the Group of Friends of Haiti reaffirms
its solidarity with and commitment to the people
and Government of Haiti in their pursuit of stability,
reconstruction, recovery, social and economic
development and democratic consolidation. The Group
of Friends recognizes the important role of MINUSTAH
in ensuring stability and security in Haiti, and expresses
its support for and recognition to the women and men of
MINUSTAH for their dedication and tireless efforts to
support recovery and stability in Haiti.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank you for convening
this debate, Madam President. I would like to thank
Special Representative Sandra Honoré for her detailed
presentation. I also thank the Permanent Representative
of Haiti, Ambassador Denis Régis, for his statement.
The Secretary-General’s most recent report
(S/2014/162) invites us to discuss options for the United
Nations presence in Haiti after 2016, and at the same
time reminds us of ongoing challenges — persistent
issues on the security, social and economic fronts, and
the political divisions that have delayed the Haitian
people’s full enjoyment of democratic stability. In
addition to those challenges, Haiti must confront a
cholera epidemic with the highest number of cases in
the world.
At the same time, it is fair to acknowledge that
Haiti has come a long way on the path to stabilization.
Progress on the humanitarian situation, in particular the
relocation of displaced people, is encouraging, although
forced evictions are a cause for concern. Recent positive
economic prospects confirm our confidence in the
potential for Haiti’s development. On the political front,
in particular, the recently signed El Rancho agreement
presents a vital opportunity to break with old patterns
and practices that run contrary to institutional progress

S/PV.7147

and have continued to hold the country back. In that
regard, I would like to recognize the key role of the
mediators who are providing the necessary space and
support for the inter-Haitian dialogue. We expect that
the political dialogue will, in the short term, lead to
the swift implementation of concrete commitments and
allow for normalization of the country’s democratic
life with the holding of pending elections in 2014 and
presidential elections in 2015.
That complex picture is a reminder of the
integrated nature of the challenges Haiti faces in
this advanced stage of the stabilization process. This
remains a fundamental circumstance as we discuss
the best strategy for consolidating the stabilization
gains secured so far with the crucial contribution
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). In that context, I should like to convey
Brazil’s strong support for the work being done by
Special Representative Sandra Honoré and her team.
On the security front, the Secretary-General’s
report informs us of the progress achieved by the Haitian
National Police in implementing its development plan
with the key support of MINUSTAH. That should not
divert us from the importance of translating our support
for strengthening the justice and security sectors
into concrete benefits for the population and greater
protection of basic human rights, including social and
economic rights. To help establish that fundamental,
rights-based connection between institutions and
citizens, it is key that MINUSTAH continue to pursue a
comprehensive approach to stability.
Brazil welcomes the deeper integration of
community projects to reduce violence within the
spectrum of the Mission’s rule-of-law activities, as
well as the efforts to tackle weaknesses in the judicial
sector and the issue of prolonged pre-trial detentions.
Stabilization tools such as quick-impact projects and
the community projects to reduce violence become
even more important as we move forward with the
implementation of MINUSTAH’s consolidation plan,
with further reductions of its military component.
It is a positive development that the situation
has remained stable in the departments vacated
by MINUSTAH’s troops. It indicates that a wellcalibrated, responsible, progressive and situational
approach is best suited to consolidating gains without
compromising security. We believe such a careful,
gradual and responsible approach should continue to
prevail in our planning for a sustainable transition.

14-2733429/35

S/PV.7147

The question concerning Haiti

It is the security situation on the ground, its prevailing
social and political dimensions and Haiti’s capacity to
assume increasing responsibilities that should continue
to guide us — not self-imposed budgetary constraints
or arbitrarily conceived time frames unrelated to Haiti’s
specific situation. The Council should not sacrifice
hard-earned security and stability at the risk of paying
a higher price in the medium term. Neither should it
pursue the establishment of new and needed missions to
the detriment of, and at the expense of, active ones that
have not fully discharged themselves of their purpose.
As the Secretary-General himself points out, a
comprehensive strategic assessment will be needed
for an informed decision on the options presented in
his report or any other alternatives deemed suitable.
We hope that this exercise will improve the concrete
situation on the ground, identify opportunities for the
further transfer of responsibilities where they present
themselves, and take into account the need to ensure that
key objectives such as electoral processes and political
national dialogue are met with adequate support. Close
and effective coordination with the Government of
Haiti will remain a decisive requirement in this context.
I take note with encouragement of the final paragraphs
of the statement made by the representative of Haiti in
that regard.
It is clear, especially in the light of the security
requirements for upcoming elections, that no abrupt
interruption of the support provided by a peacekeeping
presence is advisable. Brazil would favour options that
maintain a military capability to support the Haitian
National Police, as needed, under Chapter VII. We
are also of the view that the present Latin American/
Caribbean profile of the Mission should be fully
preserved throughout its reconfiguration process.
The ultimate transition must be a Haitian one — a
transition away from past instability and back to the
original Haitian dream that inspired an entire region
to seek independence as a way to ensure a dignified
life for all. We stand firmly behind this objective in
solidarity with our Haitian brothers and sisters.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Alday González (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation welcomes the convening of this debate
at a decisive moment for the future of the Government
and people of Haiti and for the definition of the United
Nations presence in the country. Ten years following

30/35

24/03/2014

the establishment of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and four after the
devastating earthquake that had tragic humanitarian,
political and economic consequences in Haiti, we now
see important advances in security, stability, political
dialogue and the rule of law. This progress could not
have been achieved without the presence MINUSTAH
and the support of the United Nations and other
international organizations. It is clear that the strategy
of addressing the challenges of security, development
and human rights on parallel tracks, as has been
pursued since 2004, has been decisive in the restoration
of stability and reconstruction of Haiti.
The Government of Mexico welcomes the positive
assessment of the political process offered in the
Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2014/162), arising
from the adoption of the electoral law and the beginning
of direct dialogue between the executive branch,
Parliament and the political parties. These agreements
are essential to the ongoing creation of an enabling
environment for the elections this year and presidential
elections in 2015. A peaceful transition of power as a
result of free elections, coupled with the institutional
strengthening of the Haitian Government, would be
important to consolidating democracy in the country. It
is crucial to maintain the support Haiti will need in this
period so as to bring to fruition the efforts being made
by the Haitians and the international community.
My country has supported Haiti in strengthening
and professionalizing its electoral institutions. At the
request of the Electoral Council , the Mexican Federal
Electoral Institute has provided technical assistance in
various areas, and in the coming months will dispatch
a mission to develop, jointly with the authorities of
that country. a collaborative programme on electoral
matters.
Although the Secretary-General reports significant
progress on the humanitarian front over the past year,
we are concerned about the persistence of the high
number of cases of cholera; this crisis has already
claimed the lives of 8,500 persons. Mexico hopes that
the implementation of the humanitarian action plan for
Haiti in 2014 and the National Plan for the Elimination
of Cholera in Haiti, with the support of the United
Nations system and other international partners, will
help to address the needs related to the epidemic and
to reduced rates of infection. We are convinced that
these efforts should be part of a strategy that addresses
poverty and development challenges simultaneously

14-27334

24/03/2014

The question concerning Haiti

and strengthens food security, nutrition and disaster
preparedness. Mexico is commited to that task. We
will continue to promote actions in the priority areas of
development cooperation, established with the Haitian
Government, in agriculture, education, socioeconomic
development, the environment, health and democracy.
The distance covered in the past decade by Haiti and
the international community reflects the progress made
in the priority areas of stabilization, the MINUSTAH
consolidation plan, and the professionalization of the
Haitian National Police. As the Secretary-General
notes, challenges remain to be addressed in order to
ensure that the national authorities can progressively
assume greater responsibility in establishing the rule
of law and the preparation of the coming elections. It
is essential that MINUSTAH enjoy the resources to
address these challenges.
Mexico hopes that the MINUSTAH consolidation
plan will lead to a successful transition process, with
the ultimate departure of the Mission once it has
met its objectives of maintaining stability and longterm development in Haiti. It is essential to sustain a
gradual and planned approach to the reconfiguration
of MINUSTAH in 2016, pursuant to resolution 2119
(2013). An abrupt, unplanned withdrawal of the Mission
could generate a recurrence of the crisis and political
instability of incalculable consequences.
On behalf of my delegation, I recognize the efforts
of the men and women deployed in MINUSTAH, who, in
cooperation with the Haitian Government, are working
to lay the foundations for a prosperous and peaceful
Haiti. The legacy of the MINUSTAH is tangible. The
country today is not what it was between 2004 to 2010.
Let us bring our common efforts to fruition and make
Haiti another success story for the Council, for the
Organization and particularly for the Haitian people.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like first to thank you, Madam President, and
the delegation of Luxembourg for having organized this
debate on Haiti. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra
Honoré, for her briefing on the situation in Haiti, and
to assure her of Canada’s continued support to her
and the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). We acknowledge the ongoing efforts of
all the MINUSTAH staff to strengthen stability in Haiti.

S/PV.7147

Although progress has been made since the
Security Council last discussed Haiti in August
(see S/PV.7024), more work is needed to ensure its
sustainable development and stability. One example of
this progress is the relocation of thousands of families
living in displaced person’s camps; 90 per cent of the
population displaced by the 2010 earthquake have now
moved out of these camps. We must continue to work
until the remaining 10 per cent have homes. In January,
Canada announced further support to help relocate
another 53,000 internally-displaced persons over the
next year.
(spoke in English)
Canada has shared a unique partnership with Haiti
for decades. Since 2006, Canada has provided more than
$1.4 billion in development and humanitarian assistance.
These efforts have been designed to complement to
and support the efforts and actions of our allies and of
multilateral and regional bodies in Haiti. Canada has
worked to make improvements in a number of areas
including economic growth, food security, governance
and — in line with Canada’s Group of Eight Muskoka
initiative — has placed a particular focus on maternal,
newborn and child health.
Canada welcomes the fact that Haiti has
made economic development, including trade
and investment, a top priority. We welcome the
Government’s emphasis on modernizing the business
environment so as to facilitate foreign investments,
and we strongly encourage actions that can lead to
further gains in transparent governance, economic
development and sustainable job creation. A private
sector creates employment and employment builds
an economy. Transparency, accountability, economic
competitiveness and diversification are all essential to
Haiti’s development and sustained revenue generation
for the Government. We encourage continued action
in improving the business environment, which can
transform Haiti’s economic potential into concrete
outcomes for the Haitian people.
(spoke in French)
If Haiti is to succeed on the path of development
in accordance with its own objectives and plans,
accountable institutional and political stability are
necessary. We note with concern that the long-overdue
senatorial, municipal and local elections prescribed by
the Constitution still have not taken place, despite the
repeated calls of Haitian political actors and members

14-2733431/35

S/PV.7147

The question concerning Haiti

of the Security Council that they be held without delay.
We are encouraged by recent announcements that these
elections will take place this fall, but those words must
now be turned into action and lead to voters casting
their ballots at the polling stations.
The promulgation of the electoral law in December
2013 was an important step towards the holding of the
elections. We commend Haiti’s political actors for the
consensual solutions they have reached through the
recently concluded inter-Haitian dialogue. We also
recognize and appreciate the efforts of MINUSTAH in
providing electoral assistance and logistical support for
those elections. We note the importance of strengthening
the status and capacity of Haitian institutions to take on
an increasing role in the future.
It is also important to continue to improve human
rights protection in Haiti. Canada commends the
Haitian Office of the Ombudsperson for becoming
accredited as a national human rights institution in
December 2013. That was an important step forward for
Haitian-led efforts to protect and promote human rights
in the country, and Canada is proud to have supported
the Office over the past few years. We also welcome the
submission of several reports on Haiti’s implementation
of its obligations under human rights conventions as
important steps towards accountability in this domain.
There is still much more to be done, however, as
generalized weaknesses in institutions of the justice
sector remain a concern and undermine human rights
protection. A large number of Haitians — up to
70 per cent of the prison population, according to some
sources — face prolonged pre-trial detention in terrible
conditions. It is time for this issue to be addressed.
Continued international engagement and the ongoing
institution-strengthening efforts of the Haitian
authorities are crucial to improving the current situation
in an effective and sustainable way.
(spoke in English)
In conclusion, Canada wishes to state that it
continues to appreciate and support the important work
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
For 10 years, MINUSTAH has worked to improve
security conditions and contribute to lasting stability
in Haiti, and it has made considerable progress. Canada
notes MINUSTAH’s forward planning on the post-2016
presence of the United Nations in Haiti. As we consider
the possibilities for the future, it is important that such
decisions be based on the situation on the ground,

32/35

24/03/2014

and in particular the capacity of the Haitian State to
deliver security to its population. We should also avoid
reduction scenarios that would jeopardize the results
we have achieved to date.
We also commend the mission’s efforts towards the
reform and development the Haitian National Police,
an organization that has demonstrated increasing
capacity in recent months. We are extremely pleased
that the first group of Haitian police commissioners
has completed its training, and that the training of a
second group is now under way. This is an important
milestone and the result of considerable work by
Haitian authorities to develop curriculum and recruit
and train professors, among other activities. Canada is
proud to have provided considerable support to these
efforts, and we encourage the Haitian Government to
ensure the sustainability of these achievements. We
urge the Haitian Government to continue this work and
to further build upon it by tackling weaknesses in the
justice sector so that the rule of law can be delivered
to all Haitian citizens. This is critical for Haiti’s future
and I can assure you, Madam President, that Canada
will continue to support Haiti in that regard.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra Velásquez (Peru) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I should like to welcome the
initiative of the presidency of the Security Council
to convene this debate on the situation in Haiti. I
also warmly welcome the presence of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti,
Ms. Sandra Honoré, and thank her for her presentation
of the report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Haiti (S/2014/162).
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Uruguay on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Haiti, especially its recognition of
the important work of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) in ensuring the
stabilization and security of Haiti, as well as in
strengthening its democratic institutions and the rule
of law. We believe that this work remains essential to
providing the Haitian authorities with the security and
support needed to facilitate the process of democratic
consolidation in Haiti.
Peru is committed to achieving and consolidating
security, stability, sustainable development and
institutional strengthening in Haiti. My country has

14-27334

24/03/2014

The question concerning Haiti

S/PV.7147

therefore actively participated in MINUSTAH since
2004 with a military contingent of 372 troops, including
female field staff, as well as military officers in the
General Staff of the Mission.

Regarding the various options provided by the
Secretary-General on the future of the Mission,
my delegation believes that a future reduction of
MINUSTAH personnel, or even a change in the nature
of the Mission, should be determined only after a
Peru recognizes the significant progress made​​ serious analysis of the situation on the ground. In this
towards the holding of the long-delayed legislative, regard, we welcome the Secretary-General’s intention
municipal and local by-elections. However, we are to conduct a strategic assessment of the desirability of
concerned that a new postponement thereof could the various options set out in the report, and we hope
generate a climate of political instability and a that he will duly consider the parameters and indicators
governance vacuum in Haiti. Therefore, recognizing in the MINUSTAH reconfiguration and consolidation
the democratic vocation of the Haitian people , my plan.
delegation reiterates its call on all Haitian political
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that
forces to reach the agreements necessary to the timely
MINUSTAH’s
major achievements to date should
holding of these elections, which will strengthen
not
lead
us
to
the false conclusion that the United
the functioning of key institutions of democratic
Nations
task
in
Haiti is finished, or even close to it.
governance Haiti.
Experience has shown us the grave consequences in
As noted in the report of the Secretary-General certain countries when the Organization has decided to
(S/2014/162), the security situation in Haiti remains withdraw its presence on the ground before it should
relatively stable thanks to the crucial work of have, which is why we call upon the entire international
MINUSTAH. However, there has been an increase community to continue its ongoing support in Haiti.
in protests, mainly linked to political tension,
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
socioeconomic problems and the lack of basic services.
floor
to the representative of Japan.
This should remind us that the United Nations system
should provide cooperation in the three areas that
Mr. Yamakazi (Japan): I would like to express
have direct impact on the ongoing process of Haitian my appreciation to you, Madam President, for
recovery and reconstruction: governance, security and presiding over today’s debate. I would also like to
sustainable development.
commend Ms. Sandra Honoré, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in Haiti, for her invaluable
In reiterating our appreciation for the work of the
and significant contribution to the United Nations
military component of MINUSTAH to ensure stability
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I thank
and security in Haiti, we wish to express our satisfaction
her for her comprehensive briefing this morning. I
with the progress achieved in the implementation of the
also wish to pay tribute to the men and women of the
five-year development plan for 2012-2016 of the Haitian
MINUSTAH for the commitment and fortitude they
National Police, which will give that institution the
have demonstrated under difficult circumstances.
capacity necessary to maintain public order and security
I welcome the Secretary-General’s report on
throughout the country, as well as a firm institutional
MINUSTAH
(S/2014/162), issued on 7 March. As the
foundation for promoting the strengthening of the rule
report
points
out,
the adoption of the electoral law and
of law and respect for human rights.
the launching of an inter-Haitian dialogue process are
The progress made by MINUSTAH in Haiti’s encouraging signs that can lead to overcoming the
stabilization allows us to look to the future with recurrent political crises and defuse tensions. Various
optimism, because we believe that the time has come challenges persist but significant progress has been
to for Haiti initiate a process of gradual transition made in the stabilization and recovery process in Haiti.
towards a phased, gradual and orderly second stage In that regard, the support provided by MINUSTAH,
of cooperation with the United Nations system. In this such as increasing the capacity of the Haitian National
regard, we welcome the progress made in implementing Police, building electoral capacity, strengthening the
the reconfiguration and consolidation plan for rule of law and supporting political dialogue, has been
MINUSTAH, aimed at consolidating the achievements indispensable.
made to date and at laying the foundations for longJapan, as a close friend of Haiti, has also been
term development programmes .
contributing to the recovery process in the country.
14-2733433/35

S/PV.7147

The question concerning Haiti

A total number of approximately 2,200 Japanese
Self-Defense Force personnel served as part of the
engineering unit that was dispatched until December
2012. Their activities contributed to clearing away
rubble and debris, building facilities and transporting
supplies in the aftermath of the earthquake that hit
Haiti in 2010. Moreover, at the time of the withdrawal
of its personnel, Japan donated engineering equipment
to the Government of Haiti and prefabricated houses to
MINUSTAH.
In addition to the Japan Self-Defense Force
contribution, my country has disbursed more than
$150 million since 2010 for the reconstruction of Haiti.
Basic infrastructure in the country remains fragile.
Therefore, Japan has focused its assistance on restoring
and establishing basic social services in the fields of
health, hygiene and education.
Recently, on 7 March, the Government of Japan
agreed to provide approximately $6.8 million in
assistance for a water supply facilities reconstruction
project in Léogâne and approximately $7 million for a
hospital reconstruction project in Jacmel. In addition,
on 11 March, the Government of Japan signed a
document with UNICEF to provide assistance totalling
approximately $2.5 million for a cholera-prevention
project in Haiti. Further, approximately $3 million for
underprivileged farmers in Haiti has also been decided.
Japan intends to continue to support the recovery in and
cooperate with Haiti.
The Secretary-General’s report raises an important
issue about the future United Nations presence in
Haiti. Japan welcomes the integrated planning process
on the post-2016 United Nations configuration in the
country that has been launched and the five broad
possible options presented in the report on the future
of MINUSTAH.
Mindful of the presidential elections scheduled
for November 2015, while also taking into account
the developments to date in Haiti, Japan was
encouraged to learn that a reduction in MINUSTAH
personnel — a withdrawal of 1,249 infantry and
engineering personnel — is planned to take place by
the end of June 2014. Through support to the recovery
efforts in Haiti, Japan hopes that, in the near future,
conditions on the ground will enable a progressive
drawdown of the MINUSTAH operation and a handover
of its functions to the Government of Haiti.
Two decades have passed since the first JapanCaribbean Community (CARICOM) consultation was
34/35

24/03/2014

held in 1993. The year 2014 has been designated as the
Japan-CARICOM Friendship Year in order to enhance
the relationship in diverse fields. The friendship built
between Japan and Haiti is also a strong and solid one.
Japan will never forget the solidarity shown by Haiti
in the aftermath of the Great East Japan Earthquake in
2011. Through that friendship, I am confident that we
can overcome the difficult challenges ahead of us and
advance towards a brighter future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Ms. Honoré so that she may briefly respond to
the observations that have been made.
Ms. Honoré: Once again, I take the opportunity to
thank you, Madam President, for having placed today’s
debate on the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on the work of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) (S/2014/162) on the
Security Council’s agenda.
I wish to thank you, Madam President, and
the members of the Council for the comments and
recommendations that have been made in the course of
this morning’s debate on our work and on the work of
the Mission for stabilization in Haiti.
My gratitude is also extended to all the other
Member States, including the Republic of Haiti, and
the multilateral organizations that have proferred
comments and suggestions, either on their own behalf
or on behalf of regional groupings.
On behalf of the personnel of MINUSTAH — military,
police and civilians, international and Haitian — as
well as United Nations Volunteers, I thank participants
today for their expressions of support for the work of
the Mission as we strive to fully acquit ourselves of the
Council mandate to ensure an environment of security
and stabilization in Haiti. We are encouraged by the
Council’s continuing support of our efforts and its
desire to ensure they redound to the full benefit of the
children, women and men of Haiti.
In keeping with the Mission’s consolidation
plan, we continue to concentrate on the core areas
of development of the Haitian National Police, the
strengthening of the national capacity for electoral
management, the rule of law and human rights, and key
governance issues, including elections, the legislative
agenda and institutional-strengthening.
MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team
in Haiti draw inspiration from the remarks made today

14-27334

24/03/2014

The question concerning Haiti

and look forward to continuing our work and service
in support of the Secretary-General’s obligations to the
Council as it continues deliberations on the contents of
the report contained in document S/2014/162.
The Mission renews its deep appreciation for
participting countries’ and organizations’ long-standing
and continuing cooperation with the Government and
people of Haiti. We have taken note of the specific
comments on specific areas in which participants

S/PV.7147

feel that we need to place renewed emphasis and look
forward to continuing to serve them.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Honoré
for her clarifications.
There are no further speakers inscribed on the list
of speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

14-2733435/35
