A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/84
30 January 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 102
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/52/634)]
52/84.

Education for all

The General Assembly,
Recalling that in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights2 and the Convention on the Rights of the Child3 the right of every individual to
education is recognized as inalienable,
Recalling also its resolutions 42/104 of 7 December 1987, by which it proclaimed 1990 as International
Literacy Year, 44/127 of 15 December 1989, 46/93 of 16 December 1991 and 50/143 of 21 December 1995,
in which it called for continuing international efforts to promote literacy,
Recalling further its resolution 45/126 of 14 December 1990, in which it called for strengthening efforts
towards the elimination of illiteracy of women of all ages,
Mindful of the fact that eradication of illiteracy is one of the paramount objectives of the International
Development Strategy for the Fourth United Nations Development Decade,4
Deeply concerned about the persistence of the gender gap in education which is reflected by the fact that
nearly two thirds of the world's adult illiterates are women,

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3

Resolution 44/25, annex.

4

Resolution 45/199, annex.

98-76447

/...

A/RES/52/84
Page 2

Convinced that literacy, especially functional literacy and adequate education, represents an indispensable
element for the development and harnessing of science, technology and human resources for economic and
social progress,
Recalling its resolution 49/184 of 23 December 1994, entitled "United Nations Decade for Human Rights
Education", and taking note with satisfaction of resolution 1997/7 of 22 August 1997 of the Subcommission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities of the Commission on Human Rights on the
realization of the right to education, including education in human rights,5
Confident that the International Literacy Year and the World Conference on Education for All, held at
Jomtien, Thailand, in 1990, resulted in increased awareness and support for literacy efforts and became a
turning point in the struggle for a literate world,
Underlining the importance of sustaining and further promoting the progress achieved since the
International Literacy Year and the Jomtien Conference,
Welcoming the Amman Affirmation, 6 the final communiqué of the mid-decade meeting of the
International Consultative Forum on Education for All, adopted at Amman in June 1996, which reaffirmed
the necessity for and possibility of bringing the benefits of education to all,
Recognizing that, despite the significant progress in basic education, especially the increase in primary
school enrolment coupled with a growing emphasis on the quality of education, major problems, both
emerging and continuing, still persist which require even more forceful and concerted action at the national
and international levels so as to achieve the goal of education for all,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General and the Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization entitled "Progress report on the implementation process of
the education for all objectives";7
2. Reaffirms that basic education for all is essential for achieving the goals of eradicating poverty,
reducing child mortality, curbing population growth, achieving gender equality and ensuring sustainable
development, peace and democracy;
3. Acknowledges the efforts of the mid-decade review of progress towards achieving the goals of
education for all in identifying both continuing and emerging challenges, and stresses the need to meet those
challenges and to accelerate the efforts to meet the basic needs of people of all age groups, particularly girls
and women;
4. Appeals to all Governments to step up their efforts to eradicate illiteracy and to direct education
towards the full development of the human personality and to the strengthening of respect for all human
rights and fundamental freedoms;
5. Also appeals to all Governments to redouble their efforts to achieve their own goals of education
for all by setting firm targets and timetables, where possible, including gender-specific education targets and

5

See E/CN.4/1998/2-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1997/50, chap. II, sect.A.

6

A/52/183, annex.

7

A/52/183.
/...

A/RES/52/84
Page 3

programmes to combat the illiteracy of women and girls, and by working in active partnership with
communities, associations, the media and development agencies, to reach those targets;
6. Appeals anew to Governments and to economic and financial organizations and institutions, both
national and international, to lend greater financial and material support to the efforts to increase literacy and
achieve education for all;
7. Invites Member States, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system and relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to further intensify their efforts
to effectively implement the World Declaration on Education for All,8 the Amman Affirmation6 and the
Hamburg Declaration and the Agenda for the Future adopted at the Fifth International Conference on Adult
Education, held at Hamburg, Germany, from 14 to 18 July 1997, as well as the relevant commitments and
recommendations to promote literacy made at major United Nations-sponsored international conferences, with
a view to better coordinating their activities and increasing their contribution to development;
8. Recommends that all Member States and relevant organizations of the United Nations, as well as
non-governmental organizations, provide the necessary information on the implementation of the strategies
of education for all to the Secretary-General and to the Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization so as to enable them to report on the overall progress achieved and the
shortfalls encountered in attaining the goal of education for all;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and in consultation with Member States, to consider
effective ways and means for achieving the goal of education for all, including the desirability and the
feasibility of launching a United Nations decade to eradicate illiteracy, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its fifty-fourth session, through the Economic and Social Council;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the question of cooperation
towards education for all under the item on social development.
70th plenary meeting
12 December 1997

8

Final Report of the World Conference on Education for All: Meeting Basic Learning Needs, Jomtien,
Thailand, 5-9 March 1990, Inter-Agency Commission (UNDP, UNESCO, UNICEF, World Bank) for the
World Conference on Education for All, New York, 1990, appendix I.
