S/2022/940

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 December 2022
Original: English

Letter dated 9 December 2022 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
The present letter is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2655
(2022), in which the Council requested that, within 45 days of the adoption of the
resolution, I provide detailed recommendations on how the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia would carry out the verification of section 1, on
comprehensive rural reform, and section 6.2, on ethnic perspectives (“the ethnic
chapter”), of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict an d Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace, and to confirm any implications of those additional tasks for the
configuration of the Mission. The proposed additions to the mandate, which were
requested jointly by the Government of Colombia and the former Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP), were conveyed in the
letter dated 17 October 2022 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia
(S/2022/787, annex), in which he refers to the rural reform and ethnic chapters as
points of “structural” importance to overcoming the conflict and building a stable and
lasting peace in Colombia. The recommendations contained herein have been
informed by consultations held by my Special Represe ntative for Colombia and his
team at the Verification Mission with the Government of Colombia and other key
national interlocutors, as well as with partners in the United Nations system and the
international community.
Comprehensive rural reform
Issues of land access and rural underdevelopment have been enmeshed in the
Colombian armed conflict throughout its history, shaping conflict dynamics and
marking a deep divide between rural and urban areas. Section 1 of the Agreement,
entitled “Towards a new Colombian countryside: comprehensive rural reform”, was
designed to overcome those factors by laying the foundations for the structural
transformation of rural areas of the country.
In that section, a series of measures are set out to improve living conditi ons,
integrate rural areas into national social and economic development, eradicate poverty
and close inequality gaps, and uphold the rights of the rural population, recognizing
the ethnic diversity of Colombia and prioritizing rural women. The implementat ion
of those measures under the Agreement is aimed at ensuring the non -recurrence of
the conflict that has significantly affected rural areas for over five decades. The
provisions cover three core areas: land, development programmes with a territorial
focus and national plans for comprehensive rural reform.
With regard to land, the Agreement provides for: (a) the creation of a land fund
to distribute 3 million hectares of land to landless peasants; (b) the establishment of

22-27814 (E)

161222

*2227814*

S/2022/940

measures to incentivize access to land; (c) the formalization of 7 million hectares of
small and medium-sized plots currently held informally; (d) the restitution of land to
those who had been stripped of land as a result of the conflict; (e) the creation of
mechanisms to regulate the use of land and resolve land conflicts; (f) the creation and
updating of the rural land registry; and (g) the demarcation of the agricultural frontier
and the protection of reserve areas. The Government of President Gustavo Petro
Urrego has committed itself to prioritizing rural reform; has increased the 2023
budgets of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, the National Land
Agency and the Agency for Rural Development; and has pledged to meet the targets
of formalizing and delivering land plots by the end of its term. Regarding land
acquisition for distribution to peasants, the Government has reached an agreement
with the Colombian federation of cattle ranchers on the purchase of 3 million hectares
for the land fund.
The development programmes with a territorial focus are aimed at achieving
structural change in the areas affected by conflict, poverty, illegal economies and the
limited presence of the State, and at closing the development gap between urban and
rural areas. Under the Agreement, such programmes require the formulation of action
plans for regional transformation, with the active participation of communities and
the necessary resource allocation, as well as the definition of follow -up mechanisms
to ensure proper implementation. The 16 development programmes, covering the 170
municipalities most affected by violence and poverty, were formally constituted in
2017, following a broad consultative process with communities. In the ensuing years,
action plans associated with each development programme have been formulated in
each of the targeted regions, with the participation of more than 220,000 members of
conflict-affected communities. The previous administration had reported that, of the
32,000 initiatives proposed, 3,600 projects were being implemented, on such matters
as roads, aqueducts and schools, and that additional funding sources had been
identified for larger projects. Despite those steps forward, independent State and
non-governmental assessments indicate that far more significant in vestments over
time will be needed to realize the transformative potential of the development
programmes. President Petro has affirmed that implementation of the programmes
will continue, linked to the comprehensive implementation of other aspects of the
Agreement and with broad citizen participation and requisite funding for the
necessary investments
In addition, the Agreement provides for the establishment and implementation
of nationwide development plans in specific sectors, which go hand-in-hand with, and
reinforce, efforts to increase land access and deliver on territorial development plans.
According to the previous administration, of the 16 plans for comprehensive rural
reform provided for in the Agreement, 14 have already been adopted, and 2 are un der
development. They cover areas such as roads, electrification, connectivity, land
adaptation, the strengthening of cooperatives, technical assistance, health, education,
housing, food, agricultural production, the promotion of market access and rural
workers’ rights. In their implementation, aimed at overcoming poverty, these plans
are to include specific and differentiated measures to meet the specific needs of rural
women and to achieve effective equality of opportunities between men and women.
Independent analyses point to uneven implementation to date between regions and
sectors, limited budget allocation, challenges in coordination with local authorities
and the lack of an umbrella mechanism to monitor and coordinate.
Overall, despite some progress being made, the implementation of the rural
reform chapter has been limited, as detailed in a recent report of the Inspector-General
of Colombia, an oversight body. In addition to the insufficient progress made in the
above-mentioned areas, neither the high-level body to promulgate guidelines on the
use of land, nor alternative mechanisms for conflict resolution around issues
2/8

22-27814

S/2022/940

pertaining to the use and property of land, have yet been established, nor has the
agrarian tribunal. The gender and ethnic aspects of rural reform efforts are only at the
incipient stage.
The ethnic chapter
The armed conflict in Colombia took a disproportionate toll on its ethnic
communities and territories, as documented, inter alia, in the final report of the
Commission for the Clarification of Truth, Coexistence and Non-Repetition (Truth
Commission). Today, those same communities continue to be heavily affected by
ongoing violence and insecurity. The ethnic chapter is based on the premise that the
incorporation of the ethnic and cultural perspective in the implementation of the Final
Agreement is essential to ending conflict and building lasting peace. Its inclusion in
the Agreement resulted from strong calls by ethnic organizations from the Indigenous,
Afro-Colombian, Raizal, Palenquero and Roma communities. The inclusion and
mainstreaming of ethnic provisions throughout the Agreement has been recognized
as a pioneering development.
The chapter contains a series of general considerations, principles and
safeguards to ensure that the ethnic approach is applied in a cross-cutting manner
throughout the implementation of the Agreement. For instance, ethnic peoples should
be consulted prior to the implementation of its provisions, and peace implementation
cannot be detrimental to the interests of ethnic peoples.
The chapter also contains a list of specific aspects of each of the six main
sections of the Agreement requiring an ethnic lens. Among those aspects, it is
stipulated that, for the implementation of rural reform (se ction 1), the existing legal
framework and protection mechanisms of ancestral land and traditions should be
respected, and that ethnic peoples should benefit from measures to improve access to
land and be consulted in the implementation of development prog rammes with a
territorial focus. On political participation (section 2), provisions are made for the
effective participation of ethnic authorities in implementation mechanisms and for
guarantees to include candidates from ethnic communities in the special transitional
electoral districts for peace. An ethnic perspective should be factored into security
and protection programmes for former combatants and communities in conflict affected areas (section 3), and security systems such as the Indigenous and Cimar rona
guards should be strengthened. On illicit drugs (section 4), ethnic communities and
organizations should participate in and be consulted on the design and implementation
of the National Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of Illicit Crops, an d
demining programmes should be attentive to ethnic concerns. Measures to address
the impact of illicit crops cultivation on specific Indigenous groups and ethnic
territories have also been spelled out. The agreement on victims of the conflict
(section 5) includes the provision that the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice,
Reparation and Non-Repetition should respect the judicial functions of the traditional
authorities within their territories. A differentiated approach is also called for with
regard to the reintegration of former combatants of ethnic origin into their communities.
Given the importance of consultations on the ethnic dimension, the Agreement
provided for the High-level Forum of Ethnic Peoples as a consultative body on ethnic
matters to the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement. The Forum was established in 2017 and has
been actively carrying out its responsibilities under the Agreement.
Despite broad recognition of the significance of the ethnic provisions, their
implementation is lagging. The Petro administration has expressed its commitment to
fully realizing the objectives of the chapter. The Vice-President, Francia Márquez
Mina, is responsible for coordinating the implementation of the commitments
22-27814

3/8

S/2022/940

contained therein. The Government has established a dedicated working group,
comprising the Office of the High Commissioner for Peace and various Government
entities, to enhance internal coordination and priority-setting and ensure coherent
resource allocation. Recently, the United States of America and Mexico announced
that they would officially support the implementation of the ethnic chapter.
Overall verification approach
Since its establishment, the Verification Mission has sought, through its
impartial and proactive verification efforts, to help stakeholders in the Colombian
peace process to overcome obstacles to the comprehensive implementation of the
Final Agreement. The Mission flags areas where improvements can be mad e on highimpact and strategic issues, and it offers recommendations. It also draws on the
strength of its presence in the field, notably for land-related and ethnic conflict
analysis and resolution efforts. The Mission also leverages partnerships with Colombian
and international interlocutors. If tasked with verifying the implementation of sections
1 and 6.2 of the Agreement, the same strategic and proactive approach would be taken .
Proposed approach to the verification of comprehensive rural reform
In order to develop the Mission’s guiding approach to verification of the chapter
on rural reform, my Special Representative and his team have engaged with key
Government interlocutors. These include the Minister of Agriculture and Rural
Development, the National Land Agency, the Agency for Rural Development and the
Land Restitution Unit; the Offices of the Vice-President and the High Commissioner
for Peace; and representatives of former FARC-EP combatants and ethnic
organizations. These consultations were important for understanding the viewpoints
and priorities of national actors and listening to their suggestions regarding the
Mission’s verification activities.
The Mission’s verification efforts would involve placing special emphasis o n
the first two areas of the rural reform chapter, which are considered strategic to
reducing inequities in access to land, optimizing the use of land and resolving related
conflicts. The detailed verification of the third area, namely the roll-out of 16 national
plans for comprehensive rural reform, which would serve to integrate former conflict
areas into nationwide economic, productive and social dynamics, may exceed the
ability of the Mission, and a selective approach would apply, in that case.
Access to land and its adequate use. A key focus of verification efforts will be
the land fund, which will include efforts to meet goals for the delivery and
formalization of land plots. This encompasses an agreement recently reached between
the Government and the cattle rancher federation that the Mission has been asked to
support. Additional areas of focus are land restitution to victims of the conflict, which
would contribute to meaningful reconciliation, and the establishment of alternative
mechanisms to resolve land conflicts and promote social dialogue, such as the
agrarian tribunal and the high-level body to promulgate guidelines on land use. To
achieve those aims, the Mission will liaise with the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development, the National Land Agency, the Agency for Rural Development, the
Ministry of the Interior, the Ministry of the Environment, the Land Restitution Unit
and local authorities, as well as peasant and civil society organizations and unions,
ethnic authorities and women’s organizations.
Development programmes with a territorial focus. Another key focus of
verification efforts will be the inclusive participation of communities, the allocation
of resources and coordination with regional development plans and national plans for
rural reform, while ensuring the active participation of women and ethnic
communities in the endeavour. In this regard, the Mission will engage with the Office
4/8

22-27814

S/2022/940

of the High Commissioner for Peace and the Agency for Territorial Renewal, in
coordination with the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.
National plans for comprehensive rural reform. The Mission intends to report
on progress on the basis of available sources, while placing more attention on the
adoption and full implementation of plans that have an immediate impact on poverty
eradication and that address inequalities in rural areas, including the impacts on rural
women, in sectors such as health, education, housing, road infrastructure,
electrification and connectivity, water and sanitation, food security and the solidaritybased economy. The Mission will engage with the Office of the High Commissioner
for Peace, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, the Ministry of
Housing, the Ministry of Education, the Colombian Family Welfar e Institute, the
Ministry of Information Technologies and Communication, the Ministry of Transport,
the Ministry of Mines and Energy, the Ministry of Labour and the Ministry of Health.
While the Mission would consider section 1 of the Agreement in its tot ality,
identifying trends and patterns in its implementation, it will prioritize certain
geographical areas, to be determined in consultation with the Government on the basis
of jointly defined criteria. The Mission would also be guided in its verification efforts
by the specific provisions pertaining to the inclusion in the Agreement of aspects
related to gender and ethnic peoples.
As part of the methodology for the verification of section 1, the Mission would
conduct periodic visits to prioritized areas to monitor implementation, provide good
offices support and facilitate dialogue, and to take part in meetings and follow -up
mechanisms, with a view to contributing to building confidence in the process and
accelerating broad-based implementation. The Mission would also interact and
exchange information on a regular basis with Government entities, at both the local
and national levels, including the Office of the Vice-President, which leads on gender
and ethnic issues; the Office of the High Commissioner for Peace, which is
responsible for peace implementation; the Ministry of the Interior; the Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Development; the National Land Agency, which manages the
land fund; the Agency for Territorial Renewal, which is responsible for the
implementation of the development programmes with a territorial focus; the Agency
for Rural Development, which is responsible for the implementation of the national
plans; the Special Assets Administration, which will support land -related processes;
the Ministry of the Environment; local authorities; and the Land Restitution Unit, the
mandate of which is to return seized lands to victims of the conflict.
The Mission would also liaise with mechanisms, platforms and local community
leadership that will be participating in and benefiting from the reforms, such as the
recently established National Peasant Convention. In addition, the Mission would
liaise with civil society organizations, women’s organizations and ethnic authorities
and platforms, universities, think tanks, research centres, oversight entities, including
the Ombudsman’s Office, the Comptrollers’ Office and the Office of the Inspector General, and Congress.
Proposed approach to the verification of the ethnic chapter
With regard to the ethnic chapter, the Special Representative and his team have
consulted with key Government actors, including the Vice-President and the Ministry
of the Interior, ethnic authorities, the High-level Forum of Ethnic Peoples and other
organizations, to establish a common understanding on a verification role for the
Mission.
The Mission would verify progress made in and challenges to the
implementation of provisions of the chapter, which cut across the Agreement, and
make proactive and constructive recommendations to address bottlenecks, factoring
22-27814

5/8

S/2022/940

in the gender dimension throughout. The Mission would pay special attention to the
functioning of dialogue mechanisms to resolve conflicts in the implementation of
ethnic priorities. Special attention would also be given to linkages between the ethnic
chapter and the gender provisions of the Agreement, notably on matters of
reintegration, security guarantees and access to land.
A key focus of the verification approach from the ethnic perspective would be
the section on rural reform, such as the inclusion of ethnic peoples and territories in
land redistribution through the land fund, land restitution and conflict resolution
mechanisms on land use and tenure, especially with regard to potential conflicts in
cadastral records and peasant reserve zones. The Mission will offer its good offices
and verify ethnic participation in land titling, efforts to align the peasant reserve zones
with ethnic territories, ethnic participation in development programmes with a
territorial focus, efforts to reduce poverty in ethnic territories through the national
plans for comprehensive rural reform and the strengthening of protection arrangements
for communities at risk of extinction. The Mission’s simultaneous verification of the
implementation of sections 1 and 6.2 should create strong synergies.
The verification of other sections of the Agreement through an ethnic lens would
include priorities such as strengthened engagement with the Indigenous and
Afro-Colombian representatives elected in 2022, through the special transitional
electoral districts created under the Agreement, and engagement with Congress to
sustain its focus on provisions of the ethnic chapter. Local elections to be held in
October 2023 offer an opportunity for increased particip ation and representation of
ethnic populations. In keeping with the Mission’s current mandate, the verification
process would be focused on ensuring that political and socioeconomic reintegration
policies for former combatants of ethnic origin are tailored to their needs and that
security guarantees for them are reinforced. Given the disproportionate presence of
illicit crops in ethnic territories, the Mission would pay attention, in its verification
activities, to the implementation of tailored provisions of the National Comprehensive
Programme for the Substitution of Illicit Crops, among other programmes. The ethnic
dimension of the transitional justice efforts made under the Agreement would be
another area of focus, including the work of the Special Juris diction for Peace as it
pertains to ethnic populations and judicial systems, the recommendations of the Truth
Commission on ethnic matters and the work of the Unit for the Search for Persons
Deemed Missing in the context of and due to the armed conflict. E fforts to provide
collective reparations would be monitored in consultation with the Comprehensive
Victim Support and Reparation Unit of the Government of Colombia.
The Mission’s verification efforts would be focused on ensuring the
incorporation of the ethnic approach in the implementation of all points of the Final
Agreement and on promoting dialogue and intercultural mechanisms for conflict
resolution to address differences of perspective regarding implementation. A strategic
focus of the Mission’s engagement would be the verification of the full exercise of
the functions of the High-level Forum of Ethnic Peoples, which is required to play an
advisory role with regard to the Commission for the Follow -up, Promotion and
Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement.
Complementarity with the United Nations country team
In carrying out these new verification tasks, the Mission intends to maximize
synergies and complementarity with those members of the United Nations cou ntry
team who have experience, activities or mandates that support implementation of the
rural reform and ethnic chapters of the Final Agreement.
Regarding rural reform, those include agencies, funds and programmes such as
the United Nations Food and Agricultural Organization, the United Nations
6/8

22-27814

S/2022/940

Development Programme, the World Food Programme, the International Organization
for Migration, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment
of Women, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Regarding the ethnic
chapter, this includes OHCHR, UNHCR, the Office of the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the International Labour Organization and the United Nations
Children’s Fund. The work of OHCHR in those areas stems from the Final Agreement,
under which that Office was entrusted to monitor the human rights dimensions of its
implementation.
In developing these recommendations, the Special Representative has carried
out inclusive consultations with the Resident Coordinator and the United Nations
country team. Those discussions reaffirmed the potential for achieving the
complementarity desired, through enhanced coordination. There is agreement that
data and technical expertise available to agencies, funds and programmes can inform
the Mission’s analysis and reporting activities on progress made in and challenges to
implementation, as well as the formulation of its recommendations. At the same time,
the Mission, through its verification activities, can point to areas where programmatic
support by country team members could be directed to assist in overcoming obstacles
and boosting implementation, building upon existing cooperation efforts.
As is the case for existing pillars of the mandate, inter-agency coordination
mechanisms would play an important role in maximizing the overall contribution of
the United Nations to advancing implementation of the rural reform and ethnic
chapters. An inter-agency working group on rural reform would be created, bringing
together the Mission and the relevant country team members. The inter-agency task
force on ethnic issues would be utilized to the fullest extent, to ensure
complementarity regarding the ethnic chapter. Those national coordination efforts
would be reinforced at the field level, through coordination mechanisms already in
place in the regions that have been prioritized for peace implementation .
Implications for the configuration of the Mission
Although the two chapters are far-ranging in their scope, the Mission would, as
it has in other areas of its mandate, conduct its verification with a strategic and
proactive approach, applying its resources to aspects that are vital for peace
consolidation in the near and medium term and that can inform priority -setting by the
Government and other national and international actors.
With that approach as the guidepost, the Mission is we ll positioned to initiate
the verification of the two chapters, optimizing currently established structures and
resources where possible. At Mission headquarters, under the verification component,
the existing section tasked with verifying the political an d socioeconomic
reintegration of former FARC-EP combatants would also be tasked with verifying
priority elements of the comprehensive rural reform. With regard to the ethnic
chapter, the available capacity that brings expertise on ethnic issues verified in
accordance with the Mission’s current mandate would guide its verification efforts
and is likely to require some reinforcement, given the broader scope of the new task.
Both teams have developed strong relations with key State entities, civil society
groupings and other relevant stakeholders in the rural reform and ethnic areas. In
addition, the Mission’s field presence in former conflict areas largely corresponds to
the regions where the implementation of the rural reform and ethnic chapters would
be prioritized. Lastly, as described above, the Mission would maximize opportunities
of collaboration with country team members who, within their mandates, support rural
reform and ethnic issues, which would inform verification efforts and contribute to
efficiencies.
22-27814

7/8

S/2022/940

As the implementation of the two chapters advances, and specific components
of the rural reform and ethnic chapters require more attention, verification capacities
may require modest reinforcement, in particular in areas where land or ethnic issues
are acute, or for specific expertise currently unavailable at Mission headquarters. The
two new tasks would not require any change in the currently authorized strength of
unarmed international observers, which stands at 120.
Conclusions
On the basis of the preceding analysis, I recommend that the Security Council
respond positively to the request conveyed by the Government of Colombia and
authorize the addition of those tasks to the mandate of the Verification Mission. The
comprehensive rural reform and ethnic chapters of the Agreement are critical to
consolidating peace by addressing deep-rooted patterns of inequality and exclusion
of rural regions and ethnic peoples that have perpetuated, and been exacerbated by,
the armed conflict.
Given the interlocking nature of the Agreement, progress in the rural reform and
ethnic chapters is important for undergirding advances in provisions currently under
the Mission’s mandate, namely reintegration and security guarantees for former
combatants and communities. Greater progress in the area of rural reform, in
particular, is central to the extension of the State’s presence into conflict -affected
areas and the comprehensive implementation that the Security Council has called for,
and to which the Government has committed itself.
I also acknowledge the commitments made by the parties and their confidence
in the Verification Mission, as reflected in that request. While the added tasks present
new challenges, the Mission is well placed to carry them out in the manner o utlined
above. The increased focus of the Security Council on those provisions through the
Mission’s verification role would no doubt contribute to the consolidation of peace in
Colombia.
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter to the at tention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

8/8

22-27814
