S/2016/546

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 June 2016
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the twenty-eighth submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of Council resolution 2165
(2014), paragraph 5 of Council resolution 2191 (2014) and paragraph 5 of Council
resolution 2258 (2015), in which the Council requested me to report, every 30 days,
on the implementation of the resolutions by all parties to the conflict in the Syrian
Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on the data available to United
Nations agencies on the ground, from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic,
other Syrian sources and open sources. Data from United Nations agencies on their
humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the period from 1 to 31 May 2016.
More recent data have been included when available.

II. Major developments
A.

Developments on the ground
3.
During the reporting period, the cessation of hostilities faced its most
significant threat since it entered into force on 27 February. On 24 May, 39 non-State
armed opposition groups issued a statement in which they threatened to withdraw
from the cessation of hostilities within 48 hours, although they remained silent after
the ultimatum expired. Efforts by the International Syria Support Group and the
United Nations to reduce the violence continued. On 5 May, the United States of
America and the Russian Federation brokered a 48-hour “regime of silence”, which
was established in Aleppo. On 24 May, a 72-hour “regime of silence” was launched to
cover Darayya and eastern Ghutah, Rif Dimashq governorate.
4.
In line with resolution 2258 (2015), the following description of developments
on the ground reports on the compliance by all parties in the Syrian Arab Re public
with resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014). This information is
without prejudice to the work of the International Syria Support Group Task Force
on the Ceasefire.

16-09950 (E)

200616

*1609950*

S/2016/546

5.
Fighting continued during the reporting period, especially in Alepp o, Idlib,
Hama, Homs, Ladhiqiyah and Rif Dimashq governorates. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) reported that the number
of violations and abuses of international human rights law, violations of
international humanitarian law and abuses of human rights documented during the
reporting period rose significantly in certain areas, such as Aleppo and Rif Dimashq,
compared with previous months.
6.
In a note verbale to OHCHR dated 6 June, the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic informed the Office that, in May, more than 270 persons had allegedly
been killed and more than 653 injured as a result of “terrorist” attacks. It provided a
detailed list of casualties in the governorates of Aleppo, Damascus, Dayr al -Zawr,
Hama, Hasakah, Homs, Idlib, Ladhiqiyah, Rif Dimashq and Tartus. While some
incidents, such as those in Ladhiqiyah and Tartus, probably corresponded to those
recorded by OHCHR, the Office was unable to independently verify those
allegations.
7.
Open sources, including monitoring groups, reported a higher death toll in
May as a result of actions by all parties to the conflict. The United Nations was not
able to independently verify those allegations, however.
8.
In Rif Dimashq governorate, heavy fighting continued in several areas.
Government forces assumed control over the entire southern sector of eastern
Ghutah, including full control over the hitherto-besieged area of Zabdin, and made
further gains in the eastern sector towards Nashabiyah during May. The fighting
resulted in civilian casualties and led to the displacement of several thousand
civilians to the central and northern sectors of eastern Ghutah , predominantly to
Kafr Batna, and Misraba. OHCHR documented attacks by pro-government forces
and non-State armed opposition groups, as well as between non-State armed
opposition groups, that resulted in civilian casualties. Air strikes and shelling were
reported in several towns, including Duma, Shawfuniyah, Dayr al-Asafir, Marjah
and Buzaynah.
9.
In western Ghutah, government forces reportedly conducted an offensive on
the besieged town of Darayya. Reports of shelling by non-State armed opposition
groups in Darayya were also recorded. On 12 May, shortly after a convoy of the
United Nations, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and the International Committee of
the Red Cross was denied entry to Darayya by the government authorities,
pro-government forces reportedly fired shells on to the town, killing two people.
Furthermore, OHCHR received reports indicating that at le ast six civilians had been
killed and several others injured in the fighting in and around Darayya during the
second half of May.
10. Heavy fighting between government forces and non-State armed opposition
groups was reported in the Khan al-Shih area of Rif Dimashq, resulting in multiple
deaths and injuries to civilians. On 17 May, shells struck a civilian minibus
travelling along the only remaining route out of Khan al -Shih, reportedly killing
seven civilians. Later the same day, air strikes hit the Martyr Ziyad al-Bikal field
hospital, putting the facility out of service. No casualties were reported.
11. On 11 June, in the Damascus suburb of Sayyidah Zainab, in the vicinity of the
Qabr al-Sitt camp, two explosions left at least 14 civilians, including five Palestine
refugees, dead and many others wounded. That was the fourth such attack in

2/17

16-09950

S/2016/546

Sayyidah Zainab in 2016. Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) claimed
responsibility for the attacks.
12. Intensified fighting between various parties continued in several parts of
Aleppo governorate. A high tempo of air strikes and shelling by pro -government
forces of areas of the city of Aleppo controlled by non-State armed groups was
recorded. For example, on 4 May, the Ballirmun district was allegedly hit by several
air strikes, killing six persons. On 17 May, Rashidin district was allegedly hit by
several air strikes, killing two children. On 30 May, air strikes hit residential
buildings in Sukkari and Kallasah, in eastern Aleppo, killing at least 16 civilians
and injuring another 30, according to first responders. On 31 May, a mortar hit the
Ihsan Charity Medical Centre. The attack injured 45 persons and the hospital
sustained physical damage. Early in June, the Bayan hospital in eastern Aleppo was
hit, killing at least 10 people and damaging the facility. Meanwhile, the city of
Aleppo is still suffering from heavily reduced basic services, with the electricity
supply reportedly limited to 10 hours a week and water for 1 day out of every 10.
13. At the same time, non-State armed opposition groups continued their attacks on
government-held areas of the city of Aleppo. According to information received by
OHCHR, in the first half of May, mortars hit a number of western Aleppo
neighbourhoods, including Salah al-Din, Sulaymaniyah, Khalidiyah and Maydan,
killing several civilians, injuring many more and causing substantial damage to
residential buildings. For example, on 3 May, the Dubayt maternity hospital in
western Aleppo was hit and put out of service, although OHCHR was unable to
confirm exactly how that occurred. Reports from the government -controlled Syrian
Arab News Agency stated that shells fired from parts of Aleppo controlled by
non-State armed opposition groups had hit the hospital, leaving 3 civilians dea d and
at least 15 others injured. Between 19 and 21 May, the United Nations hub in western
Aleppo was hit by several rockets, with no casualties among United Nations staff.
14. Fighting, including sniper fire and rocket attacks, between members of the
Syrian Kurdish People’s Protection Units and non-State armed groups continued
along the Castillo road, one of the last remaining major supply routes into the eastern
part of the city of Aleppo, where some 300,000 people reside. An aerial bombardment
along the road during May was also reported. The road is frequently closed when
fighting intensifies, then re-opened when it abates. Air strikes were also reported in
adjacent villages north of the road. For example, on 26 May, an air strike on the
village of Anadan reportedly injured more than 10 civilians. On 27 May, five air
strikes on the town of Kafr Hamra allegedly killed a woman and injured seven other
civilians. The same day, an air strike hit a bakery in Huraytan, reportedly killing at
least 10 civilians and injuring dozens.
15. Fighting between non-State armed opposition groups and ISIL continued in
northern Aleppo governorate. An ISIL offensive on the towns of Mari‘ and I‘zaz and
the surrounding area led to numerous civilian casualties and the displacement of
some 35,000 people by late May. ISIL took further control of several villages
controlled by non-State armed opposition groups situated on the approaches to
Mari‘ and I‘zaz. Civilians remaining in partially surrounded Mari‘ were allowed
unimpeded access by non-State armed opposition groups to adjacent towns, with
medical staff also being allowed in and out of the only remaining operational
hospital.

16-09950

3/17

S/2016/546

16. In Idlib governorate, mutual shelling between the parties and intensified
pro-government air strikes continued throughout the reporting period, killing and
injuring civilians. On 5 May, the Kamunah and Ghita al-Rahmah informal
settlements for displaced persons, located south of the town of Sarmada, were hit by
what initial reports suggested was an air strike. Both the Syrian and the Russian
authorities denied launching the attacks, stating that the explosions had been caused
by shells or grenades fired by non-State armed opposition groups. First responders
reported that at least 30 civilians had been killed and dozens others injured. Air
strikes were also reported in other parts of Idlib, including the city of Idlib, Ariha,
Ma‘rrat al-Nu‘man, Khan Shaykhun, Binnish and Hafsarjah. As a result, some
70 civilians were killed and many more injured, according to information received
by OHCHR. Civilian infrastructure was also affected. For example, on 13 May, air
strikes struck Ariha, hitting a local gynaecology and obstetrics hospital and injuring
civilians. On 30 May, air strikes hit the national hospital in the city of Idlib, killing
at least 26 civilians and injuring dozens more. A second air strike in the vicinity of
Ibn Sina Hospital caused no casualties.
17. Non-State armed opposition groups continued to shell the besieged towns of
Fu‘ah and Kafraya in Idlib governorate. On 8 May, a civilian was reportedly killed
and others were injured when mortars were fired at the besieged towns. Another
three were reportedly killed in a similar attack on Fu ‘ah on 24 May. Shelling was
also reported on 31 May, but no casualties were recorded.
18. On 23 May, terrorist attacks hit the coastal towns of Jablah, Ladhiqiyah
governorate, and Tartus, Tartus governorate. Four explosions hit Jablah: one at the
national hospital, one at the electricity directorate and two at a bus stat ion. Two
explosions occurred at a bus station in Tartus, with a third in a nearby residential
area. OHCHR received reports that scores of people had been killed. The
Government informed OHCHR in a note verbale dated 6 June that 40 people had
been killed and 81 injured in the attacks in Tartus, while 122 people had been killed
and 148 injured in the attacks in Jablah. Most of those killed or injured are believed
to be civilians. ISIL claimed responsibility for the attacks. I released a statement in
which I condemned the attacks. According to open sources, following the attacks,
unidentified armed individuals allegedly attacked the Karnak shelter for internally
displaced persons, south of Tartus, with multiple tents reportedly destroyed.
19. In Hama governorate, on 12 May, Nusrah Front and Ahrar al-Sham fighters
advanced on the village of Zarah and areas around Harbinafsah in the southern
countryside. A number of civilians were allegedly executed and others kidnapped. In
a note verbale to OHCHR, the Syrian authorities indicated that seven civilians,
including three women, had been killed in the attack and another seven injured.
They added that 130 persons had been taken to undisclosed locations, providing the
names of 61 of them. According to open sources, government forces later conducted
air strikes on and shelled areas controlled by non-State armed opposition groups
around Harbinafsah, Lataminah and Kafr Zayta.
20. In Homs governorate, fighting continued between ISIL and government forces
in the eastern countryside. On 5 May, ISIL seized control of the Sh‘ir oil field and
pushed further to take control of several positions adjacent to the Jazal oil field on
17 May. On 5 May, ISIL reportedly conducted dual suicide attacks in Mukharram
Fawqani in the eastern countryside, allegedly killing 12 people and injuring
40 others.

4/17

16-09950

S/2016/546

21. Fighting between government forces and ISIL continued in Dayr al -Zawr
governorate, killing and injuring civilians. On 1 May, ISIL fighters fired mortar
rounds into the besieged Jurah and Qusur neighbourhoods of the city of Dayr
al-Zawr, reportedly killing two people. Some six people were killed and dozens more
injured during other attacks in May. On 14 May, ISIL took over Assad Hospital for a
few hours before being forced to withdraw. ISIL took some medical staff hostage and
their whereabouts remains unknown. Meanwhile, in rural Dayr al-Zawr, several
villages, including Muhaymidah, Junaynah, Hasanah and Ji’a, were hit by air strikes
on 1 May. In Ji’a, 11 civilians were reportedly killed and some 10 injured. On
16 May, several air strikes on Albu Kamal reportedly killed three children. The origin
of the air strikes could not be verified.
22. In Raqqah governorate, the Syrian Democratic Forces, supported by the
United States-led coalition, launched an offensive against ISIL, including towar ds
the city of Raqqah. Civilians were affected by the fighting: on 2 May, several air
strikes hit Raqqah, including the area known as the “17th Division”, located
approximately 4 km outside the city and close to Ibn Rushd Garden and the power
station. The raids allegedly killed at least 23 civilians and injured some 50 others.
On 3 May, the United States Central Command stated that, on 2 May, the United
States-led coalition had carried out two strikes near Raqqah targeting an ISIL
“finance station” and “weapon storage factory”. On 19 May, several air strikes on
the village of Hamrah, in the east of the governorate, reportedly killed three children
and their mother.
23. In Hasakah governorate, fighting involving government forces, Kurdish forces
and listed terrorist groups continued to result in civilian casualties. On 18 May,
military clashes erupted between pro-government militiamen and Kurdish police in
the city of Hasakah. The clashes reportedly began after a disagreement over the
administration of high school exams. On the same day, three primary school pupils
were killed in the crossfire that resulted from infighting between the Sutoro armed
group and the National Defence Forces in the vicinity of the national hospital in the
city. Elsewhere, on 21 May, a restaurant in Qamishli was attacked with hand
grenades, followed by two suicide attacks, reportedly killing at least three civilians
and injuring eight others. ISIL claimed responsibility for the attack.
24. Fighting continued in the southern Syrian Arab Republic during the reporting
period. On 19 May, non-State armed opposition groups launched a military operation
against government forces in the northern countryside of Dar‘a. In Musayfirah,
shelling reportedly hit a settlement for internally displaced p ersons, resulting in
several civilian casualties. Fighting also continued between non -State armed
opposition groups and the Nusrah Front and ISIL-affiliated groups in the western
countryside of Dar‘a. Meanwhile, aerial bombardments continued to affect parts of
Dar‘a and Qunaytirah governorates, although no major displacement was reported.
25. The United States Central Command confirmed that at least 156 strikes had
been carried out in May by the United States-led coalition against ISIL targets in
Aleppo, Dayr al-Zawr Hasakah, Homs and Raqqah governorates. The Ministry of
Defence of the Russian Federation, meanwhile, provided no information on its
operations in May, although in its briefing of 27 May it indicated that it would
continue with military operations against ISIL and the Nusrah Front, and that strikes
against “illegal oil production facilities” had intensified since 20 May. OHCHR
received various reports of air strikes allegedly conducted by international actors

16-09950

5/17

S/2016/546

that caused civilian casualties. OHCHR was unable to adequately ascertain
responsibility for those attacks, however.
26. There were developments with respect to several local agreements during the
reporting period. The local ceasefire agreement pertaining to Wa ‘r district in Homs,
which entered into force in December 2015, remained suspended owing to
disagreements over the implementation of some aspects, including the status of
detainees. The area was added to the list of locations designated as besieged by the
United Nations as at 28 May following the closure by the Government of the main
road to the district since early March and restrictions on freedom of movement for
civilians. In May, the district came under sporadic attack by surrounding
pro-government forces, causing civilian casualties. On 16 May, a woman was killed
and several others were injured by shelling. On 18 May, shooting was reported,
allegedly causing several injuries. Reports of shelling from Wa ‘r into governmentcontrolled areas were also recorded. On 30 May, 153 twelfth graders and 68 ninth
graders from Wa‘r were permitted to leave the besieged neighbourhood to sit their
exams.
27. In the besieged area of Mu‘addamiyah in Rif Dimashq, negotiations continued
between the Government and the local negotiation committee. Both sides
implemented goodwill gestures. On 29 May, the local negotiation committee raised
the Syrian flag over the municipal building and removed barricades inside the town.
The Government allowed some humanitarian assistance, including bread, to enter
the town, although the amounts and type of assistance were insufficient to meet the
full needs of residents. The Government also permitted some medical evacuations.
Both sides agreed to continue discussions on the local agreement in order to
overcome controversial issues.
28. The secretary-general of Hizbullah, Hassan Nasrallah, offered his condolences
upon the killing of a senior Hizbullah commander in the Syrian Arab Republic,
Mustafa Badr al-Din, in Damascus on 13 May. As on previous occasions, he
acknowledged the presence of Hizbullah fighters in the country and promised to
increase the presence.

B.

Human rights
29. OHCHR continued to receive reports of serious violations and abuses of human
rights, including arbitrary detentions and extrajudicial killings, in government-run
detention facilities and by non-State armed opposition groups. On 7 May, a 15-yearold boy reportedly died after having been tortured at a military security branch in
Damascus. He had been arrested in 2014 at a government checkpoint in the city of
Dayr al-Zawr while on his way to school to sit his exams.
30. On 1 May, political detainees began rioting in Hama central prison, taking at
least six guards hostage. The unrest was reportedly triggered by the attempted
transfer of five detainees to Saydnaya prison, where it was feared that death
sentences allegedly handed down against them would be carried out. On 8 May,
both sides reached an agreement by which 500 political detainees would be
released, as would the guards. The guards were subsequently released, while the
detainees are being released in batches, with several released each day, although
there have been reports of no detainees having been released on certain days. The
situation remains tense.

6/17

16-09950

S/2016/546

31. In Rif Dimashq governorate, OHCHR received reports that non-State armed
opposition groups in Khan al-Shih were mistreating captured members of
pro-government forces during continuing fighting in the area.
32. On 5 May, Kurdish forces reportedly detained 30 men at checkpoints in the
area of Ayn al-Arus, located south of Tall Abyad; the men were accused of
cooperating with ISIL. Their whereabouts remains unknown.
33. Between 22 and 24 May, residents of Kafr Nubl protested against the arbitrary
detention of dozens of the town’s residents by the Nusrah Front. In Saraqib, Idlib
governorate, on 20 May, residents protested against the execution of a male resident
by the Nusrah Front following what protesters stated was an unfair trial by an
illegitimate court. The group also reportedly publicly executed two civilians at the
Salqin roundabout in Saraqib on 20 May; the men had been accused of collaborating
with the Government.
34. On 3 May, in Tabaqah marketplace, ISIL publicly beheaded a male civilian
accused of spying for coalition forces. On 23 May, ISIL publicly stoned a 16-yearold boy accused of homosexuality.
35. Fighting between non-State armed opposition groups in eastern Ghutah
allegedly resulted in the death of an obstetrician in his home in Duma on 3 May by a
stray bullet. On 17 May, in Bayt Siwa, two civilians, including a woman, were
reportedly killed in cross-fire that resulted from infighting.

C.

Humanitarian response
36. In May, United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to reach
millions of people in need through all modalities, from within the Syrian Arab
Republic and across borders, pursuant to resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and
2258 (2015) (see table 1). Non-governmental organizations also continued to deliver
assistance, in line with previous months. The Government continued to provide
basic services to areas under its control and in many areas beyond its control.
Table 1
Number of people reached by United Nations system organizations in May 2016
Organization

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations

57 750

International Organization for Migration

55 556

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees

701 533

United Nations Children’s Fund
United Nations Development Programme

1 600 000
1 500 000 (41,452 directly and 1,475,335 indirectly)

United Nations Population Fund

46 780

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East

352 686

World Food Programme
World Health Organization

16-09950

Number of people reached

4 000 000
1 480 707 (treatments)

7/17

S/2016/546

37. Cross-border deliveries continued during the reporting period. In May,
20 consignments consisting of 559 trucks crossed from Turkey and Jordan to the
Syrian Arab Republic under the terms of resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and
2258 (2015), benefiting millions of people (see annex, map 1, for more information
on United Nations cross-border convoys in May). Eight of those consignments
crossed from Bab al-Hawa (389 trucks), four from Bab al-Salam (26 trucks) and
eight from Ramtha (144 trucks).
38. In line with Security Council resolutions, the United Nations notified the
Syrian authorities in advance of each shipment, including of its content, destination
and number of beneficiaries. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the
Syrian Arab Republic continued its operations, monitoring 559 trucks in the
20 consignments in May, confirming the humanitarian nature of each and noti fying
the Syrian authorities after each shipment. The Mechanism continued to benefit
from excellent cooperation with the Governments of Jordan and Turkey.
39. In May, inter-agency convoys to the besieged and hard-to-reach locations
listed in table 2 were completed (see annex, map 2, for more information on access
to besieged and hard-to-reach locations). From 10 April to 12 June, the World Food
Programme (WFP) successfully completed 51 airdrop rotations, delivering food
items sufficient to cover some 100,000 people with 41 kg family food rations that
included chickpeas, beans, rice and vegetable oil, lentils, bulgur wheat, salt and
sugar. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) continued to reach Yarmouk residents by providing assistance
in adjacent neighbourhoods, from which they could collect the aid.
Table 2
Inter-agency convoys at the end of April and in May 2016

8/17

Date

Location

Number of
beneficiaries

27 April and
2 May

Talbisah

60 000

Multisectoral assistance. During the loading of the convoy
on 27 April, the Syrian authorities removed some
psychotropic and anaesthetic medicines.

4 and 8 May

Qaryatayn

3 250

Multisectoral assistance.

6 May

Bludan

35 000

Health, education, non-food items and water, sanitation and
hygiene materials.

18 May

Eastern Harasta

10 000

Multisectoral assistance. Several health items, such as
surgical and burn kits, basic health kits, scissors and parts of
midwifery kits, were not approved/ removed by the Syrian
authorities.

22 May

Qadsiya

25 000

Multisectoral assistance. Several health items, such as
surgical and burn kits, basic health kits, scissors and parts
of midwifery and diarrhoea treatment kits, were not
approved/removed by the Syrian authorities.

22 May

Hamah

15 000

Multisectoral assessments and medical assistance. Several
health items, such as surgical and burn kits, basic health
kits, scissors, parts of midwifery and diarrhoea treatment
kits, were not approved/ removed by the Syrian authorities.

25 May

Hulah

71 000

Food, nutrition, hygiene kits and educational materials.

Type of assistance

16-09950

S/2016/546

40. United Nations agencies also undertook single-agency deliveries to cross-line
and hard-to-reach locations, or reached those locations through their regular
programmes during the reporting period. For example, WFP reached 368,515 people
in 14 hard-to-reach and besieged locations in seven governorates. The World Health
Organization (WHO) and its implementing partners delivered assistance to 212,158
people across conflict lines. The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) reached
some 220,000 people in besieged and hard-to-reach locations in Rif Dimashq and
Homs governorates through its regular programmes. In Yalda, UNRWA continued
the provision of humanitarian assistance, including that of 10,800 food parcels and
10,800 hygiene kits, in addition to health consultations for 1,367 residents from
Yarmouk, Babila, Bayt Sahm and Yalda, and an additional 147 dental consultations.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
supported 200 pupils from hard-to-reach areas who sat their final exams in the city
of Aleppo through the distribution of mattresses, blankets, jerrycans and kitchen sets
at six schools that had been designated by the Ministry of Education as temporary
shelters during the exam period.
Humanitarian access
41. The delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in need of assistance
remained extremely challenging in many areas as a result of deliberate restrictions
by the parties on the movement of people and goods, active conflict and shifting
conflict lines.
42. Access to the 4.6 million people living in besieged, hard -to-reach and priority
cross-line locations as at 31 May remained of critical concern. Only two besieged
areas and six hard-to-reach locations could be accessed in May through UNRWA
and inter-agency convoys: eastern Harasta, Yarmouk, Talbisah, Qaryatayn, Bludan,
Qudssiya, Hameh and Hulah. The United Nations also continued to reach those in
besieged Dayr al-Zawr through airdrops, although several weeks of airdrops have
delivered an amount of food equivalent to only one road convoy. Overall, the United
Nations agencies and partners reached 55 of the 154 besieged and hard -to-reach
areas (36 per cent) through either inter-agency convoys or single agency deliveries.
Details on the assistance to those areas in May are contained in table 3.
Table 3
United Nations deliveries to hard-to-reach, besieged and priority cross-line
locations, May 2016
Sector (United Nations delivery only)

Number of people reached (as a percentage of 4.6 million)

Food security

398 000 (8.7)

Health (treatments)

841 000 (18.3)

Non-food items

60 000 (1.3)

Water, sanitation and hygiene

128 350 (2.8)

43. Active conflict in several governorates hindered the effective delivery of
humanitarian assistance and people’s access to essential services. Markets, schools,
medical centres and other civilian infrastructure were damaged as a result of
fighting in May, reducing the availability of basic and essential services in critical
areas. The offices of the United Nations and local non-governmental organizations

16-09950

9/17

S/2016/546

were also damaged. The fighting also disrupted humanitarian supply lines to
communities at risk. For example, the security situation along the Castillo road
resulted in the suspension of humanitarian deliveries to the eastern part of the city
of Aleppo several times in May and early June. The United Nations and its partners
have pre-positioned supplies in case of further access constraints in and around
Aleppo. Meanwhile, in northern Aleppo governorate, health partners had to
evacuate four hospitals and several primary health facilities and suspend their
primary and secondary health activities in and around I‘zaz and the Mari‘ area
following an ISIL offensive. Elsewhere, several approved inter -agency convoys to
hard-to-reach areas, including the subdistricts of Harbinafsah, Kafr Zayta and
Madiq Castle, were put on hold at the request of the Government until sec urity
conditions improved.
44. Deliberate interference and restrictions by the parties also continued to prevent
aid delivery. For example, WFP continued to be unable to gain access to populations
in need in ISIL-controlled areas of the country, given that all plans to deliver
assistance to those areas are suspended owing to the inability to work independently
and monitor activities. That is preventing WFP from reaching Raqqah and most of
Dayr al-Zawr governorates and certain areas in northern rural Aleppo , southern rural
Hasakah and north-western rural Hama. As regards the situation in Khan al-Shih,
UNRWA submitted a note verbale to the Syrian authorities to request approval for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to the area. That request was denied o n 12 May.
45. On 19 May, the United Nations submitted its inter-agency convoy plan for June
that included requests to reach 1.1 million beneficiaries across 34 besieged, hard -toreach and priority cross-line locations. On 5 June, the United Nations submitted a
written request to the Syrian authorities reiterating its request for full approval to
deliver overland assistance to areas that had been partially approved or not approved
under the plan. The United Nations also sought access by air to Darayya, Duma and
Moadamiya in Rif Dimashq governorate and to Waʽr in Homs governorate, should
overland access to any of those locations not be granted by 10 June.
46. By 14 June, in response to the plan, the Syrian authorities granted approval in
full to 16 locations for 355,250 people; 14 locations were partially approved, with
restrictions on the type of assistance and/or a reduction in the number of approved
beneficiaries to 396,200 (a difference of 176,800 between the number requested and
the approved target); and 4 locations, with a total of 208,500 people, were not
approved. Of the 17 besieged areas requested, the United Nations has approvals to
reach 16, reaching either the full population in need or part thereof. In total, for
June, the Government authorized the United Nations to deliver assistance to 68 per
cent of the requested population in need under the plan: delivery in full to 32 per
cent and delivery with conditions to 36 per cent. Unapproved or only partially
approved requests mean that 32 per cent of planned beneficiaries will not be
reached. The Syrian authorities have also approved eight additional locations not
requested by the United Nations.
47. The Nusaybin/Qamishli crossing in Hasakah governorate has been temporarily
closed by the Turkish authorities owing to security concerns since 27 December
2015 (the crossing is not authorized for use under resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014) and 2258 (2015)). WFP stocks of monthly family food rations in the
governorate were completely exhausted in March 2016. Currently, WFP has only
ready-to-eat parcels available sufficient for up to 5,420 people there. The delivery of

10/17

16-09950

S/2016/546

food assistance for a planned 275,000 people in May could not take place. However,
WFP provided emergency stocks of ready-to-eat rations to 10,630 people staying in
shelters for internally displaced persons in the cities of Qamishli and Hasakah. The
United Nations sent a note verbale on 23 May to the Syrian authorities requesting
access to Qamishli by air from Damascus. On 2 June, the Syrian au thorities agreed
to the implementation of an air bridge into Hasakah governorate from Damascus.
Separately, on 26 May and 1 June, UNHCR airlifted non -food items for some
50,000 people to Qamishli from Amman.
48. As at 31 May, 113 visas for United Nations staff had been approved, of which
58 were new visas and 55 renewals. Some 27 requests remained pending, and 4 had
been rejected.
49. A total of 16 international non-governmental organizations are authorized to
operate in the Syrian Arab Republic. Five more have applications pending approval
by the Government. International non-governmental organizations continued to face
administrative hurdles and restrictions that affect their ability to operate, including
in gaining permission to undertake independent needs assessments.
50. The number of national non-governmental organizations authorized to partner
with United Nations organizations increased from 145 to 147 in May, with two
added to the list in Homs and Damascus governorates. Authorized national
non-governmental organizations continued to operate under complex procedures in
partnering with United Nations agencies.
Besieged areas
51. The number of people living in areas designated by the United Nations as
besieged currently stands at 590,200. That is up from 517,700 in my previous report,
following the addition of the Waʽr district of the city of Homs. Meanwhile, Zabadin
has been removed from the list of besieged areas in eastern Ghutah following the
retaking of the town by the Government. Humanitaria n conditions in besieged areas
continue to be dire. The United Nations has been standing by ready to deliver
assistance to all besieged locations as soon as access is granted. In besieged areas,
the flow of commercial supplies through official routes remai ned largely blocked,
leading to high prices for commodities reaching besieged areas through unofficial and
irregular supply lines. Freedom of movement remained heavily restricted, although
limited numbers are sporadically allowed to exit and re -enter some besieged areas.
Indications of severe trauma were observed during inter -agency convoys to besieged
areas, with children being particularly affected. Meanwhile, significant numbers of
children appear to have been recruited into armed groups, with many boys under
18 years of age — in uniform or plain clothes — brandishing weapons.
52. In May, the United Nations and its partners assisted some 130,000 people in
besieged areas (21 per cent of the total besieged population) through inter -agency
convoys, WFP airdrops, UNRWA operations and other single-agency operations.
53. In eastern Ghutah, Rif Dimashq, some 282,500 people remain besieged by
government forces in Duma, eastern Harasta, Arbin, Zamalka, Ain Tarma,
Hammura, Jisrein, Kafr Batna and Saqba. Zabadin is no longer considered besieged
following its full retaking by the Government in May, with the population fleeing to
other parts of eastern Ghutah, including Kafr Batna and Misraba. On 18 May, an
inter-agency convoy of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, the Inte rnational Committee

16-09950

11/17

S/2016/546

of the Red Cross and the United Nations reached besieged eastern Harasta with food
and other humanitarian supplies for 10,000 people — the first delivery since March
2013. Several health items, such as surgical and burn kits, basic heal th kits, scissors
and parts of midwifery kits, were not approved by the Ministry of Health.
Elsewhere, on 25 May, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent delivered a small quantity of
medicines and school bags to Duma. On 10 June, the United Nations and partners
completed the first of a multi-phase delivery to bring food, nutritional items, health,
hygiene and other humanitarian supplies to some 40,000 people in Duma.
54. In Madaya and Bquine, in Rif Dimashq governorate, some 43,000 people
remain besieged by government forces. On 15 May, the Syrian authorities allowed
68 pupils and a few teachers to exit/enter Madaya to sit their final exams. An
inter-agency convoy with multisectoral assistance for 40,000 people is pending the
parties making final arrangements to facilitate safe passage for the convoys, as part
of the Four Towns agreement.
55. In Zabadani, Rif Dimashq governorate, some 700 people remain besieged by
government forces. Although not approved under the May plan, a multisectoral
convoy is pending the parties making final arrangements to facilitate safe passage
for the convoys, as part of the Four Towns agreement.
56. In Fu‘ah and Kefraya, Idlib governorate, some 20,000 people remain besieged
by non-State armed opposition groups and the Nusrah Front. An int er-agency
convoy with multisectoral assistance for 20,000 people is pending the parties
making final arrangements to facilitate safe passage for the convoys, as part of the
Four Towns agreement.
57. In Darayya, Rif Dimashq governorate, about 4,000 people remain besieged by
government forces. Under the May plan, the Syrian authorities granted conditional
approval for Darayya, limiting the delivery of assistance to baby milk and school and
medical supplies. Notwithstanding the guarantees and approvals receiv ed from the
Syrian authorities, a convoy and assessment mission planned for 12 May was aborted
following extensive negotiations on the content of the convoy. Following intense
negotiations at various levels, an inter-agency convoy was finally deployed on 1 June
to Darayya to deliver initial assistance, consisting of medical supplies, vaccines and
nutritional items for children. That was the first time the United Nations had entered
the town with assistance in nearly four years, and followed an assessment mi ssion
on 16 April. On 9 June, the United Nations and its partners delivered food, nutrition,
health and medical, water, sanitation and hygiene and education assistance to
Darayya, as a follow-up to the initial convoy. According to unconfirmed reports,
dozens of barrel bombs were reportedly dropped on Darayya the following day.
58. In Madamiyet Elsham, Rif Dimashq governorate, about 45,000 people remain
besieged by government forces. Under the May plan, the Syrian authorities granted
conditional approval, limiting the delivery of assistance to certain types and
quantities of aid supplies. An inter-agency convoy that was supposed to reach the
town on 14 May was, however, unable to deploy owing to a lack of final approval.
Following intense negotiations at various levels, on 1 and 3 June, inter-agency
convoys were finally deployed to the town to deliver food and health supplies for
45,000 people. The third phase of those convoys was approved on 7 June.
59. In Yarmouk, Damascus governorate, some 10,000 people have been besieged
by government forces and non-State armed opposition groups. UNRWA humanitarian

12/17

16-09950

S/2016/546

missions into Yalda resumed on 2 May and continued uninterrupted throughout the
month. During May, 6,000 civilian families from Yarmouk, Yalda, Babila and Bayt
Sahm received food parcels and hygiene kits and 1,367 refugees received health
services, including 147 dental consultations.
60. In the government-controlled western neighbourhoods of the city of Dayr
al-Zawr, some 110,000 people have been besieged by ISIL. From 10 April to
12 June, WFP successfully completed 51 airdrop rotations. The quantities airdropped
to date are sufficient to provide a 41 kg ration to all households registered by the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent.
61. In Waʽr, in Homs governorate, about 75,000 people have been besieged by
government forces. The first phase of a convoy delivering multisectoral assistance
could not proceed on 5 May, even though facilitation letters had been received and
trucks loaded. The convoy was put on hold at the request of the Government, and
security personnel were requested to offload the trucks. On 30 May, 153 twelfth
graders and 68 ninth graders from Waʽr were allowed to leave the besieged
neighbourhood to sit their exams. On 11 June, a joint mission of the Office of the
Resident Coordinator and the Office of my Special Envoy for Syria to Homs was
conducted in order to diffuse tensions between the Government and the Waʽr local
committee. On 14 June, written approval was received for an inter -agency convoy to
Waʽr.
Attacks on medical facilities and free passage of medical supplies, personnel
and equipment
62. In blatant disregard for the special protected status of health -care facilities
under international humanitarian law, and for resolution 2286 (2016), adopted on
3 May, medical facilities continued to be damaged or destroyed as a result of
fighting. The United Nations and health partners have received reports, which are
being verified, of 10 attacks on medical facilities in May. Several attacks early in
June have also already been reported.
63. WHO and UNICEF continued to implement the nationwide vaccinatio n
campaign. The component of the campaign from within the Syrian Arab Republic
began on 24 April and lasted for four days, reaching some 260,000 of a targeted
550,000 children in 10 governorates. Areas not reached as a result of insecurity and
access challenges included parts of Damascus, Hama and Rif Dimashq governorates.
As to Idlib governorate, non-State armed opposition groups refused vaccine delivery
and campaign implementation. On 26 May, the cross-border component of the
nationwide campaign began in Idlib and Hama and in some parts of Aleppo. In the
first six days of the campaign, more than 200,000 of a target of some 500,000
children for those three governorates were vaccinated. Insecurity has hampered the
campaign: the intensified air strikes in Aleppo and Idlib towards the end of May
resulted in major access problems, and the campaign was suspended for four days in
the city of Idlib because of insecurity. The campaign has not been rolled out in parts
of Raqqah and Dayr al-Zawr governorates owing to lack of access.
64. In 2016, WHO has submitted 23 individual requests to the Government to
deliver medical supplies to 86 locations in 10 governorates. The Government has
approved six requests for 31 locations, one of which was to deliver medical supplies
to Duma, in Rif Dimashq. Meanwhile, 17 requests for 55 locations remained
unanswered.

16-09950

13/17

S/2016/546

65. The removal of life-saving medicines and medical supplies continued, with
hundreds of treatments removed from convoys in May intended for Talbisah
(Homs), eastern Harasta (Rif Dimashq) and Qadsiya (Rif Dimashq). Removed items
included surgical supplies, anaesthetics, trauma kits, mental health medicines and
burn kits. Supplies for an estimated 150,000 treatments have been removed from
convoys since the beginning of the year.
Safety and security of staff and premises
66. A total of 29 United Nations staff members, 27 of whom are UNRWA area
staff, as well as 1 from UNDP and 1 from UNICEF, continue to be detained or are
missing. A total of 87 humanitarian workers have been killed in the conflict since
March 2011: 17 staff members of the United Nations, 53 staff members and
volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, 8 volunteers and staff members of the
Palestinian Red Crescent Society and 9 staff members of interna tional
non-governmental organizations. Of the 87 killed, 2 have been killed since
1 January 2016.

III. Observations
67. I am deeply concerned by increased reports of indiscriminate and
disproportionate attacks by all parties to the conflict, includi ng designated terrorist
groups, in particular the use of explosive weapons in densely populated areas.
Medical facilities, markets and other public infrastructure continue to be attacked,
causing widespread death and destruction. Such attacks must stop imm ediately. The
parties to the conflict are failing to live up to their international legal obligations to
protect civilians. The use of explosive weapons in populated areas not only kills and
injures on a large scale, but also will have severe long -term humanitarian
ramifications resulting from the destruction of the housing and essential
infrastructure upon which civilians depend. No corner of the country has been left
unscathed. As long as it continues, it will only force more and more people to leave
their homes in a desperate search for safety.
68. Continuing violations and abuses of international human rights law by all the
parties to the conflict remain of the highest concern. Large numbers of civilians
continue to be held in government-run detention facilities, frequently without due
process, subjected to terrible torture, and are being denied the right to a fair trial
solely for having exercised their rights to freedom of speech, expression and
peaceful assembly. At the same time, non-State armed opposition groups continue to
arbitrarily deprive civilians of their liberty. Torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment seemingly aimed at maximizing suffering is often inflicted, along with
killings of persons owing to their sexual orientation or percei ved political
affiliations. I condemn all such acts in the strongest terms as signs of a total
disregard for basic human rights, which must cease immediately. There must be
accountability for those and other violations. I repeat my call for the situation i n the
Syrian Arab Republic to be referred to the International Criminal Court.
69. It is vital that the momentum with respect to humanitarian access sustained
over the past few months continues and be expanded into the second half of the
year. To date, progress in 2016 has been slow, uneven and hard-won, especially in
May. However, the challenges and setbacks notwithstanding, the humanitarian

14/17

16-09950

S/2016/546

community has collectively worked from every angle to press for access to besieged
locations. Since January, we have reached more than 50 per cent of the people in 16
of the 19 besieged locations, many of those more than once. It is far from sufficient,
however. Too many of those in need continue to be beyond our reach. We remain
committed and ready to deliver aid, through any possible modality, for civilians in
desperate need, whoever and wherever they are. I urge the members of the Security
Council, especially those with influence, to do their utmost to ensure that all
requests and approvals to access besieged locations are translated into humanitarian
deliveries that help us to alleviate the suffering of Syrian civilians, including
through the work of the International Syria Support Group. However, let me be
clear: granting access should never be conditional, depend u pon political
negotiations or be used as a bargaining chip in talks. These are fundamental tenets
of international humanitarian law and must be respected by the parties.
70. While I welcome the recent progress in reaching some besieged locations, I
wish to make clear that a complete lifting of all sieges is required. That dozens of
barrel bombs were reportedly dropped in Darayya on 10 June, the day after the
United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent delivered the first food aid to the
town since November 2012, shows that the situation for people in besieged areas
will not be resolved by delivering humanitarian aid. The only sustainable solution
for the 590,200 people trapped and forced to live in horrific circumstances is an end
to the sieges. Besiegement is not a natural or necessary consequence of conflict; it is
a deliberate policy of parties, and one that can be undone if the political will to do
so can be mustered.
71. Humanitarian agencies in the Syrian Arab Republic continue to do their utmost
to reach the millions of men, women and children in need of life -saving assistance
throughout the country, the many access and security challenges notwithstanding.
That aid is delivered at great personal risk, in particular by Syrian organizations and
volunteers, who are often the first responders in a volatile and dangerous
environment. It has come at a high cost, with 87 humanitarian workers having lost
their lives and hundreds of medical workers having been killed, including many
over the past few weeks. I pay tribute to their sacrifice and bravery.
72. There is no military solution to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic. All
are losing while the country is disappearing, bleeding and dying before our eyes. I
urge the international community and Syrian stakeholders to restore and consolidate
the cessation of hostilities and improve humanitarian access as soon as possible to
all in need throughout the country. I welcome the readiness of the Co -Chairs of the
International Syria Support Group Task Force on the Ceasefire, the Russian
Federation and the United States, to provide a credible and transparent joint
assessment of major attacks on civilians to the Support Group and the Security
Council. I am also encouraged that the Co-Chairs have committed themselves to
improving the monitoring of the cessation of hostilities, and to minimizing aviation
operations over populated areas. Those steps, along with actions against listed
terrorist groups, were endorsed by the Support Group. The efforts of the Support
Group and individual Member States, as well as Syrians themselves, have sho wn
what can be achieved when there is the political will to solve problems. I appeal to
all not to give up, but to redouble efforts to bring an end to this horrifying conflict
and to support my Special Envoy for Syria to facilitate a peaceful and political
resolution.

16-09950

15/17

S/2016/546

16/17

16-09950

S/2016/546

16-09950

17/17
