S/2016/361/Rev.1

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 June 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on conflict-related
sexual violence
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, which covers the period from January to December 2015,
is submitted pursuant to paragraph 22 of Security Council resolution 2106 (2013),
in which the Council requested me to report annually on the implementation of
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010), and to recommend strategic
actions. Developments during the reporting period have deepened concerns about
the use of sexual violence by terrorist and violent extremi st groups, including as
part of the systems of punishment and reward through which they consolidate their
power. In resolution 2242 (2015), the Council recognized the changing global
context of peace and security, in particular the gender dimensions of vio lent
extremism and mass displacement. The Council’s recognition of sexual violence as
both a tactic of war and a tactic of terrorism (resolution 2242 (2015)) affirms that
conflict-resolution and counter-terrorism strategies can no longer be decoupled from
efforts to protect and empower women and girls and to combat conflict -related
sexual violence.
2.
The term “conflict-related sexual violence” refers to rape, sexual slavery,
forced prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced abortion, enforced sterilization, f orced
marriage and any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity perpetrated
against women, men, girls or boys that is directly or indirectly linked (temporally,
geographically or causally) to a conflict. This link with conflict may be evident in
the profile of the perpetrator (often affiliated with a State or non -State armed
group), the profile of the victim (who is frequently a member of a persecuted
political, ethnic or religious minority), the climate of impunity (which is generally
associated with State collapse), cross-border consequences (such as displacement or
trafficking in persons) and/or violations of the terms of a ceasefire agreement.
3.
While many settings are affected by the threat, occurrence or legacy of
conflict-related sexual violence, the present report is focused on 19 country
situations for which credible information is available. For the first time, United
Nations country presences were requested to report on the use of sexual violence as
a tactic of terrorism (see sect. III). The report should be read in conjunction with my
seven previous reports on conflict-related sexual violence, which provide a

16-10524 (E)

230616

*1610524*

S/2016/361/Rev.1

cumulative basis for the listing of 48 parties (see annex). As in 2014, the majority of
listed parties are non-State actors. Engaging with such groups to foster compliance
with Security Council resolutions raises unprecedented political and operational
challenges. All States repeatedly listed for grave violations against children and/or
conflict-related sexual violence will be prohibited from participating in United
Nations peace operations. Troop and police contributors that are currently listed for
such violations are required to engage with my special representatives in order to be
delisted and to implement specific time-bound commitments and action plans to
address violations for which they are listed (see resolution 2242 (2015) and
S/2015/682).
4.
The report is based on cases documented by the United Nations. The increased
presence in the field of women’s protection advisers, who are responsible for
convening the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict -related
sexual violence and facilitating dialogue in order to obtain protection commitments
from parties to conflict, has deepened the quality of the data and analysis aimed at
informing interventions. To date, 34 women’s protection advisers have been
deployed to seven mission settings. All six peacekeeping missions with a mandate
that includes the protection of civilians have established the monitoring, analysis
and reporting arrangements and incorporated the matrix of early -warning indicators
of conflict-related sexual violence into their broader protection arrangements. A
concerted effort to enhance prevention, early warning and timely responses to
conflict-related sexual violence will continue to require dedicated human and
financial resources commensurate with the scale of this challenge.
5.
Strengthening the capacity of national institutions is critical to ensuring
accountability for conflict-related sexual violence. The Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, in accordance with its mandate under
Security Council resolution 1888 (2009), has provided assistance to Governments,
including in the areas of criminal investigation and prosecution, military justice,
legislative reform, protection of victims and witnesses and reparations for survivors.
Reporting directly to my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, the
Team of Experts is composed of experts from the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and a
specialist seconded by the Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict Initiative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. The Team also maintains a
roster of experts with a range of specializations. Since its establishment, the Team
has played a catalytic role in implementing the frameworks of cooperation agreed
upon between my Special Representative and national authorities and regional
actors, complementing the work of the United Nations country presence. With
dedicated assistance, Governments can effectively adjudicate such cri mes, as in the
case of Guinea, where the technical assistance of the Team has resulted in
16 indictments of military and political leaders for sexual violence and other crimes
committed in September 2009. The Team, by virtue of its structure and compositio n,
has contributed to enhanced coherence on the issue of conflict -related sexual
violence among the entities constituting it. To date, the Team has been engaged in
the Central African Republic, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Guinea, Liberia, Mali, Somalia and South Sudan.
6.
The United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict initiative,
which consists of 13 United Nations entities and is chaired by my Special

2/34

16-10524

S/2016/361/Rev.1

Representative, supports the development of training, guidance and advocacy
resources aimed at building the technical capacity of United Nations country
presences to deliver a coordinated and holistic response to conflict -related sexual
violence. In 2015, it provided catalytic funding for the deployment of wom en’s
protection advisers to Côte d’Ivoire and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
supported a mapping of interventions to implement the national strategy to combat
gender-based violence in Côte d’Ivoire and funded a joint project in Bosnia and
Herzegovina supporting transitional justice. A number of tools and knowledge
products were produced to improve practice in the field, including guidance on
strengthening the medico-legal response to sexual violence in conflict, developed by
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the World Health
Organization (WHO); a guidance note on the intersections between the Gender based Violence Information Management System and the monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements, prepared by the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF),
the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR); and a menu of country-level support
options. Joint technical support missions were conducted to Mali in Janu ary and
South Sudan in April. In 2015, through the joint roster of the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women and Justice Rapid Response
of international investigators of crimes involving sexual and gender -based violence,
some 30 experts were deployed to accountability mechanisms, including the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, the
commission of inquiry on human rights in Eritrea, the fact -finding missions to Iraq
and Libya, and the national war crimes processes. The Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support, in collaboration with a range of
partners, developed a new conflict-related sexual violence training module for core
and advanced-level predeployment training, in addition to advanced-level integrated
mission training for military, police and civilian components.

II. Sexual violence as a threat to international peace and
security: overview of current and emerging concerns
7.
A consistent concern is that fear and cultural stigma converge to prevent the
vast majority of survivors of conflict-related sexual violence from coming forward
to report such violence. Practitioners in the field estimate that for each rape reported
in connection with a conflict, 10 to 20 cases go undocumented. The figures
presented here reflect incident reports and therefore do not indicatee the magnitude
of the problem. My successive reports on conflict-related sexual violence provide a
cumulative picture of the factors that can either enable or constrain the ability of
survivors to seek redress. In addition to the debilitating physical and psychological
trauma, most victims fear being stigmatized or subjected to reprisals by the
perpetrators. This is compounded by a lack of confidence in national institutions,
including the police and judiciary, especially when sexual violence is perpetrated by
the very forces meant to provide protection.
8.
Accordingly, a critical objective is to bring information to light and improve
the opportunities for survivors to safely seek recourse. Any attempt to suppress such
information by intimidating victims, witnesses or their families in order to convince
them to recant complaints, or by denying access to relevant sites, is a further
violation that warrants Security Council scrutiny. Such intimidation often extends to

16-10524

3/34

S/2016/361/Rev.1

service providers and can thus have a chilling effect on their response. Late
reporting can be lethal. For example, in the Central African Republic, only 26 per
cent of survivors seek assistance within 72 hours, missing a critical opportunity to
prevent HIV/AIDS transmission or unwanted pregnancy and to gather forensic
evidence. Amidst emergencies, vast population movements, capacity constraints,
suspended legal systems and overburdened, underfunded or inaccessible services
complicate documentation. The denial of access to places that may cause acute
vulnerability, such as detention settings, is another impediment. The threat or use of
sexual violence as a form of ill treatment in detention and interrogation centres
remains a largely unquantified problem, although extensive testimonial evidence,
including from Libya and the Syrian Arab Republic, points to its prevalence. Such
violence is often used as a form of torture against men and boys, many of whom
remain silent for fear of social ostracism due to accusations of homosexuality in
contexts in which it is taboo or even criminalized, as it remains in 78 countries. An
important, albeit counter-intuitive, consideration in interpreting information on
conflict-related sexual violence is that an increase in the number of survivors
coming forward to report such violence, including to State -run facilities, generally
signifies an easing of access restrictions, the availability of high -quality care and an
improvement in the security situation overall.
9.
Experience from the field attests that, when appropriate mechanisms are in
place, such as the gender-based violence crisis hotline in Somalia operated by a
non-governmental organization, or the sustainable community-based care available
in remote regions of the Central African Republic, reporting increases significantly.
When there are specialists available and confidential avenues for reporting, the
issue becomes visible and can be addressed, rather than the attendant trauma,
disease and desire for vengeance being left to fester within communities. When
multisectoral services are available, survivors may be more willing to pursue
justice, as seen in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where 66 per cent of rape
survivors who received integrated medical, psychosocial and legal support opted to
file a case. The only country covered herein for which detailed data are provided on
sexual violence against men and boys is the Central African Republic, where a
conscious effort has been made to describe gender-based violence services in
gender-neutral terms and to train both male and female staff with a view to
minimizing the perception that they support women exclusively. A total of
62 countries still provide no legal protection for male rape victims. Free medical
treatment is also crucial for a survivor-centred response. However, in many settings,
survivors are charged fees by the police to open a case file, as in Somalia, or asked
to pay for medical certificates, as in the Central African Republic and Côte d ’Ivoire.
Moreover, health providers often require survivors to report to the police before
receiving care. In Myanmar, this has meant that only 4 per cent of gender -based
violence survivors choose to access services. The practice of mandatory reporting to
the police also presents a barrier to access to care in contexts such as the Sudan and
South Sudan, despite formal instructions to the contrary, as well as in the Syrian
Arab Republic and some countries receiving Syrian refugees.
10. It is alarming that incidents of mass rape continue to occur with impunity
despite the issue having been a priority concern on the agenda of the Security
Council for almost a decade. In 2015, such cases were documented in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and the Sudan, and widespread and
systematic sexual violence continued in the Syrian Arab Republic and areas of Iraq

4/34

16-10524

S/2016/361/Rev.1

held by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). In addition, reports of t argeted
sexual assaults based on actual or perceived political affiliation emerged in Burundi.
When suspects implicated in such incidents are released from custody, or are
redeployed in proximity to civilian centres, it signals to communities that reportin g
is not only dangerous, but also futile. Rapists anticipate that their victims will not
have the means, courage or support required to testify against them, especially in
the chaos of conflict. Prosecution is therefore essential to prevention, because it can
deter potential perpetrators and contribute to restoring faith in the rule of law. It
demonstrates that no political or military leader is above the law and no woman or
child is beneath it. However, given the absence, obstruction or protracted pace of
justice in many conflict-affected settings, communities commonly resort to
traditional mechanisms. In South Sudan, it is estimated that 90 per cent of such
cases are resolved through customary courts, which often require rape victims to
marry the perpetrator as a form of settlement. In north-east Nigeria and in Somalia,
“restitution” through marriage is widely accepted by victims ’ families in order to
avoid “shame”, and in Myanmar, “reparation marriages” are a traditional remedy for
rape. Such measures not only fail to provide deterrence, but also deny the victim a
future, effectively sentencing her to repeated rape.
11. Patterns of sexual violence also persist as a manifestation of a lack of
discipline and lax command and control. An encouraging developmen t has been the
adoption of commitments, action plans and disciplinary measures by parties to
armed conflict, such as the Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo
(FARDC) and the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA), as well as progress on
implementing zero-tolerance policies and codes of conduct for the armed forces in
Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire and Nepal. Efforts to obtain protection commitments have
also been undertaken with non-State actors, such as the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) and the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement/Army-in-Opposition (SPLM/A-IO). This is the first
time, in the latter case, that a specific plan to combat sexual violence has been
adopted by a non-State armed group. To change behaviour, such efforts must
become more systematic. A glaring disparity remains between international human
rights standards and national legislation in conflict-affected countries, which often
minimizes these crimes or conflates them with adultery, as in A fghanistan and
Yemen. This shields the perpetrator at the expense of the victim. Transitional justice
can provide an opportunity for transforming harmful social norms and ensuring that
wartime atrocities do not become entrenched in the post -conflict period. This
process begins with gender-responsive mediation aimed at ensuring that concerns
regarding conflict-related sexual violence are reflected in ceasefire agreements,
peace accords and subsequent implementation mechanisms. Effectively addressing
the issue of conflict-related sexual violence in peace agreements can potentially
increase the durability of peace by mitigating security fears and improving
transparency, accountability and confidence among the parties. However, of all the
unfolding peace processes referenced herein, the Colombian process alone has
addressed gender concerns in a systematic manner that exemplifies the aims of the
Security Council in resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) and subsequent
resolutions. This can ensure that conflict-related sexual violence is not omitted by
history, but rather reflected in the public record, validating the experiences of
survivors and promoting reconciliation.

16-10524

5/34

S/2016/361/Rev.1

12. In response to the age-old culture of denial and impunity that has characterized
this scourge, in 2015 the General Assembly adopted by consensus a resolution
declaring 19 June the International Day for the Elimination of Sexual Violence in
Conflict (resolution 69/293). The aim of the resolution, which was sponsored by
114 countries, is to commemorate the breakthrough adoption on 19 June 2008 of
Security Council resolution 1820 (2008), in which the Council condemned sexual
violence as a tactic of war and an impediment to peacebuilding. The
commemoration provides a new opportunity to raise awareness, stand in solidarity
with the survivors and pay tribute to those working on the front lines.
13. Women and girls face a heightened risk of sexual assault when performing
livelihood activities such as collecting firewood, grass or water, going to marke ts or
tending fields, as in the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, northern Nigeria, South Sudan and the Sudan (Darfur), or when herding
cattle, as in remote areas of Myanmar. In the Central African Republic, rape has
been used to punish Christian women for trading with members of the Muslim
community and to “dishonour” them so that they dare not set foot in Muslim
enclaves. Given that there is already a pronounced gender gap in terms of women ’s
access to land and other productive assets, this reduces their resilience to security
shocks, including in terms of financial and food security. The ever -present threat of
sexual assault compels women to lead highly circumscribed lives in militarized
zones, as seen in eastern Afghanistan or northern Sri Lanka. Moreover, high-profile
women across a range of professions have been subjected to sexual harassment and
humiliation aimed at silencing them. In this way, sexual violence serves as a tool of
social and moral control to relegate women to the private sphere and to punish
perceived “countercultural” behaviour. Professional women in Libya have been
exposed to inflammatory rhetoric, and Afghan women serving in, or training to join,
the security sector have suffered sexual harassment. In Bur undi, women associated
with the political opposition have been depicted in media cartoons as prostitutes.
This carries echoes of the media incitement to violence against women during the
Rwandan genocide of 1994, as well as of the incitement to ethnically motivated rape
by Radio Bentiu FM during the resurgence of conflict in South Sudan in April 2014.
In 2015, reports emerged of ISIL using radio broadcasts to threaten and terrorize
women. Historically, misogynistic media propaganda and crackdowns on women ’s
rights and freedoms have presaged the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war,
terrorism and political repression. This underscores the strategic value of gender
analysis in all atrocity-prevention efforts.
14. In some contexts, sexual violence is employed as a tool of genocide against
indigenous, religious, ethnic or political minorities. Extremists groups such as ISIL
have raped women pursuant to a plan of self-perpetuation aimed at transmitting
their ideology to a new generation who can be raised in their own image. In this
way, women’s bodies are used as “biological weapons” to alter the demography of a
region and to unravel existing kinship ties. In addition, individuals have been
targeted for physical and sexual violence on the basis of their actua l or perceived
sexual orientation. The risks facing lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
minorities has been a blind spot in the monitoring of civilian protection concerns.
This issue was featured for the first time in my previous report on con flict-related
sexual violence (S/2015/203). In the intervening year, it has become apparent that
enhanced attention, including through the Council’s Arria formula meeting on the

6/34

16-10524

S/2016/361/Rev.1

persecution of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex minorities in the
Middle East, held on 24 August 2015, is leading to heightened awareness.
15. When security deteriorates, women and girls often find their mobility greatly
restricted. They currently face grave threats when passing checkpoints in Myanmar,
South Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen; using public transportation,
which may be operated by ex-combatants, as in parts of Côte d’Ivoire and Mali; and
at every stage of the displacement cycle, including in the camp s or urban
settlements in which they seek refuge. During the reporting period, a mass
migration crisis occurred, which included conflict-related sexual violence as a
deliberate form of persecution to displace populations in the Horn of Africa, Iraq
and the Syrian Arab Republic. As a result, more than 950,000 new refugees and
migrants reached Europe. Reports have emerged of people -smugglers demanding
sex as “payment of passage” and of an evolving criminal infrastructure designed to
exploit refugees, in particular unaccompanied minors, including for trafficking,
commercial sex and sexual slavery. Given these cross-border dynamics, it is critical
that effective regional and subregional cooperation be undertaken to close corridors
for trafficking in persons.
16. In countries in which women are denied the right to confer their nationality
upon their children, contrary to article 9 of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, there is a considerable risk that such
children will be left unregistered and stateless, which will result in their
socioeconomic marginalization and vulnerability to future radicalization. This
includes children born as a result of rape, who continue to live in the shadows.
Although there are many children born as a result of rape in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya and Rwanda, they are
rarely accepted by society and often viewed as both a “bad memory” and a future
threat. Social pressures combined with a lack of reproduc tive health care make
unsafe abortion a leading cause of maternal mortality in many displacement
settings, from the Central African Republic to South Sudan.
17. Increased debt and dependency on humanitarian assistance have led many
displaced families to rely on harmful coping strategies, such as the early marriage of
girls. The rate of underage marriage among Syrian refugee girls hosted in
neighbouring Jordan, Lebanon or Turkey has more than doubled since the beginning
of the crisis (from 12 to 26 per cent) owing to fears of sexual violence, lack of
access to education and economic hardship. Abduction for the purposes of sexual
slavery or forced marriage to combatants also appears to be on the rise. Armed
groups often view the civilian population as a resou rce to be exploited, seeing
women’s sexuality and fertility as commodities to be “owned”, trafficked and traded
as part of the political economy of war. This is evident in the cross -border
trafficking of Syrian and Iraqi women and children. Crucially, in D ecember 2015,
the Security Council adopted a presidential statement on trafficking in persons
(S/PRST/2015/25), in which the Council affirmed the nexus between such
trafficking and sexual violence and underscored the urgency of efforts to deter,
detect and disrupt trafficking in persons, including by ISIL, Boko Haram and other
violent extremist groups.
18. Serious and continuing allegations and underreporting of sexual exploitation
and abuse by United Nations peacekeepers and non-United Nations forces represent
another area of major concern. Sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers

16-10524

7/34

S/2016/361/Rev.1

violates the very trust placed in them by host populations and the expectation that
such peacekeepers will fulfil their mandate to protect civilians. Global attention has
been paid to the sexual abuse of minors in the Central African Republic by
peacekeeping forces and sexual exploitation and abuse allegations in Somalia and
elsewhere (see A/70/729). Sexual exploitation and abuse, among other crimes and
forms of serious misconduct, by military, civilian and police personnel is
unacceptable, and the United Nations system will continue to strengthen efforts to
implement the policy of zero tolerance for sexual exploitation. Regular reporting to
the Secretary-General by United Nations mechanisms, including those related to
children and armed conflict, women and peace and security, and OHCHR will
continue to include allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse (see resolution 2272
(2016)).

III. Sexual violence committed in the context of violent
extremism, including as a tactic of terrorism
19. The shocking trend of sexual violence employed as a tactic of terrorism by
violent extremist groups was documented in my previous report, in which I built a
case for making women’s protection and empowerment central to counter-terrorism
strategies, which have traditionally been gender-blind. It demonstrated that the
targeting of women and girls that accompanies the rise of extremism is not
incidental, but premeditated, systematic and strategic. While the threat of sexual
violence has been a “push” factor driving the forced displacement of civilians, the
offer of wives and sex slaves has been a strategic “pull” factor for the recruitment of
men and boys, inducing both local young people and foreign fighters to join the
ranks of ISIL. ISIL has also used medical professionals to procure drugs and
administer harmful treatments not justified by medical co ncerns, including hormone
treatments to accelerate the physical maturation of young girls in order to expedite
their sale and sexual exploitation, and drugging them to facilitate rape, thus making
some physicians complicit in medicalized torture.
20. Following the advocacy of my Special Representative, there have been a
number of efforts during the reporting period to mainstream such considerations
into policy processes. In October, the Security Council expressed deep concern, in
its resolution 2242 (2015), that acts of sexual violence were part of the strategic
objectives and ideology of certain terrorist groups, which were used to increase their
power, revenue and recruitment base and to shred the social fabric of targeted
communities. The Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674) includes a
focus on gender equality and the need to empower women as a force for sustainable
peace. By its resolution 2253 (2015), the Council expanded the sanctions framewo rk
for the suppression of terrorist financing to formally include ISIL and condemned the
abduction of women and children for sexual exploitation, trafficking and trading. ISIL
continues to benefit from external donations and ransom payments by families of
hostages, in particular from the Yazidi community. The United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq estimates that these payments amounted to between $35 million and
$45 million in 2014. It is believed that $850,000 was paid in January 2015 for the
release of 200 Iraqi Yazidis (see S/2016/92). Such evidence notwithstanding, the
global discourse on and response to the issue of curbing financial flows to violent
extremists are focused almost exclusively on such consid erations as the sale of oil
and antiquities. The fifth review of the United Nations Global Counter -Terrorism

8/34

16-10524

S/2016/361/Rev.1

Strategy, in June 2016, will provide an opportunity to anchor new understandings in
an expansive global framework.
21. Despite such policy developments, conflict-related sexual violence committed
by violent extremist and terrorist groups such as ISIL, Al -Shabaab, Boko Haram,
Ansar Eddine, the Taliban and Al-Qaida continues unabated. ISIL describes the
capture and enslavement of “infidel” women and children as an inevitable
consequence of its conquest of new territory and seeks to regulate and codify sexual
slavery, as expressed in its fatwa No. 64, of 29 January 2015. This continues the
explicit justification of sexual enslavement presented in its pamphlet of December
2014 entitled “Questions and answers on taking captives and slaves”, and in volume 9
of its magazine, Dabiq, of May 2015. The ideological opposition of ISIL affiliates
to the autonomy and education of women and girls has placed adolescent girls,
primarily, at heightened risk of abduction for the purposes of sexual slavery and
forced marriage. This has been particularly pronounced in north -east Nigeria, where
Boko Haram continues its campaign of abduction, forced marriage and forced
pregnancy. Attacks by violent extremist and terrorist groups disproportionately
affect women and girls, who are often targeted as the repositories of cultural
identity, the relatives of perceived fighters or the bearers of future gener ations who
will populate disputed territories.
22. It is critical, therefore, to deepen the understanding of sexual violence as a
tactic of terrorism and to formally recognize victims of sexual violence as victims of
terrorism in order to build counter-narratives and counter-strategies and pave the
way for reparations and redress. It is also critical to invest in the capacity of
women’s groups to lead grass-roots efforts to counter extremism and youth
radicalization. Engagement with traditional and religio us leaders, who can help to
shift the shame and stigma of sexual violence from the victims to the perpetrators, is
vital to ensuring that extremists do not win the underlying battle of ideas. This
includes negating attempts to legitimize rape on religious terms. Efforts to counter
violent extremism must not compromise women’s rights, but rather empower
women as part of efforts to foster resilient families and communities, as called for
by the Security Council in resolution 2178 (2014) on addressing the terr orist threat.

IV. Sexual violence in conflict-affected settings
Afghanistan
23. The fall of Kunduz city, in northern Afghanistan, which was attacked by
Taliban forces on 28 September and remained partially under their control until
13 October, caused widespread chaos and fear. The Taliban conducted house
searches using a list of human rights defenders, including women ’s rights defenders,
journalists and the staff of non-governmental organizations, the United Nations and
the Government. Those searches, combined with active fighting in the city, reports
of the abduction of women and allegations of sexual violence, caused the mass
displacement of civilians and the suspension of some essential services for women,
including shelters and health care in several adjacent provinces. Despite the severe
access and security constraints impeding documentation, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) considers the allegations of an
abduction of a woman and the killing of two women to be cred ible. The emergence
of ISIL affiliates in eastern Afghanistan also caused some families to either flee or

16-10524

9/34

S/2016/361/Rev.1

confine women and girls to their homes. Multiple sources have expressed concerns
about sexual violence, and continued monitoring and investigation are required.
24. Rising insecurity and the fear of repercussions exacerbate the underreporting
of sexual violence by impeding access to services, especially in areas controlled by
anti-Government elements. Under the law, there remains a conflation of rape wi th
adultery, which means that the complainant herself may face a criminal charge.
National institutions are ill-equipped to respond to cases of sexual violence, and
women represent less than 2 per cent of the Afghan national police. UNAMA
documented 55 incidents of sexual violence against women and girls, 7 of which
were committed by parties to the conflict, including the police, anti -Government
elements, members of a pro-Government group and the Taliban. Between March
2014 and March 2015, national institutions recorded 169 cases of rape, although the
Government’s report does not mention a link with conflict in any of the cases. The
United Nations remains concerned about boys recruited by armed groups in
Afghanistan, who may be at risk of sexual abuse, and b y ongoing reports of the
practice of bachah-bazi, involving “dancing boys”, which may include sexual
violence and the enslavement of boys by men in positions of power. In June, the
Government launched its first national action plan on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).
Recommendation
25. I urge the authorities to ensure the safety of service providers, human rights
defenders and monitors and to address the lack of accessible services for women
and girls. I call upon the Government and all parties to the conflict to make the
protection and empowerment of women central considerations in any peace process;
to counter messages of intimidation by ISIL affiliates, the Taliban and other groups;
and to ensure that sexual violence is clearly defined and criminalized in the Penal
Code. I also urge that legislation prohibiting the practice of bachah-bazi be swiftly
adopted.
Central African Republic
26. Concerns regarding conflict-related sexual violence became particularly acute
in late 2015, given the political unrest. During that period, many women and girls
were in need of assistance, and many service providers were forced to suspend their
operations. Intercommunal conflict, poverty, displacement and a climate of impunity
reinforced gender inequality and placed women and girls at heightened risk. The
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA) verified 79 cases of conflict -related sexual violence,
36 involving the rape of minors, committed by former Séléka, anti-balaka and
Lord’s Resistance Army elements; armed youth and self-defence groups; and
gendarmes and the police. Service providers recorded 29,801 cases of gender -based
violence more broadly, including rape, sexual assault and sexual slavery. Of the
survivors, 27,977 were women and girls and 1,824 were men and boys. A total of
44 per cent of cases involved gang rapes, often committed in front of family
members. Rape has been used to punish women suspected of tradin g with people on
the other side of the sectarian divide. The pre-disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process, launched in 2015, revealed that a number of children
associated with armed groups had been subjected to sexual violence. There was also

10/34

16-10524

S/2016/361/Rev.1

a disturbing pattern of sexual exploitation and abuse by international peacekeepers,
with the MINUSCA Conduct and Discipline Team addressing 23 cases.
27. The absence of a functioning justice system, combined with the fear of
retaliation and the pressure placed on survivors and their families by the
perpetrators, continue to deter reporting. Evidence has emerged of forced marriage
as a negative coping mechanism to “protect the victims ’ honour”. Those who report
to service providers often come forward very late, sometimes a year or more after
the incident. Survivors experience rejection by their families and communities, in
particular when they are pregnant. Children born as a result of rape are rarely
accepted by society, and a high number of rape victims r esort to unsafe abortion,
which is the leading cause of maternal mortality. Many public structures charge fees
for medical services and certificates, which renders them inaccessible to the
indigent. Sexual violence against men and boys has been shrouded in cultural
taboos. Accordingly, a neutral term for gender-based violence crisis centres has
been adopted, namely listening centres, and male staff have been employed. In
2015, 1,128 boys and 969 men accessed gender-based violence services.
28. Reports emerged of married women being abducted from their homes and
forced to marry former Séléka fighters, and allegations arose of women and girls
being used as sex slaves by anti-balaka elements. Conflict-related sexual violence is
both a cause and a consequence of displacement, and most incidents are reported
during flight. For example, women sought refuge in host families and sites for
internally displaced persons following a series of rapes in connection with armed
attacks in villages along the Mbrès and Ouandago axis. More than 447,000 people
have been internally displaced, and sex has been demanded from women fleeing war
zones as a form of “payment of passage”. Sexual assaults are so frequent when
internally displaced persons leave displacement sites that United Nations agencies
have begun distributing warning kits to women, which contain flashlights and
whistles to alert local protection committees in the case of emergency. The law
establishing a special criminal court with jurisdiction over grave human rights
violations was promulgated in June 2015. Efforts are under way, including by the
Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, to ensure that
conflict-related sexual violence remains central to the court’s undertakings.
Following the signing in January 2015 of a presidential decree establishing a rapid
response unit within the police and the gendarmerie to combat sexual violence, the
Team, in coordination with MINUSCA, was deployed to provide technical advice to
the Government to make it operational. The Team also supported the training of
military prosecutors through the regional training centre of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region. Although the justice system is largely
non-functional, on 18 September an anti-balaka fighter was sentenced to five years
imprisonment for rape. Parties to the conflict participated in the Bangui Forum on
National Reconciliation, held in May, at which women’s organizations called for
action to end impunity for sexual violence.
Recommendation
29. I encourage the authorities to operationalize the joint rapid response unit to
combat sexual violence and to establish the special criminal court to exercise
jurisdiction over grave violations of international law.

16-10524

11/34

S/2016/361/Rev.1

Colombia
30. Peace talks between the Government and FARC-EP made welcome progress in
2015, and a breakthrough agreement was reached on 15 December on truth, justice,
reparations and guarantees of non-repetition for victims of the conflict. The
agreement provides for a comprehensive transitional justice process, which includes
a truth commission that recognizes the disproportionate impact of conflict and
conflict-related sexual violence on women, and a special jurisdiction for peace,
which identifies sexual violence as a grave crime for which amnesty cannot be
granted. Following the creation of the unique structure of a gender subcommission
in September 2014, leaders of women’s rights and sexual diversity groups, as well
as survivors of sexual violence, participated in the talks. The United Nations
supported national and regional forums to ensure that the voices of more than 3,000
civilians were included in the process. My Special Representative visited Colombia
in February and Havana in March, and called upon the parties to place gender
justice and the eradication of conflict-related sexual violence at the centre of the
peace process. The Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict has supported the Government’s legislative reform efforts and the
development of guidelines for the military and the police.
31. In January 2015, the Constitutional Court issued an order in which it
emphasized the persistence of conflict-related sexual violence and urged the
authorities to address the structural factors that perpetuated such crimes. Although
the judicial authorities have committed themselves to according priority to such
cases, few charges have thus far resulted in convictions. Significantly, in February,
sentences for conflict-related sexual violence were issued against “Cuco” Vanoy,
“La Mona” and five other former paramilitary members.
32. The gaps in data due to underreporting notwithstanding, conflict -related sexual
violence is considered to be a widespread risk in at least 10 departments of
Colombia, predominantly areas under the influence of armed groups. In addition,
incidents and threats of sexual violence have been reported against women leaders
and activists and those associated with armed groups. Cases of forced prostitution,
sexual slavery and trafficking in persons were documented. Those at risk include
indigenous groups, Colombians of African descent, girls residing in remote areas
and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons. Service providers
reported 1,973 cases of gender-based violence in 2015, and the perpetrators
included post-demobilization and other armed groups and, in some cases, members
of the Colombian armed forces. The National Victims’ Unit registered 103 cases of
conflict-related sexual violence between January and December 2015, with armed
groups identified as responsible for 46 per cent of such cases. Men were recorded as
victims in 3 per cent of cases, and women of African descent or indigenous women
were targeted in 30 per cent of cases. The Unit awarded reparatio ns to 5,488 sexual
violence survivors. However, despite such exemplary commitment, a gap remains
between the robust normative framework and the institutional capacity for its
implementation, including for psychosocial assistance and services for survivors in
remote areas.
Recommendation
33. I commend the parties on the progress made in the peace process and urge
them to continue to ensure that gender and conflict-related sexual violence

12/34

16-10524

S/2016/361/Rev.1

considerations remain central to the implementation of the agreeme nt. At this
critical juncture, it is essential to ensure adequate capacity for a continued
monitoring of violations, including conflict-related sexual violence, which can
undermine peace and reconciliation. I welcome the Government ’s willingness to
work with my Special Representative and her Team of Experts and to share good
practices with other conflict-affected countries.
Democratic Republic of the Congo
34. During the reporting period, data collected by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
UNFPA and UNHCR each show a decline in incidents of conflict-related sexual
violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, the United Nations
remains cautious as to the interpretation and completeness of those data, which are
likely to be affected by underreporting and limited access. MONUSCO verified
637 cases of conflict-related sexual violence, of which 375 victims were women and
262 were girls. The majority of perpetrators were from armed groups, which were
responsible for 74 per cent of the cases, compared with 69 per cent in 2014.
Government security forces were responsible for the remaining 26 per cent of
confirmed incidents. The FARDC was the main perpetrator on the side of the
Government and was responsible for cases involving 133 victims. The national
police was implicated in cases concerning 28 victims. UNFPA recorded 1,900 cases
of conflict-related sexual violence by armed perpetrators in North Kivu, South Kivu
and Maniema provinces, as well as the former provinces of Orientale and Katanga.
UNHCR data identified South Kivu as the province most affected in 2015, followed
by North Kivu and the former province of Orientale, which were most affected in
2014. According to UNHCR, more than one third of victims are internally displaced
persons, refugees or returnees. In March 2015 alone, five attacks in which women
were raped took place against internally displaced persons sites.
35. Although there are signs of progress, conflict-related sexual violence remains
prevalent, with a reported incident of mass rape by national forces. A unit of
FARDC soldiers was also allegedly involved in the rape of at least 12 women during
a cordon-and-search operation in the Kalehe territory of South Kivu, conducted
between 20 and 22 September 2015. The Government has launched an investigation.
On the side of the armed groups, Raia Mutomboki factions, predominantly based in
the Shabunda area of South Kivu, are responsible for 16 incidents recorded by
MONUSCO and have targeted their attacks against civilians in villages and mining
sites, including in an incident of mass rape during the night of 1 to 2 May 2015. The
Forces de résistance patriotique en Ituri (FRPI), in Ituri province, were responsible
for 22 per cent of cases verified by MONUSCO. Failed negotiations between the
Government and FRPI led to the disintegration of the group into fragmented units,
which attacked and terrorized villages in southern Irumu territory. Another group,
Mai Mai Simba Manu, repeatedly raided mining sites and villages in Mambassa
territory in Ituri province and Lubero territory in North Kivu. These attacks were
accompanied by high levels of sexual violence, with 17 women raped in a single
attack. Elements of the Forces démocratiques de Libération du Rwanda (FDLR)
were responsible for 9 per cent of all conflict-related sexual violence incidents.
Despite a de-escalation of the Batwa-Baluba conflict in the former province of
Katanga, UNHCR registered 171 victims of sexual assault, perpetrated primarily by
Batwa militiamen.

16-10524

13/34

S/2016/361/Rev.1

36. Sexual violence against children remains distressingly high, accounting for
41 per cent of all cases, a figure that stood at 48 per cent in 2014. A United Nations
report on girls associated with armed groups between 2009 and 2015 described
incidents of forced marriage and sexual slavery committed by the Allied Democratic
Forces, noting that approximately one third of those girls had been subjected to
sexual violence. A pattern of extreme violence against childr en in Kavumu, South
Kivu, involving kidnapping and rape, has been exacerbated by impunity.
37. The Government continued to work closely with my Special Representative. In
December 2015, the President delivered a national address in which he pledged zero
tolerance for sexual violence, and his personal representative on sexual violence
launched a campaign to improve victims’ access to justice and services. In March
2015, FARDC inaugurated a commission to oversee its action plan against sexual
violence. In 50 conflict-related sexual violence trials, 109 members of the security
forces were convicted and sentenced to prison terms of between 1 and 20 years. The
United Nations continues to provide holistic support for survivors by embedding
legal clinics and psychosocial services in medical facilities. Military justice
authorities and the special police for the protection of women and children also
continue to combat sexual violence in a challenging context. MONUSCO and the
Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict assisted the
FARDC in the implementation of its action plan, resulting in the issuance of
command orders prohibiting sexual violence and the signing by 30 commanders of
documents aimed at addressing conflict-related sexual violence.
38. Many of the perpetrators of the Walikale mass rape involving 387 victims, and
for which the Security Council urged swift prosecution in 2010, remain active in the
conflict today. Likewise, the alleged perpetrators of the mass rapes in Bushani and
Kalambahiro in 2010 and 2011 have yet to be brought to justice. Judgments,
including the award of reparations to victims of sexual violence issued by
Congolese courts and for which the Government is liable, remain unpaid. The Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict is assisting in the
development of a prosecutorial strategy for the backlog of emblematic sexual
violence incidents and the establishment of mechanisms for the protection of
victims and witnesses. The Team of Experts also continued to provide support
during mobile court sessions by embedding experts in the MONUSCO Prosecution
Support Cells in Goma.
Recommendation
39. I urge the Government to sustain its efforts to combat impunity by bringing
perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence to justice, including at senior levels,
and by ensuring full implementation of the armed forces action plan. I further
recommend that the authorities ensure the prompt delivery of services and
reparations to victims, including the execution of outstanding compensation awards.
Iraq
40. First-hand accounts of sexual violence continue to be received from displaced
persons who have fled areas controlled by ISIL, as well as those rescued from
captivity. Secondary accounts, which have been received by family and community
members who are in contact with Iraqi women and girls remaining in ISIL captivity
in Mosul, Tall’Afar and Raqqah, corroborate the use of sexual violence. On

14/34

16-10524

S/2016/361/Rev.1

26 April, the ISIL leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi issued a “fatwa” in which he
ordered the separation of Yazidi children from their mothers. Children as young as
2 years of age were transferred to the Madrassa Jihadia, and those over 10 years of
age were sent to the Jihadia Institute in Tall’Afar. The women were then transferred
within Iraq and to the Syrian Arab Republic and presented to so -called “emirs” for
sexual exploitation. This advanced the strategy adopted by ISIL of separating
families in order to more easily control the population and address the shortage o f
women at the disposal of their fighters in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. ISIL
has incorporated sexual violence into its systems of punishment and reward: during
Ramadan, it ran a competition on memorizing the Koran, with the winners being
promised Yazidi sex slaves as a prize. There are also concerns that sexual violence
has been used by the Mahdi Army and Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq, in the governorates of
Salah al-Din, Diyala, Basrah and Baghdad, during 2014 and 2015. The Office of my
Special Representative received testimony from survivors and other primary sources
of rape, sexual harassment and sexual torture, in addition to restrictions imposed on
women’s rights and freedoms. The incidents mainly took place following abductions
from public streets, during house searches and in ad hoc detention facilities, and
included the torture of men and boys.
41. In displacement settings, threats of sexual violence persist, including sexual
exploitation and child marriage. Adolescent girls are particularly vulnerable: most
are out of school and many have been forced into early marriage. Humanitarian
actors have struggled to reach areas with the highest concentrations of internally
displaced persons, such as the Anbar, Ninawa, Kirkuk and Salah al -Din
governorates, owing to access constraints. Sexual and reproductive health services,
trauma counselling and reintegration support are severely limited. There is a
shortage of staff trained in the clinical management of rape and a dire need for safe
houses and shelters for abused or at-risk women, with only three such shelters in the
Kurdistan region and none in south or central Iraq. The Government has expressed
its willingness to address conflict-related sexual violence and facilitated the visit of
my Special Representative to the country in April 2015. However, specific areas of
intervention and cooperation have not yet been agreed upon.
Recommendation
42. I call upon the authorities to adopt measures to tackle conflict -related sexual
violence, as discussed during the visit of my Special Representative, including
programmes to support the social reintegration of women and girls released from
ISIL captivity; safe houses, shelters and community-based medical and psychosocial
care; and engagement with religious and civil society leaders to curb extremism.
Efforts to enhance the capacity of the United Nations system through the
deployment of women’s protection advisers should be accelerated.
Libya
43. Continued armed confrontations across Libya and the expansion of terro rist
groups have exacerbated the plight of civilians, in particular in Benghazi, Darnah
and Sirte. Violent extremist groups, such as ISIL and Ansar al -Sharia, are
consolidating their positions, with reports of forced marriage to their fighters and
the imposition of draconian regulations on women. Groups pledging allegiance to
ISIL have, in some cases, subjected forcibly recruited boys to sexual violence (see
A/HRC/31/47).

16-10524

15/34

S/2016/361/Rev.1

44. Refugees, asylum seekers and migrants, in particular foreign women, face a
heightened risk of conflict-related sexual violence. Two gang rapes of migrant
women were recorded in November, purportedly by armed groups and the police.
Migrants interviewed by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
also reported witnessing women awaiting departure to Europe being taken away at
night for the presumed purpose of sexual abuse by smugglers in “connection
houses” in western Libya.
45. All parties continued to commit violations that potent ially fall within the
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court. OHCHR documented the case of a
woman who was abducted in Tripoli and repeatedly raped by the leader of an armed
group for more than six months. She reported witnessing six girls who we re also
raped by members of the group during that time. When she eventually managed to
escape, she was pregnant and underwent an abortion in a third country. Sexual
violence has also been reported in the context of official and unofficial detention
and as committed by the police, armed groups and criminal organizations. Women,
men and children are not held separately in detention and, in some cases, women
have been subjected to strip and cavity searches by male guards. A female medical
professional reported to UNSMIL that an armed man receiving treatment sexually
assaulted her on 18 May in the hospital where she worked. The survivor noted that a
number of similar incidents perpetrated by armed men against female staff were
going unreported owing to the climate of impunity. The limited participation of
women in the political dialogue remains an impediment to reaching a lasting,
inclusive peace. There is still no functioning transitional justice mechanism, and the
Libyan Foundation for Victims of Sexual Violence, established in 2014, is not yet
operational.
Recommendation
46. I call upon the authorities to ensure that conflict-related sexual violence crimes
are duly investigated, the perpetrators brought to justice and services and
reparations provided to victims, in line with Decree No. 119 (2014). I also call upon
the Constitution Drafting Assembly to ensure that gender equality principles are
reflected in the new Constitution. I urge all parties to provide monitors with
unhindered access to places of detention.
Mali
47. The inter-Malian dialogue concluded on 20 June 2015 with the signing of an
agreement on peace and reconciliation in Mali by the Government, the Plateforme
and the Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad (CMA), which precludes
amnesty for sexual violence. However, volatility in the north, combined with
sociocultural inhibitions and fear of reprisals, continues to restrict reporting of
sexual violence. Survivors often resist filing legal complaints or seeking care owing
to a lack of confidence in the institutional response and instances of pressure placed
on victims and their families not to pursue justice.
48. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) reported 25 cases of conflict-related sexual violence, including rape,
gang rape and attempted rape against 9 girls and 16 women. A total of 6 of the cases
were allegedly perpetrated by elements of the Malian defence and security forces,
14 by elements of the Groupe d’autodéfense des Touaregs Imghad et leurs alliés

16/34

16-10524

S/2016/361/Rev.1

(GATIA), 1 by a member of Ganda Izo, 2 by members of the Coalition du peuple de
l’Azawad and the others by unidentified armed elements. The incidents occurred in
the regions of Mopti, Timbuktu, Kidal and Gao, and most of the victims were
members of the Tuareg community. Service providers recorded 89 cases of conflict related sexual violence involving 80 women, 8 girls and 1 man. A total of 7 of these
cases were allegedly committed by the Malian defence and security forces, 39 by
members of the Mouvement national de libération de l’Azawad (MNLA), 38 by
armed men whose affiliation could not be established and 5 by MINUSMA
peacekeepers. Those cases allegedly committed by MINUSMA peacekeepers were
referred to the Conduct and Discipline Team.
49. Patterns of conflict-related sexual violence were observed during the
occupation of Ménaka, in the Gao region, and Anéfis, in the Kidal region, by
GATIA elements. In Ménaka, sexual violence was deliberately directed against the
wives and daughters of CMA members. Similarly, in Anéfis, reports of conflictrelated sexual violence against local women coincided with the military occupation
by GATIA, which is a party to the peace agreement. In Timbuktu, local sources
indicate an increase in sexual violence since the installation of the Coalition du
peuple de l’Azawad in July 2015, including the rape in September of a woman and
girl at gunpoint while travelling on public transport, allegedly by elements of the
Coalition.
50. Members of the Malian defence and security forces hierarchy continue to
obstruct investigations, including by redeploying alleged perpetrators to theatres of
conflict. Legal proceedings have progressed in relation to 19 of the 80 cases
allegedly committed by violent extremist groups in 2012, and a protection trust fund
has been established to support sexual violence survivors during these
investigations. A total of 23 cases of sexual violence, also dating back to 2012, were
filed in Bamako on 6 March 2015 against 15 suspects. One of the suspects, Ahmad
Al Faqi Al Mahdi, is currently on trial at the International Criminal Court. Malian
women’s groups have objected to the exclusion of sexual violence charges from his
indictment, which was focused only on the destruction of cultural propert y. In
August 2015, the Mauritanian authorities released Sidi Mohamed Ould Mohamed
Ould Bouamama, despite his indictment for alleged atrocities, including conflict related sexual violence, in 2012. In September 2015, political leaders of the
Plateforme issued a statement of commitment to further engage their military and
political wings in efforts to combat conflict-related sexual violence and to work
with MINUSMA towards an action plan. During its deployment to Mali in June
2015, the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict
engaged with the judicial authorities on addressing the backlog of conflict -related
sexual violence cases, and with the bar association of Bamako on the provision of
free legal aid.
Recommendation
51. I call for women to be fully and meaningfully represented and gender expertise
to be embedded in the monitoring and implementation committees of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and urge the Government to adopt a law for the
protection of victims and witnesses.

16-10524

17/34

S/2016/361/Rev.1

Myanmar
52. The process of political reform in Myanmar presents an opportunity for
advancing women’s rights and combating conflict-related sexual violence. The
inclusion of sexual violence in the nationwide ceasefire agreement, signed by the
Government and eight ethnic groups on 15 October 2015, is a promising sign. In
particular, the stipulation that armed forces and groups must not commit any form of
sexual violence and that women must be represented in political dialogue prov ides a
foundation for addressing sexual and gender-based violence. However, there
continue to be serious concerns about impunity for conflict -related sexual violence.
Military justice lacks transparency, despite the Defence Services Act (1959), which
provides for the transfer of cases of rape by military personnel to civilian courts.
Moreover, State health practitioners continue to request a police report before
authorizing the provision of medical care to rape survivors, contributing to a rise in
unsafe abortions and maternal mortality. This practice persists despite the
requirement under the Emergency Treatment of Patients Law (2014) that service
providers ensure access to life-saving medical care.
53. Sexual violence has been exacerbated by conflict and displacement, notably in
Kachin and northern Shan States, linked to the collapse of social protection
mechanisms, the increased presence of armed actors, and military camps in
proximity to civilian centres. Fear of reporting, which is generally due to sham e and
cultural narratives that define women’s issues as “unspoken” issues, is greater when
crimes are committed by members of armed groups, given the risk of retaliation.
When traditional mechanisms are used, “reparation marriages” of the victim to the
perpetrator may be ordered, which deters reporting. A rise in trafficking for the
purposes of sexual exploitation and forced marriage was noted, with 45 cases
recorded early in 2015. Stateless women and those who lacked identity documents
were at greatest risk, including while travelling on crowded boats and staying in
smugglers’ camps. In 2015, six alleged rapes by members of the armed forces were
reported, though the actual number is believed to be much higher. The gender -based
violence subcluster provided services to over 600 women and girls in 2015 in both
government-controlled and non-government-controlled areas of Kachin and Rakhine
States. Approximately 20 cases of sexual violence are recorded per month. On
average, just 2 per cent of survivors choose to pursue legal redress, and just 4 per
cent opt to access health services, in line with the perceived requirement that
victims must first report to the police.
Recommendation
54. I encourage the Government to adopt a comprehensive law to address viole nce
against women and to uniformly enforce the Defence Services Act (1959) so that
military perpetrators can be prosecuted transparently.
Somalia
55. Conflict-related sexual violence remains widespread throughout Somalia and
affects displaced women and girls in particular, who comprised 74 per cent of the
victims recorded in 2015 and 81 per cent in 2014. It serves as a tool to punish and
assert dominance in the context of inter-clan conflicts, military offensives,
displacement and forced evictions, with women from minority clans exposed to the
greatest risk. In areas held by Al-Shabaab, a range of violations continue, including

18/34

16-10524

S/2016/361/Rev.1

a practice called “dumaashhi”, which involves the claiming of new brides by
fighters (see S/2015/801). Between January and June 2015, service providers
recorded 2,901 cases of rape and 1,007 cases of gang rape. During the same period,
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) documented 14 cases
of conflict-related sexual violence against women and girls, noting that a lack of
outreach and response avenues had exacerbated underreporting. This became
evident given the rise in reporting that occurred following the establishment of a
hotline sponsored by a non-governmental organization, which received 73 sexual
violence cases in October alone. The majority of these were attributed to the Somali
National Army, with most taking place in the Bakool or Shabelle Hoose regions.
Arrests were made in 56 cases, although it is unclear whether they have led to
prosecution. The judicial process is complicated by local power dynamics, the
politicization of cases and victims being required to pay fees to the police.
56. Services are severely limited, with a weak legislative framework and
insufficient access to justice perpetuating a climate of impunity. Efforts undertaken
during the reporting period included outreach to 9,315 women and girls for
psychosocial support, legal assistance and medical care provided by UNICEF and
its partners. UNSOM and UNDP are helping the Somali police to establish
specialized units to address violence against women and children. With support
from UNFPA, police, prosecutors, judges, legal aid providers, and civil society
organizations were trained on the multisectoral response to sexual violence.
UNSOM is supporting the delivery of conflict-related sexual violence scenariospecific training of trainers to the Somali national army, targeting recently recruited
and integrated forces. A protocol for the clinical mana gement of rape has been
developed, and a forensic facility is being established to improve evidence for
prosecution. The Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict assisted in strengthening the provisions of the draft bill on sexual offences,
which is pending adoption, and helped to build the capacity of Somali military
prosecutors.
Recommendation
57. I encourage the Government to adopt the pending bill on sexual offences and
implement the commitments made in its national action plan to combat sexual
violence in conflict, of 2013, including training and accountability measures for the
army and police.
South Sudan
58. The Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan was signed in August 2015, yet the situation remains volatile. Sexual
violence continues to be used as a tactic of war with a brutality that points to its
ethnic, as well as political, undertones. In addition to recurrent intercommunal
fighting, new armed groups have emerged, such as those of General Martin Konji
and Major General Johnson Olony, as well as youth militias. Militarization, arms
proliferation and the rule of law vacuum, have triggered an escalation of violence.
Sexual violence has been employed in a widespread and systematic manner by all
parties in the course of military offensives and counter -offensives. The majority of
incidents recorded were committed in Unity State by SPLA and associated militias.

16-10524

19/34

S/2016/361/Rev.1

59. UNMISS documented 194 incidents of conflict-related sexual violence by
parties to the conflict, involving at least 280 victims. Service providers documented
266 cases of rape: 96 per cent of the victims were female , and 25 per cent were
children. Among the alleged perpetrators, 4 per cent were members of the national
police, and 17 per cent were affiliated with armed groups. One of the most
egregious incidents of conflict-related sexual violence took place in July 2015 in
Unity State, where offensives launched by SPLA in Koch County included the rape
and gang rape of at least 30 women and girls, some of whom were later burned alive
in their tukuls. One survivor stated, “If you look them in the face when they are
doing it, they will kill you”. A witness in Leer County reported that assaulting
women and girls was considered a form of “practice” for soldiers. UNMISS
recorded the case of a woman who was gang raped by four SPLA soldiers.
Thereafter, she witnessed other women subjected to the same ordeal as a form of
reprisal when SPLM/A-IO reclaimed the village. Following attacks by SPLA and
affiliates, boys were reportedly found sexually mutilated. Between May and June
2015, SPLA soldiers, often intoxicated, committed sexual assaults and “assigned”
women to fighters. An older displaced woman was repeatedly assaulted by SPLA
soldiers who entered her home in search of food and money. Abducted women and
girls have also been forced to carry loot, as well as cook, brew alcohol a nd transport
wounded soldiers. In Juba in February 2015, a displaced Nuer woman reported
being forced to “marry” an SPLA soldier. This followed the murder of her husband
and 10 other Nuer soldiers by members of SPLA, who then forced their widows into
sexual slavery. In September 2015 in Central Equatoria State, SPLA soldiers
reportedly raped several pupils returning home from school and held a mother in
sexual slavery in their barracks. In November, in Eastern Equatoria State, two girls
and an older woman were reportedly gang raped by SPLA soldiers.
60. Women and children were subjected to sexual violence when entering and
leaving sites for the protection of civilians, notably in Bentiu and Malakal. On
14 May, 11 displaced women were reportedly abducted by SPLA soldiers in Bentiu.
In Leer, a mother of four was gang raped by five soldiers on the roadside in front of
her children, following which two other soldiers dragged her into the bush and
raped her. This incident spread fear among female internally displaced persons,
causing them to restrict their movements, impeding critical livelihood activities. As
a consequence, some have resorted to exchanging sex with male internally displaced
persons to obtain basic supplies. UNMISS has taken measures to mitigate t hese
threats by patrolling high-risk zones and facilitating the supply of firewood and
fuel. In the protection of civilian sites themselves, rape and attempted rape have
been reported, and there are concerns about unsafe, self -administered abortions,
with fetuses being found in latrines. Nationwide, the capacity for the clinical
management of rape remains low, with greater efforts needed to extend medical,
legal and psychosocial support to survivors. The weakness of the justice system
contributes to a reliance on traditional mechanisms, which generally do not treat
rape as a crime and under which forced marriage is routinely prescribed as a
“remedy”.
61. My Special Representative continues to engage with the leaders of both
parties, namely the President, Salva Kiir, and the SPLM/A-IO leader, Riek Machar.
In line with the joint communiqué signed by the Government in October 2014, the
Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, in
coordination with UNMISS, assisted in the drafting of an implementation plan. The

20/34

16-10524

S/2016/361/Rev.1

Government has since established a joint technical working group to oversee
implementation. On 26 May 2015, the Minister of Defence and Veterans ’ Affairs
issued a ministerial order to prohibit the use of sexual violence by SPLA. I n
coordination with UNMISS, the Team of Experts provided support to SPLM/A -IO
in the development of an implementation plan for the communiqué issued by Riek
Machar in December 2014. The focus of this plan is on accountability and the
protection of victims, witnesses and service providers. Pursuant to this, in October
2015, 53 SPLM/A-IO commanders, including Lieutenant General John Buth Teny,
commander of the Pagak operational base, as well as four major generals, six
brigadier generals and nine colonels, signed undertakings that reinforced their
individual and command responsibility for preventing and punishing conflict -related
sexual violence. SPLM/A-IO will also establish a special investigation and
documentation unit to enhance accountability.
Recommendation
62. I urge both parties to accelerate the implementation of the commitments made
under their respective communiqués on conflict-related sexual violence, and I call
for the operationalization of special protection units on sexual and gender -based
violence in the police.
Sudan (Darfur)
63. Conflict-related sexual violence remains of grave concern in Darfur, where
patterns of ethnically motivated sexual violence as a means of punishment,
persecution and forced displacement have been noted for 12 years. It has also been
more than a decade since the Security Council referred the situation to the
International Criminal Court for war crimes and crimes against humanity, including
systematic rape. The threat and terror of sexual violence, which is lin ked with the
prevailing insecurity and lawlessness, looms large over everyday life, restricting
women’s mobility. A total of 53 per cent of recorded sexual assaults occur when
victims venture to isolated areas to farm or collect firewood.
64. In 2015, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) documented 80 cases of conflict-related sexual violence involving
105 victims, who ranged from 5 to 45 years of age, with minors constituting 53 per
cent. All were female, with the exception of one male victim, and 47 per cent were
internally displaced persons. One victim was killed following the rape, and many
others sustained grave physical injuries, with 32 per cent of the cases being gang
rapes. UNAMID acknowledges that the available data do not reflect the actual
magnitude of violations, owing to stigma, fear of reprisals, the limited presence of
law enforcement and a denial of access to places of alleged violence. In Central
Darfur, allegations of mass rape following attacks by the Rapid Support Forces on
Golo in January 2015 have been raised with the Government, but little progress has
been made in gaining access to the area in order to corroborate the accounts.
Moreover, allegations of the mass rape of an estimated 200 women and girls o ver a
period of 36 hours beginning on 30 October 2014 by the Sudanese armed forces in
Tabit, North Darfur, have still not been impartially investigated or appropriately
addressed.
65. Some 40 per cent of conflict-related sexual violence cases centred around
North Darfur, where attacks against civilians continued despite the enhanced

16-10524

21/34

S/2016/361/Rev.1

security measures introduced by the newly appointed wali (governor) in June. A
15-year-old girl and a 27-year-old woman were raped by assailants identified as
armed Arab men in uniform during an attack on their village by the Sudanese
military on 19 and 20 January. The highest number of documented incidents
occurred in January, coinciding with military operations by the Government in and
around west Jebel Marra. A significant number of cases corresponded to the onset of
the migratory season for armed Arab herdsmen and the farming season for displaced
and local civilians. A total of 80 per cent of the perpetrators of sexual violence were
described as being armed men. On 16 September, a 14-year-old displaced girl was
raped in front of her mother and uncle by an armed man while farming in Southern
Darfur. In another flagrant case, on 13 May, armed men raped a bride and her sister
on their way to the wedding, in the company of relativ es and neighbours. A total of
15 per cent of cases were attributed to members of the national security apparatus,
including the Sudanese armed forces, while men in civilian attire, both armed and
unarmed, were identified as the perpetrator in 23 per cent o f cases. In the remaining
instances, perpetrators were either unidentified or a civilian known to the victim.
Some victims indicated that their attackers were associated with proxy forces
supported by the Government, or were armed men in military uniform. The
identification of such men is complicated, however, by the fact that military
uniforms can be purchased at local markets. UNAMID and the United Nations
country team have enhanced their interaction with communities and have tailored
patrolling schedules to the livelihood activities of women and girls. UNICEF
continued to support family and child protection units in Darfur, and UNFPA
distributed rape kits through the Ministry of Health.
66. In 2015, 45 cases involving 69 victims were reported to law enfo rcement
officials, with investigations undertaken in only 19 of the cases. This resulted in
13 arrests, and 8 of those cases proceeded to trial. In 2014, 63 incidents reported to
the police resulted in just two convictions. Many cases are not reported as a result of
weak institutions, community pressure and fear of reprisals. In addition, the
outlawed but still widely upheld requirement that victims obtain a “form 8” from the
police in order to receive medical care deters reporting. Even when there is adequ ate
evidence, the police do not consistently pursue formal prosecutions for rape, leaving
communities to resort to traditional justice. For example, a 16 -year-old displaced
girl was raped by a police officer while gathering firewood on 13 May near Khamsa
Dagaig camp. A complaint was filed, but the investigation was discontinued and the
suspect released pursuant to a traditional settlement, which decreed that he should
marry the victim. In an effort to extend the reach of the law, the Ministry of Justice
appointed new prosecutors in all the states of Darfur in 2015 and deployed police to
new areas in North Darfur. In February, the Criminal Act of 1991 was amended to
include a definition of rape that is in line with international standards, and
UNAMID and UNDP are supporting the establishment of a victim and witness
protection programme.
Recommendation
67. I urge the Government to ensure timely, unhindered access for United Nations
personnel to affected communities and to strengthen rule of law institutio ns. I
reiterate my call for the Government to engage with my Special Representative to
develop a framework of cooperation to address this long -standing concern.

22/34

16-10524

S/2016/361/Rev.1

Syrian Arab Republic
68. As the Syrian conflict enters its sixth year, sexual violence continues to be
systematically used as a tactic of warfare, torture and terrorism. It has been most
commonly reported in the context of house searches and hostage -taking, in
detention and at checkpoints, by State and pro-Government forces, and in areas
controlled by ISIL and other non-State groups. The Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic reported in September that
women, men and children continued to be subjected to sexual violence by
Government personnel at checkpoints and in detention (see A/HRC/30/48). The
United Nations received accounts of the systematic sexual torture of men in
detention centres, including rape with wooden sticks, and electric shocks to, and
burning of, genitals. Such sexual torture was aimed at obtaining confessions of the
men’s involvement in alleged anti-Government activities. In some cases, female
relatives were also arrested and forced to witness the torture.
69. ISIL continues to hold women and girls from the Iraqi Yazidi community and
other minority groups in sexual slavery in the Syrian Arab Republic on the basis of
their ethnic and religious identity. Women and girls from targeted minorities have
been sold, traded, gifted to fighters, trafficked and held for ransom. ISIL has also
forced Sunni women and girls into marriage with its fighters. Lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex persons have been targeted for physical and sexual assault
on the basis of their actual or perceived sexual orientation, notably a t checkpoints
controlled by groups such as ISIL and the Nusrah Front, as well as in detention.
70. The majority of internally displaced persons are women and children, who
face serious risks of sexual exploitation. Adolescent girls and women who are heads
of household are particularly at risk. In interviews with female refugees in
neighbouring Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey, fear of rape is cited as a major factor
inducing flight from the Syrian Arab Republic. Tragically, many refugees and
asylum seekers face renewed risks of sexual violence, including forced prostitution
and trafficking for sexual purposes by criminal elements. Both inside the Syrian
Arab Republic and in neighbouring countries, child marriage is often used as a
negative coping strategy. In some contexts, displaced and refugee women lack
residency and work permits in their own name and are therefore at risk of
exploitation. Syrian women encounter serious challenges in attempting to register
their children and face long-term social and security implications as a result.
Recommendation
71. I acknowledge the opportunity provided by the Government to my Special
Representative to visit the Syrian Arab Republic in March 2015 and call upon the
authorities, further to that visit, to agree upon spec ific measures to prevent and
address conflict-related sexual violence, including by members of the national
security forces, and to immediately release women and children detained without
charge. I call upon all parties to take measures to prevent sexual v iolence and to
ensure the full participation of women in the peace process. I commend countries
hosting Syrian refugees for their support to this vulnerable population and call upon
them to adopt protection measures to mitigate the risk of sexual violence.

16-10524

23/34

S/2016/361/Rev.1

Yemen
72. The situation in Yemen continued to deteriorate in 2015: over 80 per cent of
the population required humanitarian assistance; and women and children
represented the vast majority of the 2.5 million internally displaced persons. More
than 30 per cent of displaced households are headed by women, a notable increase
from 9 per cent before the current crisis. A significant number of men nationwide
have joined the fighting, leaving women and children in areas exposed to violence.
There are few medical professionals trained to respond to sexual violence and no
national guidelines on the clinical management of rape. In 2015, 5,866 cases of
gender-based violence, including rape, sexual harassment and early marriage, were
reported. OHCHR documented an incident in Sana’a during which a group of armed
men forced a woman into a taxi for the purpose of sexual assault. She was later
killed by her own family. The risk of “honour” crimes perpetuates the phenomenon
of underreporting. During the battle to re-establish government authority in Aden, a
number of men and boys were reportedly raped, although the perpetrators remain
unknown. UNHCR estimates that there are 9,000 asylum seekers and
118,000 refugees in Yemen who lack social safety nets and face a high ri sk of sexual
violence. The proliferation of ad hoc checkpoints in areas controlled by armed
groups is also a risk factor for conflict-related sexual violence.
Recommendation
73. I call upon all stakeholders to take steps towards the inclusion of wome n in the
political transition process and to ensure that conflict -related sexual violence crimes
are investigated, the perpetrators are held accountable and victims receive services
and reparations.

V. Addressing sexual violence crimes in post-conflict settings
Bosnia and Herzegovina
74. The social imprint of conflict-related sexual violence remains profound more
than 20 years since the end of the war, with slow progress towards the establishment
of a comprehensive support system for survivors. Most services are provided by
civil society organizations, and the lack of official recognition and redress
mechanisms further entrenches stigma. Insufficient support has been provided by
the authorities for women who have children born as a result of wartime rape,
although such women and children face socioeconomic marginalization. Displaced
and returnee survivors of wartime rape require specific protection measures, as
demonstrated by an incident in 2015 in which a survivor who testified publicly was
targeted. Despite such incidents, the police does not adequately investigate
allegations of threats against victims and witnesses. The Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina issued the first-ever order for the payment of compensation in a
judgment against perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence in 2015, which sets
an important precedent. The Peace Support Operation Training Centre continues to
provide predeployment training on conflict-related sexual violence for armed forces
in the region.

24/34

16-10524

S/2016/361/Rev.1

Recommendation
75. I urge the authorities to uphold the rights of survivors of conflict-related
sexual violence to reparations, including in the form of compensation, services,
economic empowerment, housing and education for children born as a result of
rape, and to allocate a budget for this purpose.
Côte d’Ivoire
76. On 25 October, Côte d’Ivoire held its first presidential election since the crisis
of 2010-2011, which had resulted in 3,000 deaths and the rape of more than
150 women. No recurrence of violence marred the 2015 elections, although some
residual tensions and human rights concerns were raised. While an improvement in
the security situation was seen during the reporting period, women and girls
continue to suffer widespread sexual and gender-based violence linked with a
climate of impunity, arms proliferation and an incomplete disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of combatants. The United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) documented 176 cases of rape, including 18 gang rapes,
with 39 of the incidents committed against women and 137 against minors. Of these
cases, 73 alleged perpetrators were arrested, but only 23 were detained on the
charge of indecent assault and referred for prosecution, resulting in terms of
imprisonment ranging from 2 months to 10 years. In the remaining cases, suspects
were either acquitted for lack of evidence or failed to attend court, or the victim
withdrew the complaint for fear of retaliation. Most victims resort to traditional
mechanisms to settle cases, given that the cost of a medical certificate ($100) is
regarded as prohibitive. Despite the issuance of a waiver in 2014, in practice,
medical certificates are still regarded as a prerequisite for investigation.
77. During 2015, a member of the Forces républicaines de Côte d ’Ivoire (FRCI),
2 policemen and 10 unidentified armed men were reportedly involved in incidents
of rape. The FRCI soldier raped a 2-year-old girl and was arrested, initially for
indecent assault, which the judicial authorities subsequently upgraded to rape.
UNOCI was unable to pursue allegations of the rape of a woman in Abidjan by two
police officers, due to the reticence of the gendarmerie hierarchy to share
information. The other incidents, which included the rape of minors and the gang
rape of a pregnant woman, occurred in the context of armed robbery by a criminal
network allegedly comprising FRCI soldiers and former combatants.
78. While progress has been made to harmonize national laws with international
standards, accountability remains a major challenge. None of the perpetrators of the
196 cases of sexual violence committed between October 2010 and May 2011 and
documented in the report of the National Commission of Inquiry have been brought
to justice. In March 2015, 43 survivors of conflict-related sexual violence
committed by both parties during the electoral crisis filed a formal complaint before
the Special Investigation Unit, but investigations remain at a nascent stage. While it
is significant that reparations have been awarded for those killed or injured during
the political crisis, it remains to be seen how survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence will benefit from this programme. The adoption of a national strategy to
combat gender-based violence signals political will; however, its implementation
has been stalled by the absence of a budget commensurate with its aims. The FRCI
committee of national experts continued to implement its action plan on addressing
conflict-related sexual violence with the technical assistance of the Team of Experts

16-10524

25/34

S/2016/361/Rev.1

on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict and UNOCI. On 19 June 2015,
47 commanders signed a commitment to take action against sexual violence within
their units, and the FRCI high command adopted a code of conduct on sexual
violence for Ivorian soldiers.
Recommendation
79. I encourage the Government to fully implement the FRCI action plan to
combat conflict-related sexual violence and the national strategy to combat gender based violence by ensuring that perpetrators, including the military, police and
former combatants, are held to account and survivors of sexual violence benefit
from reparations, as part of the progress necessary to enable delisting from the
annex to the present report.
Nepal
80. A decade after the end of the civil war, many Nepalese continue to suffer the
enduring consequences of conflict-related sexual violence. Survivors face
stigmatization, inadequate access to services, limited victim or witness protection
and threats from their own community. The lack of official recognition of sexual
violence survivors as conflict-affected persons limits their access to relief. The
Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Nepal, established in February 2015,
created a subcommittee for victims, children, senior citizens and persons with
disabilities and women. One commissioner expressed support for private, women only hearings for sexual violence survivors. In October 2015, the Act to Amend
Laws to End Gender Violence and Ensure Gender Equality entered into force,
broadening the definition of rape and extending the 35-day statute of limitations for
the filing of a complaint to 180 days. However, until the statute of limitations is
revoked, the legal framework will not assist victims from the civil war era.
Recommendation
81. I encourage the Government to recognize victims of conflict-related sexual
violence as conflict-affected persons, to remove barriers that may prevent them
from gaining access to justice and to accelerate the second phase of its national
action plan on the implementation of Security Cou ncil resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008).
Sri Lanka
82. The 30-year civil war in Sri Lanka disproportionally affected women, who
continue to face sexual abuse and threats. The results of an investigation by
OHCHR that covered the period from 2002 to 2011 highlighted the extent of the
sexual violence committed in detention by the security forces against both women
and men (see A/HRC/30/CRP.2). These were not isolated incidents, but rather part
of a policy. Nevertheless, accountability has been limited. The conviction of four
soldiers in October by the High Court of Jaffna for the rape of two women in 2010
is the first of its kind. The report further states that women living in the militarized
north continue to be vulnerable to sexual violence committed by members of the
armed forces. In Tamil communities, lone women who head nearly
60,000 households describe an ever-present threat of sexual exploitation by the
military. In 2015, the new Government adopted an act on the protection of witnesses

26/34

16-10524

S/2016/361/Rev.1

and victims and a set of recommendations on preventing sexual and gender -based
violence.
Recommendation
83. I call upon the Government to ensure that conflict-related sexual violence is
addressed in all transitional justice processes, that multisectoral services reach
survivors and that economic empowerment programmes benefit women in
militarized areas who are heads of households.

VI. Other situations of concern
Burundi
84. In the context of the recent political unrest in Burundi, a pattern of sexual
violence was documented on 11 and 12 December, when three military camps in
Bujumbura were attacked, generating reprisals by the security forces in opposition
districts. In connection with these reprisals, at least 13 sexual assaults were
documented, which were allegedly committed by members of the special police unit
in charge of protecting public institutions, elements of the military police, soldiers
and the Imbonerakure (armed youth and other civilians supporting the security
forces). The modus operandi of these attacks involve security forces entering
homes, forcing male residents to leave, taking women and girls aside and raping or
gang raping them. Rape victims also reported insults based on their ac tual or
perceived political or ethnic affiliation. In an illustrative incident, on 11 December,
policemen from the special unit entered a house in Mutakura, ordered the father to
leave and forced the three daughters to “undress”, which is a euphemism used to
refer to rape. The police returned on 14 December and again “undressed” the girls,
after which the family fled the area. At least one rape survivor was detained after
speaking to a journalist. Following the political crisis, UNHCR has documented
323 incidents of sexual violence, involving 264 women and 59 girls, which occurred
either in Burundi or during flight. A number of women and girls attempting to flee
were reportedly taken by the Imbonerakure to the Nyabisindu military camp, located
in Marembo, and sexually assaulted.
Recommendation
85. I call for an investigation into reports of sexual violence, the prosecution of
perpetrators; the immediate release of any women or girls detained in military
camps and efforts by the authorities to ensure that survivors can safely access
services and redress and that humanitarians can operate without impediment.
Nigeria
86. One year after Boko Haram abducted 276 schoolgirls in Chibok, Borno State,
only 57 have returned. An estimated 2,000 women and girls have been abducted by
Boko Haram since 2014, with many forced into sexual slavery (see S/2015/453).
Such acts of sexual slavery, forced marriage and forced pregnancy could amount to
war crimes and/or crimes against humanity (see A/HRC/30/67). At the internally
displaced camp in Dalori, established in April 2015, more than 100 women have
given birth following their escape from captivity (see ibid.). Several wished to
terminate their pregnancies, although abortion remains illegal in Nigeria except

16-10524

27/34

S/2016/361/Rev.1

when the life or health of the woman is at stake. Owing to stigma and religious
norms, most victims of sexual violence are reluctant to speak out and unwilling to
return to their communities for fear they will be rejected as a source of “dishonour”.
As of June 2015, 307 women and children were enrolled in a government-run
counselling, education and health-care programme. However, human rights concerns
have been raised when women and children released from Boko Haram are held for
prolonged periods by the security forces for screening and rehabilitati on.
87. In camps and host communities, women and girls continue to face rape, forced
marriage and “survival sex” to meet their families’ needs. UNHCR identifies
676 households affected by sexual assault, with the highest proportion reported in
Taraba, Adamawa and Borno States. Overcrowded camps, which afford limited
privacy or socioeconomic opportunity, exacerbate this risk. A significant proportion
of households in Adamawa, Borno and Gombe States reported cases of forced or
early marriage. Progress was noted in late 2015 in the management of internally
displaced persons camps, although psychosocial support and reproductive health
care remain limited.
Recommendation
88. I reiterate my call for the immediate release of civilians abducted by Boko
Haram and urge the authorities to assist women and girls who have survived
captivity by supporting their social reintegration and providing all necessary health
care and other comprehensive services, including the safe termination of
pregnancies. I call for effective measures to prevent sexual violence in settings
where women and girls seek refuge and to ensure that their safety and rights are
considered in all counterinsurgency efforts.

VII. Recommendations
89. The information presented above underscores the need to promote gender
equality and women’s empowerment in order to address the root causes of conflict related sexual violence, transform harmful sociocultural norms and counter violent
extremism. To this end, the following recommendations outline prevention and
response measures to be taken at the national, regional and international levels. In
their implementation, I call for national leadership and responsibility, noti ng that the
United Nations stands ready to support national authorities in their efforts.
90.

I urge the Security Council:

(a) To recognize that, in addition to being employed as a tactic of war, as
noted in resolution 1820 (2008), sexual violence can constitute a tactic of
terrorism, as noted in resolution 2242 (2015). Accordingly, efforts to prevent
and address sexual violence should be strategically aligned with efforts to
prevent violent extremism and terrorism;
(b) To fully integrate the issue of conflict-related sexual violence into the
work of relevant sanctions committees, including the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning ISIL (Da’esh) Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, and to ensure that dedicated gender and conflict -

28/34

16-10524

S/2016/361/Rev.1

related sexual violence expertise consistently informs the work of sanctions
committees;
(c) To continue to encourage and support engagement with State and
non-State parties to conflict for specific commitments and prevention plans on
conflict-related sexual violence, and to systematically monitor their
compliance;
(d) To ensure that any national forces listed in the annexes to my reports
on conflict-related sexual violence are not accepted as troop or police
contributors to peacekeeping operations until they have taken specific
measures in line with resolution 2106 (2013) and have been delisted;
(e) To continue to recognize and address the nexus between trafficking
in persons and conflict-related sexual violence, including by violent extremist
groups, and to pursue accountability and sanctions for individuals and entities
involved in trafficking for the purposes of sexual violence;
(f) To employ the means at its disposal to influence both State and
non-State parties to conflict to comply with international law, including by
referring matters to the International Criminal Court. Referrals should apply
to individuals who commit, command or condone by failing to prevent or
punish, sexual violence, and should entail a structured relationship of
cooperation, follow-up and support to the work of the Court;
(g) To give due consideration to the risk factors and early warning signs
of sexual violence in its monitoring of conflict situations, especially in relation
to periods of political instability, elections, civil strife and mass population
movements, such as forced displacement, and to monitor the use of
inflammatory rhetoric or media incitement to sexual and other forms of
violence against women in situations of concern;
(h) To use its periodic field visits to focus attention on conflict-related
sexual violence concerns, to solicit the views of affected communities, women’s
civil society organizations and associations of survivors, as appropriate, and to
draw attention to the risks faced by minorities and marginalized groups.
91.

I encourage Member States, donors and regional organizations:

(a) To ensure that survivors benefit from relief and recovery
programmes, including health care, psychosocial care and socioeconomic
reintegration and livelihood support. Services should include provision for
women with children born as a result of wartime rape;
(b) To put in place legislative and institutional arrangements to address
conflict-related sexual violence and prevent its recurrence, including specific
victim and witness protection laws and programmes; timely and consistent
sentences that serve as a deterrent; reparations for victims; safeguards to
prevent individuals accused of violations from being retained and promoted
within the security forces (vetting in the context of security sector reform); the
exclusion of these crimes from general amnesties and statutes of limitations;
education that fosters gender equality; and programmes to ensure that women,
including those who become pregnant as a result of rape, have the information,
support and services they need, including access to emergency contraception
and measures for the safe termination of pregnancies. In these efforts,

16-10524

29/34

S/2016/361/Rev.1

particular attention should be paid to groups that face additional barriers to
justice such as ethnic or religious minorities, women in rural or remote areas,
those living with disabilities, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
persons, and women and children associated with armed groups;
(c) To give due consideration to recognizing conflict-related sexual
violence as a form of persecution that may serve as grounds for refugee status,
in the light of its use as a tactic to induce displacement;
(d) To ensure that all refugee-receiving countries provide information on
the services available to sexual violence survivors, ensure sustainable
psychosocial support and provide survivors with the option to document their
cases for future accountability processes;
(e) To support the training of journalists as part of a broader strategy to
ensure that the media, including both traditional and new/social media, is not
used for incitement to violence, and to foster safe and ethical reporting on
sexual violence;
(f) To include in government protocols the specific and distinct needs of
female and male victims of sexual violence, and train health-care providers on
how to respond to survivors of any age or sex, noting that male and lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex victims should be included within the
scope of protection provided under national law;
(g) To improve conviction rates for crimes of sexual violence by
integrating legal support options with medical and psychosocial care and
improving the reach of these services in conflict-affected areas, as well as
removing the barriers to reporting by providing free treatment and medical
certificates and ending the practice of mandatory police reporting as a
precondition to access to care;
(h) To continue to draw upon existing rosters of professionals trained in
dealing with sexual and gender-based violence in order to ensure appropriate
and timely documentation and investigation of these crimes;
(i) To ensure that gender capacity is included in ceasefire monitoring
and verification arrangements and teams, noting that grave violations such as
conflict-related sexual violence should be considered to be a breach of
ceasefire;
(j) To call upon mediators to include gender and conflict-related sexual
violence expertise as part of their mediation support teams;
(k) To integrate gender analysis and training into national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes, including resocialization and
reintegration initiatives to mitigate the threat of sexual and gender-based
violence, and to ensure that psychosocial interventions reach ex-combatants,
given the rise in domestic and other violence that follows demobilization in
many settings;
(l) To ensure that regional bodies enhance cooperation in information
and documentation, the training of security forces, extradition and legal
assistance and enhancing public awareness to combat conflict-related sexual
violence;

30/34

16-10524

S/2016/361/Rev.1

(m) To train all peacekeeping personnel on gender sensitivity, sexual
exploitation and abuse prevention and addressing conflict-related sexual
violence as a mandatory component of predeployment training, and to ensure
that this consideration is integrated into the performance and operation al
readiness standards against which troops are assessed;
(n) To support the engagement of religious leaders, paying particular
attention to amplifying the voices of women, with the objective of curbing
violent extremism, preventing the justification of sexual or other violence on
religious grounds and addressing the stigmatization suffered by survivors of
sexual violence.
92. I urge Member States to draw upon the expertise of the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, to support them in building
the capacity of civilian and military justice systems, as part of efforts to
strengthen institutional safeguards against impunity. I urge donors to ensure
sustainable funding for this valuable resource.
93. I urge Member States to support the efforts of United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict and its Multi-Partner Trust Fund, in
particular for the development and implementation of comprehensive national
strategies to prevent and address conflict-related sexual violence.

16-10524

31/34

S/2016/361/Rev.1

Annex
List of parties credibly suspected of committing or being
responsible for patterns of rape or other forms of sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict on the agenda of the
Security Council
The present annex does not purport to be a comprehensive list of perpetrators,
but includes those for whom credible information is available. It should be noted
that the names of countries appear only to indicate the locations in which parties are
suspected of committing relevant violations.
Parties in the Central African Republic
1.

Lord’s Resistance Army.

2.

Former Séléka coalition.

3.

Anti-balaka forces, including associated elements of the armed forces of the
Central African Republic.

4.

Révolution et justice.

5.

Front démocratique du peuple centrafricain.

Parties in Côte d’Ivoire
1.

2.

Ex-militia groups, including:
(a)

Alliance patriotique de l’ethnie Wé;

(b)

Front pour la libération du Grand Ouest;

(c)

Mouvement ivoirien de libération de l’ouest de la Côte d’Ivoire;

(d)

Union patriotique de résistance du Grand Ouest.

Ivorian armed forces.*

Parties in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
1.

The following armed groups:
(a)

Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain;

(b)

Allied Democratic Forces — National Army for the Liberation of Uganda;

(c)

Forces pour la défense du Congo;

(d)

Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda;

(e)

Forces de résistance patriotiques en Ituri/“Colonel” Adirodhu Mbadhu/
“Colonel” Kakado;

(f)

Lord’s Resistance Army;

(g)

Mai Mai Cheka/Nduma Defence for Congo;

* Party has committed itself to adopting measures to address conflict -related sexual violence.

32/34

16-10524

S/2016/361/Rev.1

(h)

Mai Mai Kifuafua;

(i)

Mai Mai Simba Manu;

(j)

Mai Mai Simba Mangaribi;

(k)

Mai Mai Simba/Lumumba;

(l)

Nyatura;

(m) Raia Mutomboki/Mulumbu Willy, also known as “Willy Alexandre”;
(n)

Raia Mutomboki/Sadiki Desaba, also known as “Kabazimya”.

2.

Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo.*

3.

Congolese national police.

Parties in Iraq
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
Parties in Mali
1.

Mouvement national pour la libération de l’Azawad.

2.

Ansar Eddine.

3.

Mouvement pour l’unification et le jihad en Afrique de l’ouest.

4.

Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb.

5.

Groupe d’autodéfense Touaregs Imghad et leurs alliés.

Parties in Somalia
1.

Al-Shabaab.

2.

Somali national army.*

3.

Somali national police force* and allied militia.

4.

Puntland military.

Parties in the Sudan
1.

Justice and Equality Movement.

2.

Sudanese armed forces.

3.

Rapid Support Forces.

Parties in South Sudan

16-10524

1.

Lord’s Resistance Army.

2.

Justice and Equality Movement.

3.

Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army-in-Opposition.*

4.

Sudan People’s Liberation Army.*

5.

South Sudanese national police.*

33/34

S/2016/361/Rev.1

Parties in the Syrian Arab Republic
1.

Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

2.

Other armed groups in contested areas such as Raqqah, Hasakah, Damascus
and Rif Dimashq, including:

3.

(a)

Nusrah Front;

(b)

Army of Islam;

(c)

Aknaf Bayt al-Maqdis;

(d)

Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis;

(e)

Ahrar al-Sham.

Government forces, including the Syrian armed forces, intelligence services
and pro-Government forces, including the National Defence Forces militia.

Other parties of concern on the agenda of the Security Council
Boko Haram.

34/34

16-10524
