148

Gf'neral AAe1Dbl,--Twenty-ninth Seal-

2. Strongly condemns any acts of violence against
the premises of missions and their personnel as fundamentally incompatible with the status of such missions
and personnel under international law;
3. Urges the host country to exert all-round efforts
in order to take all the necessary measures and ensure
their effective implementation for the purpose of guaranteeing adequate security for missions and their personnel and creating normal conditions for the functioning of missions to the United Nations;
4. Urges the host country to take all necessary
measures to apprehend, prosecute and punish those
guilty of criminal acts against missions and their personnel;
5. Urges the host country to continue to implement
fully and effectively its Act for the Protection of Foreign Officials and Official Guests of the United States27
and, in particular, to take all appropriate enforcement
and preventive measures to make certain that demonstrations and picketing, especially where there is reason
to believe that they may be accompanied by violence
or may prevent the conduct of normal business of missions to the United Nations, are held in conformity with
this law and closely monitored by the police to prevent
any acts of violence against the missions accredited to
the United Nations and their personnel;
6. Notes the difficulties which diplomatic missions
and their personnel encounter from time to time when
parking their automobiles, and the need to maintain
public safety;
7. Appeals to the host country to review the measures with regard to the parking of diplomatic vehicles
with a view to facilitating the desires and needs of the
diplomatic community and to consider terminating the
practice of serving summonses to diplomats;
8. Welcomes the diplomatic community's readiness
to c<H>perate fully with the local authorities in solving
traffic problems;
9. Requests all members of the diplomatic community to respect the laws and regulations of the host
country;
10. Believes that the host country, the Secretariat,
the diplomatic community and the organizations concerned should in every way seek the improvement of
relations and the promotion of mutual understanding
between the diplomatic community and the local population in order to ensure conditions conducive to the
effective functioning of the United Nations and the
•missions accredited to it;
11. Notes with appreciation the efforts of the host
country, the New York City community and the New
York City Commission for the United Nations and
for the Consular Corps to accommodate the needs,
interests and requirements of the diplomatic community
and to provide hospitality;
12. Decides to continue the work of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country in 1975, in conformity with General Assembly resolution 2819
(XXVI), with the purpose of examining all matters
falling within its terms of reference;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
necessary assistance to the Committee on Relations
with the Host Country and to call its attention to issues
of mutual concern relating to the implementation of the
27 United States

Public Law 92-539 (see A/8871/Rev.1).

Agreement between the United Nations and the United
States of America regarding the Headquarters of the
United Nations and the Convention on the Privileges
and Immunities of the United Nations;
14. Requests the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country to submit to the General Assembly, at
its thirtieth session, a report on the progress of its
work and to make, if it deems it necessary, appropriate
recommendations;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session the item entitled "Report of the
Committee on Relations with the Host Country".
2319th plenary meeting
14 December 1974
3321 (XXIX). Question of diplomatic asylum

The General Assembly,
Conscious of the fact that a number of States have
granted diplomatic asylum and that several conventions on this subject have been concluded in Latin
America,
Considering that it is desirable to initiate preliminary
studies on the humanitarian and other aspects of the
question of diplomatic asylum,
l. Invites Member States wishing to express their
views on the question of diplomatic asylum to communicate those views to the Secretary-General not later
than 30 June 1975;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare and
circulate to Member States, before the thirtieth session
of the General Assembly, a report containing an analysis of the question of diplomatic asylum, taking into
account in particular:
(a) The texts of relevant international agreements;
( b) Relevant decisions of tribunals;
( c) The consideration of the question in intergovernmental organizations;
(d) Relevant studies made or being made by nongovernmental bodies concerned with international law;
(e) Relevant views of qualified publicists;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirtieth session an item entitled "Report of the Secretary-General on the question of diplomatic asylum".
2319th plenary meeting
14 December 1974
3349 (XXIX). Need to consider suggestions regarding the review of the Charter of the
United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 992 (X) of 21 November
1955 and 2285 (XXII) of 5 December 1967 concerning the procedure for the review of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Recalling further its resolutions 2552 (XXIV) of
12 December 1969, 2697 ( XXV) of 11 December
1970 and 2968 (XXVII) of 14 December 1972 entitled "Need to consider suggestions regarding the review of the Charter of the United Nations",
Taking note of the observations which were submitted by Governments in response to the inquiry made
pursuant to resolutions 2697 (XXV) and 2968

149

Re1olution1 adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

(XXVII) and which are set out in the reports of the
Secretary-General,2 8
Having heard the views expressed by Member States
concerning the need to consider suggestions regarding
the review of the Charter of the United Nations during
the consideration of the item at various sessions of the
General Assembly, including the twenty-fourth, twentyfifth, twenty-seventh and twenty-ninth sessions,
,
Reaffirming its support for the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter,
1. Decides to establish an Ad Hoe Committee on
the Charter of the United Nations, consisting of fortytwo members to be appointed by the President of the
General Assembly with due regard for the principle of
equitable geographical distribution, with the following
aims:
(a) To discuss in detail the observations received
from Governments;
( b) To consider any additional specific proposals
that Governments may make with a view to enhancing
the ability of the United Nations to achieve its purposes;
(c) To consider also other suggestions for the more
effective functioning of the United Nations that may
not require amendments to the Charter;

(d) To enumerate the proposals which have Moused
particular interest in the Ad Hoe Committee;

2. Invites Governments to submit or to bring up
to date their observations pursuant to General Assembly resolution 2697 (XXV), if possible before 31 May
1975;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the
Ad H oc Committee his views, as appropriate, on the
experience acquired in the application of the provisions
of the Charter with regard to the Secretariat;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, for
the use of the Ad Hoe Committee, an analytical paper
containing the observations received from Governments and the views expressed at the twenty-seventh.
and twenty-ninth sesions;

·s. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to submit a
report on its work to the General Assembly at its
thirtieth session;
6. Decides ,to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth :;ession an item entitled "Report of the
Ad Hoe Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations".
2323rd plenary meeting
17 December 1974

28 A/8746 and Corr.I and Add.l-3, A/9739.

•

•

•

Other decision•
Report of the International Law Commission on the work of
its twenty-sixth session 29
(Item 87)

At its 2319th plenary meeting, on 14 December 1974, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Sixth Committee,30 decided to recommend to States
and to internationa,l organizations that are depositaries of multilateral treaties to
include automatically the United Nations Secretariat in the iist of addressees for
reporting notifications that such States and international organizations are called
upon to send as depositaries.
Measures to prevent international terrorism which endangers or takes
innocent human lives or jeopardizes fundamental freedoms, and study
of the underlying causes of those forms of terrorism and acts of violence which lie in misery, frustration, grievance and despair and
which cause some people to sacrifice human lives, including their
own, in an attempt to effect radical changes

(Item 91)

At its 2319th plenary meeting, on 14 December 1974, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Sixth Committee,31 decided to include in the provisional agenda of its thirtieth session the item entitled "Measures to prevent
international terrorism which endangers or takes innocent human lives or jeopardizes fundamental freedoms, and study of the underlying causes of those forms of
terrorism and acts of violence which lie in misery, frustration: w-ievance and
despair and which cause some people to sacrifice human lives, includmg their own,
in an attempt to effect radical changes".
29 See resolution 3315 (XXIX).
10 Official Records of the General

Assembly, Twenty-ninth Session, Anne,ces, aaenda
item 87, document A/9897, para. 194.
11 Ibid., agenda item 91, document A/9947, para. S.
