~I.

Resolutions adopted on th_!_ ':!~-~-o~ the_Third Comrnit11-t•

heid through their national liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity;
30. Demands the immediate release of women and
children detained in Namibia and South Africa;
31. Strongly condemns the constant and deliberate
violations of the fundamental rights of the Palestinian
people, as well as the expansionist activities oflsrael in the
Middle East, which constitute an obstacle to the achievement of self-determination and independence by the
Palestinian people and a threat to peace and stability in the
region;
32. Demands the immediate and unconditional release
of all persons detained or imprisoned as a result of their
struggle for self-determination and independence, full
respect for their fundamental individual rights and compliance with article 5 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 6 under which no one shall be subjected to
torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment;
33. Urges all States, the specialized agencies, competent organizations of the United Nations system and other
international organizations to extend their support to the
Palestinian people through its sole and legitimate representative, the Palestine Liberation Organization, in its
struggle to regain its right to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Charter,
34. Expresses its appreciation for the material and
other forms of assistance that peoples under colonial rule
continue to receive from Governments, organizations of
the United Nations system and intergovernmental organizations, and calls for a substantial increase in this assistance;
35. Urges all States, the specialized agencies and other
competent organizations of the United Nations system to
do their utmost to ensure the full implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples and to intensify their efforts to support peoples under colonial, foreign and racist domination
in t~eir just struggle for self-determination and independence;
36. Requests the Secretary-General to give maximum
publicity to the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and to give the
widest possible publicity to the struggle of oppressed
peoples for the achievement of their self-determination
and national independence and to report periodically to
the General Assembly on his activities in this regard;
37. Decides to consider this item again at its forty-first
session on the basis of the reports that Governments.
organizations of the United Nations system and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations have been
requested to submit concerning the strengthening of assistance to colonial territories and peoples.
96th plenary meeting
29 November 1985

40/26.

Status of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 30S7 (XXVIII) of 2 November
1973, 3135 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, 3225 (XXIX)
of6 November 1974. 3381 (XXX) of 10 November 197S,
31/79 of 13 December 1976, 32/11 of 7 November 1977.
33/101 of 16 December 1978, 34/26 of 15 November
1979, 35/38 of 25 Nove-mher I 980. 36 1 1 I of 28 Octobe1
39 A/ 40/607.
•10 Sec resolution 18/ 14

199

1981, 3'1/45 of 3 December 1982, 38/ 18 of 22 November
1983 and 39/20 of 23 November I 984.
f:xpre1·sing its satisfa< 110n with the entry into force, on 3
December 1982, of the rnmpetence of the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, under article 14
of the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination, 11 to accept and to examine communications from persons or groups of persons,
and with the fact that l-mce that date more States parties
have made the declaration provided for in that article,
i. lakes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the status of the International Conve-ntion on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination; 39
2. Expresses its sat:s(action at the number of States
that have ratified the C,mvent1on or acceded thereto;
3. Reaffirms once a..i:,un its ccmv1ction that ratification
of or accession to the C.invention on a universal basis and
implementation of its pmvisions are necessary for the realizat10n of the objectives of the Second Decade to Combat
Racism and Racial Dis,:rimination: 40
4. Requests those States that have not yet become parties to the Convention I{) ratify it or accede thereto;
5. Calls upon States parties to the Convention to consider the possibility of making the declaration provided for
m article 14 of the Convention;
ti. Requests the- Secretary-neneral to continue to submit to the General Assembly annual reports concerning
the status of the Convention. in accordance with Assembly
resolution 2106 I\ (X'< of 71 December 196S.
CJMh plenary meeting
29 November 1985
1

40/27, Status of the International Convention on the
Suppression ,rnd Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid
rhe <ieneral Assemh, i.
Recalling its resolution 3068 (XXVHI) of 30 November
1973, by which it adopted and opened for signature and
ratification the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the ( 'rime of Apartheid, and its
subsequent resolutions , m the status of the Convention,
Reajjirming its conv,ctw11 that ,1partheid constitutes a
total negation of the pui;mses and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. a gross violation of human rights
and a crime against humanity. seriously threatening international peace and sernrity,
l'akmg note of the finding of the Group of Three of the
Commission on Human Rights, established in accordance
1,vith article IX of the Cmventmn, that the crime of apartheid is a form of the- c11me of gcnocide, 41
Strongly condemning South Africa's continued poliC}, of
apartheid and its continued illegal occupation of Namibia,
as well as its recent acts of aggression against Angola and
other African States,
·1/armed by the aggrnvat10n of the situation in South
Africa, in particular 1he further escalation of ruthless
repression by the Fasc,st-like apartheid regime, including
the use of the armed ft1rces against the opposing people
and the imposition PI virtual martial-law conditions
intended to facilitate 1 he brutal oppression of the black
population,
Condemnmg the- continued collaboration of certain
5tatt·s and 1ransnatio,1a: ,,rp ,,,1·. 1 ·,; ,;ir'1 tk racist
reg1m1· ,.fSnnth ,\fi ,. 1 , •
, ,.·:, , . mil1tar)

200

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

and other fields as an encouragement to the intensification
of its odious policy of apartheid,
Firmly convinced that the legitimate struggle of the
oppressed peoples in southern Africa against apartheid,
racism and colonialism and for the effective exercise of
their inalienable right to self-determination and independence demands more than ever all necessary support by
the international community and, in particular, further
action by the Security Council in accordance with Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
Underlining that ratification of or accession to the Convention on a universal basis and the implementation of its
provisions without delay are necessary for its effectiveness,
and therefore will contribute to the eradication of the
crime of apartheid,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the status of the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid; 42
2. Commends those States parties to the Convention
that have submitted their reports under article VII thereof;
3. Appeals once again to those States that have not yet
done so to ratify or to accede to the Convention without
further delay, in particular those States that have jurisdiction over transnational corporations operating in South
Africa and Namibia and without whose co-operation such
operations cannot be halted;
4. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Group of Three of the Commission on Human Rights,
established in accordance with article IX of the Convention, and, in particular, of the conclusions and recommendations contained in that report; 41
5. Draws the attention of all States to the opinion
expressed by the Group of Three in its report that article
Ill of the Convention could apply to the actions of transnational corporations operating in South Africa;
6. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
intensify, in co-operation with the Special Committee
against Apartheid, its efforts to compile periodically the
progressive list of individuals, organizations, institutions
and representatives of States deemed responsible for
crimes enumerated in article II of the Convention, as well
as those against whom or which legal proceedings have
been undertaken;
1. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate the
above-mentioned list to all States parties to the Convention and all Member States and to bring such facts to the
attention of the public by all means of mass communication;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to invite the States
parties to the Convention, the specialized agencies and
non-governmental organizations to provide the Commission on Human Rights with relevant information concerning the forms of the crime of apartheid, as described in
article II of the Convention, committed by transnational
corporations operating in South Africa;
9. Appeals to all States, United Nations organs, the
specialized agencies and international and national nongovernmental organizations to step up their activities in
enhancing public awareness by denouncing the crimes
committed by the racist regime of South Africa;
I 0. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his
efforts, through appropriate channels, to disseminate information on the Convention and its implementation with a
42 N40/606.
43 Resolution 38/ 14. annex.
44 Oifinal Record• ol rhe iiNwral Asscmh/v f,,irr,erh Session, Sup1>lemem
l'i'o 18 u. ,io1 lS)

view to promoting further ratification of or accession to
the Convention;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
next annual report under General Assembly resolution
3380 (XXX) of 10 November 1975 a special section concerning the implementation of the Convention.
96th plenary meeting
29 November 1985

40/28.

Report of the Committee on the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 39/21 of 23 November 1984 on
the report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination and 40/26 of 29 November 1985 on the
status of the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 11 as well as its
other relevant resolutions on the implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Second Decade to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination, 43
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination on the work of its
thirty-first and thirty-second sessions, 44 submitted under
article 9, paragraph 2, of the Convention,
Emphasizing the need for Member States to intensify, at
the national and international levels, the struggle against
acts or practices of racial discrimination and the vestiges
or manifestations of racist ideologies wherever they exist,
Bearing in mind that the Convention is being implemented in different economic, social and cultural conditions prevailing in individual States parties,
Mindful of the obligation of all States parties to comply
fully with the provisions of the Convention,
Aware of the importance of the contribution of the
Committee to the implementation of the Programme of
Action for the Second Decade to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination and to the elimination of all forms
of discrimination based on race, colour, descent or
national or ethnic origin,
Taking note of the decisions adopted and recommendations made by the Committee at its thirty-first and thirtysecond sessions,
I. Takes note of the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination on its thirty-first and
thirty-second sessions;
2. Also takes note of the part of the report relating to
Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories and other Territories to which General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960 applies; 45
3. Draws the attention of the relevant United Nations
bodies to the opinion and recommendations of the Committee relating to the Territories mentioned in paragraph 2
above, calls upon those bodies to ensure that the Committee is supplied with all relevant information on the Territories and urges all administering Powers to co-operate
with those bodies by providing all the necessary information in order to enable the Committee to discharge fully its
responsibilities under article 15 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
4. Considers that the Committee should not take into
consideration information on Territories to which General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) applies unless such infor4 , Ihul., sect V
