S/PV.8643

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8643rd meeting

Thursday, 17 October 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Matjila. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Bieke
Ms. Morrison González
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Soemirat
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Ugarelli
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Repkin
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Special Report of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations on the African Union — United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2019/816)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-32153 (E)
*1932153*

S/PV.8643

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.

10 October in Addis Ababa, we also briefed the African
Union Peace and Security Council. I will share my
impressions from that joint visit in a moment.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Special Report of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations on
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2019/816)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/816, which contains the special report
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and the Secretary-General of the United Nations on
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council, in line with
resolution 2479 (2019).
I have just returned from the Sudan, where I
travelled from 7 to 10 October with Mr. Smaïl Chergui,
African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace and
Security. During our visit, we met with Mr. Abdalla
Hamdok, Prime Minister of the Sudan, General
Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo, Vice-Chair of the Sovereign
Council, as well as the diplomatic community and
senior officials at central and local Government levels,
including the Acting Wali of Northern Darfur, during a
one-day field trip to El Fasher. During our visit, we also
held on 7 October the 27th meeting of the Tripartite
Coordination Mechanism on the United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), together with senior
representatives of the Sudanese Foreign Ministry. On
2/17

17/10/2019

Since my most recent briefing on the situation
in Darfur on 26 August (see S/PV.8603), remarkable
developments have taken place in the Sudan. On
8 September, a new Cabinet led by Prime Minister
Abdalla Hamdok was sworn in. Four members of the new
Cabinet are women, including the Minister for Foreign
Affairs. Prime Minister Hamdok rapidly articulated the
priorities of his Cabinet, which are focused primarily
on achieving lasting and comprehensive peace across
the Sudan and the urgently needed economic recovery.
He articulated those same priorities during his remarks
at the high-level event on the Sudan on 27 September
in New York, which he co-chaired with the SecretaryGeneral and the Chairperson of the AU Commission.
Consistent with the priorities set out in the
Constitutional Declaration signed on 17 August,
including the one related to the urgent need to end
conflicts across the Sudan, on 11 September the
Sovereign Council and a number of armed groups,
including several Darfuri groups, signed, under the
auspices of President Salva Kiir Mayardit of South
Sudan, the Juba Declaration for Confidence-building
Procedures and the Preparation for Negotiation. The
Declaration constitutes a road map and trust-building
agreement for the peace process, under which the
parties have agreed on, among other measures, a
ceasefire, the opening of humanitarian corridors,
the release of war prisoners, the end of travel bans
for the movements’ leaders, and the establishment of
a preparatory committee for peace negotiations. As
Council members are aware, negotiations began on
14 October in Juba, with the objective of reaching a
peace agreement by 14 December. It should be noted
that, for the first time in the modern history of the
Sudan, this process is expected to be widely inclusive
of almost all armed groups.
On 16 October, negotiations were suspended for 24
hours after the Sudan People’s Liberation MovementNorth, led by Abdel Aziz Al-Hilu, suspended its
participation, accusing the Government of violating
the cessation of hostilities in Khor Waral, in South
Kordofan. The authorities have indicated that the
clashes involved herders and merchants, and condemned
these incidents. The Head of the Sovereign Council,
General Al-Burhan, also issued a decree announcing a
nationwide ceasefire on the same day.
19-32153

17/10/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

While the effects of these talks on the ground are
yet to be seen, the overall security situation in Darfur
has remained largely unchanged since my last briefing,
despite several incidents detailed in the report before the
Council (S/2019/816). However, the Mission has noted
that the gradual shift of the attention of the authorities
to the security challenges in Khartoum has contributed
to leaving some gaps in the effective functioning of
security institutions across the Darfur states, where
incidents of criminality have increased. This has been
the case particularly in camps for internally displaced
persons (IDPs), and the number of incidents of farm
destruction and unlawful occupation of land in various
parts of Darfur was reported to be higher than during
the same period last year. Meanwhile, intermittent
armed clashes between Government forces and the
Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid (SLA-AW)
continued in the Jebel Marra area, with the movement
targeting Sudan Armed Forces positions around Golo.
The humanitarian situation continued to be
characterized by the trends identified in our special
report of 30 May (S/2019/445). Since then, more people
have been displaced as a result of intercommunal
conflict and of fighting between security forces and the
SLA-AW. As of the end of August, the peak of the lean
season, more than 1.8 million people were facing phase
3 or phase 4 levels of food insecurity across Central,
East, North and South Darfur. This represents 17 to
24 per cent of the population, depending on the state,
compared to an average of 14 per cent for the whole
of the Sudan. Meanwhile, the overall humanitarian
situation in the Sudan is getting worse as the economic
crisis compounds the impact of conflict, political
instability, natural hazards and disease outbreaks. Over
8 million people are estimated to need humanitarian
assistance or protection.
The Mission has continued to implement its
mandate, including on the protection of civilians. Despite
challenges, UNAMID’s transition-related activities
have also continued, with joint programmatic activities
with the United Nations country team undertaken
within the framework of the State liaison functions in
four Darfur states. The State liaison functions have
contributed to enhancing the United Nations country
team’s presence and operations in Darfur, for example
in East Darfur, where nine agencies, funds and
programmes are currently operating, compared to five
prior to January 2019. The extension of the State liaison
functions to the greater Jebel Marra area is planned

S/PV. 8643

to begin in January 2020, although security concerns
and the limited presence of the United Nations country
team in that area continue to challenge the expansion
process there.
Let me now say a few words on the visit we just
concluded with Commissioner Chergui, which gave
us a timely opportunity to review progress made in
the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding in
Darfur, in the light of the most recent developments
and ahead of the envisioned closure of UNAMID. We
were able to discuss with Sudanese counterparts the
challenges facing Government institutions in taking
over key responsibilities entrusted heretofore to
UNAMID, including for the protection of civilians and
security. It was also a chance to discuss the prospects
for longer-term engagement by the AU and the United
Nations following UNAMID’s departure.
During our meeting, Prime Minister Hamdok made
a strong request for a well-sequenced transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding in Darfur, aligned with
the Government’s priorities and time frame, that would
take the ongoing talks into consideration in defining
the next steps. The Prime Minister indicated that
this request was based on the concerns expressed by
the armed groups during their consultations with the
Government of the Sudan that led to the adoption of
the Juba Declaration on 11 September. In this context,
Members of the Security Council will recall that
among the streamlined benchmarks developed by the
joint United Nations-AU strategic review of UNAMID
earlier this year and presented in the 30 May joint report
of the African Union Commission and the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/445), a specific reference was made
to the importance of resuming peace talks with a view
to reaching comprehensive peace across Darfur so as
to create the conditions for a successful exit strategy
for UNAMID.
During our meetings, Government officials also
insisted on the need for the international community to
unequivocally support the new momentum for peace in
Darfur and the Two Areas, initiated with the ongoing
talks in Juba. In this context, our interlocutors deplored
the fact that, despite Prime Minister Hamdok’s initiative
to meet with Abdul Wahid Al-Nur of the SLA-AW in
Paris on 30 September, the latter has continued to reject
the transition process and the new Government and is
yet to join the peace talks process. In our view, every
effort should be made to impress upon all concerned

19-321533/17

S/PV.8643

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

groups the imperative of seizing the momentum
for peace.
Looking ahead, the Government has requested
more time to formulate its needs for a possible followon mechanism to UNAMID, making us unable
to respond to the Council’s request for options at
this time. However, during the 27th meeting of the
Tripartite Coordination Mechanism on UNMAMID,
in Khartoum on 7 October, we established a joint task
force that should finalize options for a possible followon presence to be presented in the December 2019
progress report to be submitted to the two Councils. It
should be noted that, in our consultations with Sudanese
authorities, we have emphasized the importance for any
follow-on presence to be guided by the priorities set out
by the Government in order to ensure full ownership of
this possible future partnership for peacebuilding in the
Sudan. Consistent with the political strategy outlined
in the report before the Council, we stressed during
our meetings in Khartoum the readiness of the AU
and the United Nations to actively support the ongoing
talks with a view to ensuring that the peace process
remains inclusive of all armed groups in Darfur and the
Two Areas.
In resolution 2479 (2019), the Security Council
requests the AU Commission Chairperson and the
Secretary-General to provide recommendations on the
appropriate course of action regarding the drawdown
of UNAMID. In the light of the recent developments
on the ground, the report contains two options for
the Security Council’s consideration. In the first,
consistent with the AU Peace and Security Council
communiqué of 13 June, we are proposing to undertake
a geographical realignment of UNAMID’s footprint
from the 13 locations currently remaining down to five
team sites, mainly located in central Jebel Marra, where
armed elements are still active. This option takes into
account the conflict trends of the past year, as presented
in the 30 May report, and prioritizes those sites that had
seen no major security incidents during the reporting
period. Accordingly, and for an initial period of six
months, which coincides with the anticipated duration
of the talks, UNAMID would retain the same ceiling
of uniformed personnel. As mentioned in the special
report of May, while the military component would
be consolidated into fewer sites, the Mission would
maintain an appropriate reserve capacity to intervene
in extremis situations in locations from which
UNAMID has withdrawn, such as when the physical
4/17

17/10/2019

protection of civilians is required. Under the second
option, UNAMID would proceed with its drawdown,
as outlined in our previous report, with a view to
completing the drawdown by end of June 2020.
For both options, we agreed with the Government
during the recent tripartite meeting that closed
team sites would be handed over to the transitional
authorities, in line with United Nations rules and
regulations for civilian-end purposes and in accordance
with the sequenced handover plan already developed
by UNAMID and the Government. The United Nations
would also maintain a presence in vacated areas through
the State liaison functions that would be established to
bring together UNAMID, the United Nations country
team and Sudanese Government institutions in support
of the rule of law, human rights and durable solutions
for IDPs and local communities.
I should note, however, that based on our
interactions with many stakeholders on the ground and
our consultations last week with the African Union
Peace and Security Council, our recommendation
would be to adopt an approach that would align the
next phase of the transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding in Darfur with the pace of the peace talks
in Juba, and therefore the first option would be more
consistent with this approach. That is also in line with
the AU Peace and Security Council communiqué of
10 October, which stresses the need for the withdrawal
of the Mission to take into account the progress made
in the peace process.
In the months ahead, our strategy to support the
Government’s efforts to achieve a comprehensive peace
would also require adjusting UNAMID’s priorities to
focus on support for the peace process, the tasks related
to the implementation of the peace agreement, the
Peace Commission and the strengthening of the State
liaison functions and their expansion in Jebel Marra.
I would like to conclude by echoing a key message
that we have repeatedly heard during our visit. Effective
peace consolidation in Darfur and the wider Sudan
cannot be achieved without tangible progress on the
economic recovery front. However, from all accounts,
resource mobilization remains a major challenge that
bears the potential to unravel the positive gains made
thus far by the Sudanese leadership and the people on
the path to political and economic stability. In that
regard, the Secretary-General has made a strong call
for the lifting of all economic and financial sanctions
19-32153

17/10/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

on the Sudan and for the removal of the Sudan from
the list of countries sponsoring terrorism. The United
Nations system is actively engaged with partners of the
Sudan in forging a path towards alleviating some of the
most pressing economic challenges facing the country.
The Sudan is at a historic crossroads. We have a
unique opportunity to support the authorities in ending
the conflicts that have plagued the country for years.
We are committed to doing everything that we can to
accompany the Government, according to its vision
and its pace, to build an inclusive and lasting peace in
Darfur and the wider Sudan. I hope that we can count
on the Council’s support in that critical endeavour.
The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I think that the Council members saw empty
glasses in front of them when they came in, unlike this
morning. There will be water in the glasses very soon
once things normalize.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I assume you,
Mr. President, are sharing your water with all the
members of the Security Council who need it.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing. I also welcome the Ambassador of the Sudan
here. The Under-Secretary-General talked about some
of the remarkable changes that have happened since the
Council last met on the Sudan (S/PV.8603). I would add
one to those, which was the sight of and opportunity
to hear Prime Minister Hamdok during the General
Assembly’s high-level week. I think that he made a
huge impression on all of those of us who met him and
listened to what he had to say. If a better illustration of
the change that has taken place in the Sudan over the
past few months were ever wanted, it was that for me.
I again congratulate and salute the people of the Sudan
for the courage that they have shown in choosing the
path that they are now on. I am sure that it will not
always be a straightforward path, but we and others are
there supporting them.
As Under-Secretary-General Lacroix set out, we
continue to see positive developments in the Sudan as a
civilian Government takes forward the implementation
of the Constitutional Declaration. Like him, I would like
to welcome the appointment of women to key positions
within the new Government and also the milestone

S/PV. 8643

agreement to open an Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in the Sudan.
But as we were enjoined, we must all support
unequivocally the new momentum behind the peace
talks, in Mr. Lacroix’s words. From the United Kingdom’s
perspective, the start of those peace talks between the
Government and the armed movements — the work
done in Juba — is of particular importance to note. We
therefore encourage all sides, in particular the armed
movements, to engage constructively, immediately and
without preconditions so that a comprehensive, fair
and inclusive peace agreement can finally be achieved.
I would also like to say how much we welcome the
decision to remove bureaucratic impediments imposed
on humanitarian actors and hope that this decision
will be implemented fully to enable much-needed,
unfettered humanitarian access throughout Darfur and
wherever it is needed in the Sudan.
Turning to the situation on the ground,
notwithstanding the positive elements that we have
learned about today, we cannot ignore the fact that the
security, humanitarian and human rights situations in
Darfur remain volatile. We remain concerned about
the gaps that Mr. Lacroix mentioned, namely, the
increase in intercommunal conflict and criminality,
continued civilian displacement and human rights
violations and abuses, all of which are documented in
the special report of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations (S/2019/816). The Council, the United
Nations, the African Union and, most critically of all,
the Government of the Sudan will need to seriously
consider how to address those continued challenges in
order to prevent them from undermining the transition
to peacebuilding.
With respect to the mandate of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), let me first say that the United Kingdom
remains absolutely committed to ensuring a transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, and that it is
successful and responsible. As I have already said, we
are extremely optimistic about that and the opportunities
presented by the new civilian Government and the
prospects for a comprehensive peace agreement in not
only Darfur but also other areas.
It is a complex situation, and the root causes remain
unresolved. I think that we will take into consultations
a more detailed conversation on UNAMID’s mandate,

19-321535/17

S/PV.8643

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

but let me just say here that the United Kingdom will
be guided by the emphasis that the Government of the
Sudan has placed on the importance of not creating a
security vacuum during the ongoing peace efforts. I note
the communiqué of the African Union in that context.
We certainly believe that withdrawing UNAMID at this
critical time would create such a vacuum and remove a
key part of international support to the peace process.
On the follow-on side that the Under-SecretaryGeneral also touched on, I think that it is really
important, as he said, that the priorities for the follow-on
are aligned with those of the Government, and we think
that it is important to ensure ongoing support to Darfur.
We will want to give the Government time to consider
the options that it wants for future international support
and cooperation.
Let me finish by simply welcoming the
commitment — as I believe everyone already has and
the United Kingdom certainly has — made by the
United Nations and the African Union to engaging
actively with the Government in the coming months on
options for a follow-on presence. We look forward to
receiving them, I believe it was said in December, and
to making progress on the transition from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding. All of us support the people and
Government of the Sudan at this time.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me first of all thank
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and
extend a special welcome to the Ambassador of the
Sudan. Needless to say, we will listen very carefully
to how the Government of the Sudan wants to take
forward the issue under discussion today.
Like many among us, the German delegation
was extremely impressed with the way the Sudanese
delegation, led by Prime Minister Hamdok, articulated
its vision for a new Sudan during the high-level week.
Our German Foreign Minister, Mr. Heiko Maas,
expressed that during the high-level meeting on the
Sudan when he offered Germany’s full and concrete
support for the transitional Government and the people
of the Sudan. I think that the Security Council must ask
itself the exact question of how we can best support the
Sudanese vision for peace. How can we help implement
the priority that the transitional Government attaches
to ending the conflicts in the country, as clearly stated
in the constitutional agreement and so convincingly
articulated by Prime Minister Hamdok here in
New York?
6/17

17/10/2019

One important tool of the Council is the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and it is clear to us as co-penholder that
we as the Council members should live up to our
responsibility by working towards two goals with
regard to UNAMID.
First, in the short term, we must provide the best
stabilization efforts in Darfur and ensure immediate
expert support to the ongoing peace talks. We need to
secure UNAMID’s investment in peace and stability
in Darfur — an investment that is needed more
urgently than ever at this decisive time for the future
of the Sudan. As we just heard from Under-SecretaryGeneral Jean-Pierre Lacroix, that is an aspect that was
also recently emphasized by Prime Minister Hamdok
during the recent United Nations-African Union visit
to the Sudan.
Secondly, in the medium term we should provide
a tailored, joint United Nations-African Union support
package that helps the Government achieve lasting
peace in Darfur and beyond. That is why we think that
we should not jeopardize UNAMID’s ability to support
the peace process by directing the mission to focus on
completing its drawdown. Continuing UNAMID for a
further period of time, as suggested as one option in the
report of the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
(S/2019/816), would indeed, in our view, be the prudent
way forward. That would respond to the continued need
for stabilization in Darfur and preserve the international
engagement at such a crucial time, while peace talks are
being held, and would enable uninterrupted, continuous
support to the ongoing mediation by the Joint Special
Representative and his team.
If we take our commitments to improve
peacekeeping seriously, we should not wind up a
peacekeeping mission at precisely the moment when
peace talks have just been revitalized, even more so
because they have the potential of ending a decades-old
conflict. Taking a disruptive decision against UNAMID
now would turn our joint commitment to the primacy of
politics on its head.
At the same time, we think that the Council should
encourage the United Nations and the African Union
to continue their conversation with the Sudanese
Government about a follow-on mission to UNAMID.
Such a mission should, in our view, reflect the priority
19-32153

17/10/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

that the Government attaches to peacebuilding,
reconciliation and tackling the root causes of conflict.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to thank most warmly the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peace Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
for his briefing on the significant developments in
the Sudan over the past weeks. I also welcome the
Ambassador of the Sudan and his delegation, which
represents the new face of the Sudan, which we support.
That leads me to the first point I wanted to make
here: that it is clear that we must support the Sudanese
transition. We hope that the transition will be a success
and make it possible to meet the legitimate aspirations
of the people of the Sudan. The transition will succeed
if it can deliver on the two priorities set by Prime
Minister Abdalla Hamdok — bringing about peace and
relaunching the economy. We must do our utmost to
assist the Government of the Sudan in succeeding in
these two areas.
The President of France assured Mr. Hamdok, who
visited France at the end of last month, that we stand
determined to support the Sudan at this critical juncture
of its history. France will therefore provide economic
support of €60 million for the transition period. We also
wish to accelerate the tackling of Sudan’s external debt
and welcome the fact that the donors’ conference will
be held in France. Finally, it is vital that the Sudan be
removed from the list of State sponsors of terrorism.
We call upon all rebel groups to participate in the
discussions that began in Juba some three days ago,
on 14 October. It was in that spirit that we facilitated
a meeting between the Sudanese Prime Minister and
Abdul Wahid Al-Nur in Paris on 29 September.
Finally, we welcome the signing by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
authorities of the Sudan of an agreement paving the
way for the opening of several offices in the Sudan,
including in Darfur. This is a crucial step for the
strengthening of the rule of law in the Sudan, and we
support the efforts of the Sudanese authorities in the
promotion of human rights, access to justice and the
fight against impunity. We call on them in that respect
to start a new chapter in the relationship with the
International Criminal Court and to cooperate with its
Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda.
Against that backdrop, the second point I wish to
make today is that in order to better support the peace

S/PV. 8643

process in the Sudan, and, as my colleagues from
the United Kingdom and Germany have just noted,
we should not be hasty in withdrawing the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).
France takes note of the call made by the Sudanese
authorities to avoid creating a security vacuum in
Darfur during the peace negotiations. They also called
upon international partners to support the peace
process and the implementation of the agreement. In
that context, we believe that the recommendation of the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission to maintain the same ceiling of
UNAMID personnel for a period of six months is
entirely justified. The drawdown of UNAMID right
in the middle of negotiations would risks derailing the
peace process.
We also support the recommendation to reframe
the UNAMID mandate in support of the peace process
and State liaison functions. However, the protection of
civilians and support for the delivery of humanitarian
aid must also remain mission priorities for UNAMID
right up to the end of its mandate.
My third and final point concerns our support for
the creation of an ambitious follow-on mechanism in
the wake of UNAMID’s departure. We must continue
to support and consolidate peace in Darfur after the
departure of the Blue Helmets, as we have done in other
countries. We understand that the Sudanese authorities
need more time to determine their expectations
concerning such a follow-on mechanism and hope
that the tripartite structure will be able to make more
specific recommendations to the Security Council in
December, as has been announced.
We also welcome the recommendations of the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission concerning the United NationsAfrican Union political strategy in the Sudan. We,
too, believe that the United Nations and the African
Union should support the negotiation process and the
implementation of the agreement, particularly the
security arrangements and the quest for safe, dignified
and sustainable solutions for displaced persons
and refugees.
Finally, the support of the United Nations and the
African Union for the drafting of a new constitution and
in the preparations for elections will be very important.

19-321537/17

S/PV.8643

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing.
We commend the people of the Sudan for their
continued efforts to seek political solutions to their
governance challenges and for putting in place a
civilian-led transitional Government. This is not easy
work, but it is the right work. We also recognize the
important role that the United Nations, the African
Union, Ethiopia and other international partners have
played in supporting a stable transition in the Sudan.
The recent transitional agreement provides a
foundation for civilian and democratic rule in a clear
path to timely elections. These commitments are all to
the good, and we hope that they will be fully honoured.
Additionally, we welcome Prime Minister Hamdok’s
focus on including women in all structures of power
in the new Government. We encourage the Prime
Minister to ensure the full, effective and meaningful
participation of women during all stages of the Sudan’s
political transition. We are also encouraged by the
establishment of an independent national committee to
conduct a thorough investigation into the violent 3 June
crackdown on peaceful protesters in Khartoum.
However, despite the hope that the international
community has for the transitional Government, we
are deeply concerned by accounts in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2019/816) of increased criminality,
internal displacement and kidnappings, including of
non-governmental organization workers in Darfur.
These incidents disrupt progress toward peace and
diminish hope among the Sudanese people that they
might be able to go about their daily lives without fear.
We were especially disheartened to read in the
report of continued violations against children. The
report mentions 84 children who were affected by
“grave violations” in just four months, of whom 35
were killed and/or maimed. This is deplorable. As we
all know, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) plays a critical role in
verifying these kinds of human rights abuses in Darfur.
So if these atrocities occur with UNAMID present,
what will happen when it is gone?
That is why, given UNAMID’s impending mandate
expiration, at the end of October, it is of such great
importance that the transitional Government quickly
inform the Secretary-General of its priorities for the
mandate’s extension. It is also of great importance that
Government forces stop using UNAMID team sites.
8/17

17/10/2019

We strongly urge the Rapid Support Forces to turn
over all previous UNAMID team sites to communitybased institutions.
Furthermore,
after
reading
the
report,
my Government even more strongly urges the
incorporation of gender-sensitive conflict-analysis and
conflict-mitigation approaches in the peace process,
the UNAMID mission and any potential followon mechanism.
Finally, we call on all parties to ensure unhindered
humanitarian access to vulnerable populations as well
as respect for international humanitarian law. We
encourage the transitional Government to work with
United Nations partners, humanitarian actors and
affected communities to devise durable solutions for
displaced Sudanese.
Although we are concerned that it has not been
strictly adhered to, there is a viable path to lasting peace
in the Sudan. So long as all parties remain committed
to doing the right thing, we are hopeful that they can
arrive at a safer, better destination.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his very
informative briefing, and I welcome the presence of the
Ambassador of the Sudan here today.
At the outset, I would like to commend the
Sudanese transitional authorities’ ongoing efforts and
commitment to addressing the multiple challenges
facing the country. We continue to believe that the
political changes in the Sudan provide a unique and
historic opportunity to implement a real and inclusive
transition under a civilian leadership and to address the
Sudanese people’s aspirations to peace and prosperity.
We see that the new political dynamic in the Sudan is
already bringing momentum back to the peace process in
Darfur. In that context, we welcomed the signing of the
Juba Declaration for Confidence-building Procedures
and the Preparation for Negotiation, which creates the
necessary framework for addressing the remaining
drivers of conflict in Darfur, and we commend the
leadership role that the transitional authorities have
taken in reaching out to all the armed groups. We
call on all the Darfuri armed opposition groups and
movements to engage in the negotiations with the new
Sudanese authorities and seize the opportunity to take
part in bringing positive change and comprehensive
peace to Darfur.
19-32153

17/10/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Despite those positive developments, many
challenges still remain in Darfur. The humanitarian and
human rights situations continue to be of concern with
regard to the obstruction of the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to internally displaced persons and the
persistence of violence against civilians, including
sexual violence. The security situation remains stable
yet vulnerable, with incidents between the security
forces, armed movements and civilians, intercommunal
tensions and rising levels of criminality. Due to the lack
of effective State institutions and good governance, the
perpetrators of crimes and violations enjoy impunity.
The situation in Darfur is closely linked to the ongoing
political process in the Sudan. For that reason, as we
approach the renewal of the mandate of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), it is imperative that in our reflections on
the mission’s future we take into account developments
in the nationwide political process as well as the peace
process in Darfur.
Poland looks forward to discussions on the new
draft resolution. We are willing to consider the options
on UNAMID’s way forward suggested in the latest
special report of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Secretary-General of the United
Nations (S/2019/816), while making sure that the new
mandate will allow the mission to support the peace
process and the implementation of the peace agreement
that is expected to be signed by the end of the year.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing. We also welcome the presence here today of
the Permanent Representative of the Sudan.
At present, the situation in Darfur is generally
stable, and the improvement on the humanitarian front
continues. Thanks to the good offices of President
Kiir of South Sudan, the transitional Government of
the Sudan and the Sudan Revolutionary Front, along
with other groups, launched formal negotiations
on 14 October with a view to reaching a final peace
agreement by 14 December. China welcomes those
efforts and commends South Sudan for its active role
and the Sudan for its efforts to relaunch the peace
process. The current progress is the hard-won result
of the efforts of all parties. The African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) has
been performing its duties actively and effectively. The
African Union and other regional and international
partners have fully cooperated, thereby contributing to

S/PV. 8643

the continued improvement of the situation in Darfur.
The international community must further increase
its efforts in Darfur, consolidate the results achieved
so far and facilitate the reconstruction process. The
peace process must be relaunched without delay. The
relevant parties in Darfur must seize this window of
opportunity in the political process in the Sudan,
relaunch the peace process as soon as possible and use
dialogue, consultations and other political means to
resolve disputes and differences, while refraining from
military action, with a view to achieving lasting peace
in Darfur.
The reconstruction process must be speeded up.
The international community must provide effective
humanitarian and economic assistance, help to resolve
issues such as the return and resettlement of displaced
people and assist the Sudanese Government in achieving
self-reliance in its economic development as soon as
possible. The Sudanese Government must be supported
in bearing the primary responsibility for security in
Darfur. The international community can actively
assist it by bolstering its capacity in security and
governance and by supporting UNAMID’s scheduled
withdrawal, in accordance with the relevant Council
resolutions, and the appropriate and smooth transfer
of responsibility for Darfur’s security to the Sudanese
security forces.
China has consistently supported the peace process
in Darfur. As a major contributor of troops to UNAMID,
we have made an enormous contribution to peace and
stability in Darfur over the years. China stands ready to
work with the international community and to continue
its constructive role in achieving peace, stability and
development in Darfur.
Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General JeanPierre Lacroix for the information he has provided
on the state of affairs in Darfur and the activities of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) in the region. We welcome the
presence of the Permanent Representative of the Sudan
at today’s briefing.
We agree with the conclusions of the special report
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and the Secretary-General (S/2019/816) that the
direction of events in Darfur has not significantly
changed and, most importantly, that no negative trends
have emerged on the security front. The isolated

19-321539/17

S/PV.8643

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

clashes in Jebel Marra between Government forces and
the Sudan Liberation Movement/Abdul Wahid, which
continues to be the main spoiler of the peace process,
does not change that assessment.
We also see some normalization on the humanitarian
front, while the overall evolution of the situation in the
areas that the Blue Helmets have already left gives no
grounds for concern. We therefore believe it is essential
to stay the course for the phased drawdown and
withdrawal of UNAMID in accordance with the time
frame established in resolution 2429 (2018). We hope
that the dialogue with the Sudanese authorities will help
to create the appropriate conditions and determine the
parameters for the subsequent United Nations presence
in Darfur.
The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation, which was deployed 12 years ago, made it
possible to tackle an acute phase of the crisis, and an
analysis of its activities will be extremely important for
future peacekeeping operations. However, the challenges
now facing Darfur are of a peacebuilding rather than
a peacekeeping nature. The time has come to focus
on Darfur’s restoration and economic development,
and that is what should be the priority now. We want
to point out that this was the unifying thread running
through the statements made during the 27 September
high-level event on Sudan held on the margins of the
general debate of the General Assembly at its seventy
fourth session. In addition to this, many speakers called
for lifting all the sanctions on Khartoum. That would
go a long way to simplifying the new authorities’ job of
reviving the country’s economy. That appeal, which we
support, is also in the special report.
In conclusion, we would like to underscore that
we assume that the opinion of the Government in
Khartoum, as the host party, should be decisive in
every case, in accordance with the basic principles
of peacekeeping. Moreover, given the complicated
domestic political situation in the country, we call for
understanding regarding possible delays in the Sudan’s
response to issues related to agreeing on the parameters
of the mission that will succeed UNAMID.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jean Pierre Lacroix for his thorough briefing.
I also wish to join my colleagues in welcoming the
presence of the Permanent Representative of the Sudan
here among us today.
10/17

17/10/2019

Recent months have been marked by positive and
historic developments in the Sudan. The Sudanese
people, particularly women and young people, have
achieved unprecedented changes by demanding a
peaceful, democratic and prosperous future. Belgium
wishes the new Sudanese authorities every success in
the crucial tasks that they will have to undertake, as
set out in the Constitutional Declaration of 17 August.
We welcome the priorities outlined/identified by Prime
Minister Abdalla Adam Hamdok during his statement
here in New York during the high-level week of the
General Assembly (see A/74/PV.10). We particularly
welcome the commitments to respect for the human
rights and fundamental freedoms of the Sudanese
people. In that context, we welcome the agreement
signed by the authorities on establishing an office of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights in the Sudan. We encourage the
authorities to fully implement that agreement as soon
as possible.
Belgium applauds the crucial mediation role played
by the African Union and the region, particularly during
the recent meetings in Juba, and the support provided by
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
United Nations and the entire international community.
We encourage all those actors to continue to support
the Sudan.
We have an unprecedented opportunity to build a
lasting peace in Darfur. As mentioned by the UnderSecretary-General, Darfur remains a fragile region,
where the root causes of the conflict, in particular
access to land and the future of the displaced, have not
yet been resolved. We fully support the first priority of
the Sudanese authorities to bring an end to the existing
conflicts and to restore peace within the first six months
of the transition. In that context, the Juba Declaration
of 11 September represents a significant milestone. We
call on all parties, in particular the armed movements,
to engage in constructive negotiations. This moment
represents a unique opportunity to put an end to the
many conflicts that have been tearing the country apart
for too long.
With regard to Darfur, the conflict has had many
humanitarian consequences. Civilians continue to
suffer in clashes in Jebel Marra. The protection of
civilians, including free and unhindered humanitarian
access, must be ensured. I would also like to stress the
importance of the fight against impunity in responding
to violations against children and women.
19-32153

17/10/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Finally, the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) will
be reviewed by the Council again before the end of
the month. For Belgium, the UNAMID exit process
cannot be separated from developments in the rest of
the country. In that regard, we noted with interest the
conclusions and recommendations contained in the joint
United Nations-African Union report (S/2019/816) on
the common political strategy for Darfur. A six-month
renewal of UNAMID’s mandate is required, without
reducing its military and civilian personnel. With
regard to the specific conditions for the transition and
for a follow-up mechanism, Belgium calls for patience.
Our country welcomes the establishment of the African
Union-United Nations-Sudan joint task force, which
will consider it and whose recommendations may
enable the Council to take a more informed decision in
the coming months.
The Sudan is experiencing a historic moment as a
result of the courage and aspiration for freedom, peace
and justice of its people. Significant challenges to
sustainable peace remain. The Council must continue
to support the country as it continues its transition.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): As always, we would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix for his presentation of the
special report (S/2019/816) of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission on the current situation
in Darfur and the future of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). I am
delivering this statement on behalf of the three African
countries on the Security Council: Côte d’Ivoire, South
Africa and Equatorial Guinea.
We appreciate the ongoing assurances and specific
measures by the Sudanese transitional authorities,
led by Prime Minister Abdalla Hamdok, with regard
to implementing the Constitutional Declaration of
17 August and the agreement governing the 39-month
transition period, which will help to bring about a
just and comprehensive peace in the Sudan. To that
end, we are convinced that the commitments to the
confidence-building measures contained in the Juba
Declaration represent the appropriate road map for
achieving that goal.
The profound changes that we have seen in the
country over the past year were achieved by paying
a high price in terms of human lives. The sacrifices

S/PV. 8643

made by many have brought about a historic window
of opportunity to put the Sudanese on the path towards
a lasting peace that will enable the country to develop
and prosper by achieving the vision of a new Sudan that
is in line with the pan-African aspirations enshrined in
the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative.
The ongoing and constructive engagement of
the international community is essential during and
after this transition period. We reiterate the call on
the relevant parties to immediately lift all economic
and financial sanctions against the Sudan, including
its removal from the list of countries sponsoring
terrorism, in order to promote its economic activities
and encourage foreign investment.
Like the Sudan itself, UNAMID has also reached a
critical moment in its history. Over the years, there have
been many initiatives by the international community
to protect and ease the suffering of the local population
since the widespread atrocities in Darfur began in 2004.
To date, none of those plans has succeeded in bringing
about peace. Yet now that UNAMID is preparing to
leave and hand over the responsibility for ensuring the
protection of civilians to the Sudanese authorities, we
are closer than ever to restoring an acceptable standard
of living in the region.
In considering this transition from a peacekeeping
to a peacebuilding approach, decisions with farreaching implications must be taken. Darfur does not
exist in a vacuum. For that reason, when it comes to
taking decisions, we must always bear in mind all
stakeholders and issues that determine the context in
which UNAMID operates. The main concern of the
three African countries in that regard is shared by all,
namely, that the course of action adopted should not
jeopardize or reverse the progress that has already been
made in Darfur.
The three African countries welcome the
proposed joint African Union-United Nations followon mechanism to UNAMID. We look forward to a
responsible withdrawal of the hybrid presence in
Darfur and the ultimate end of the mission, including
the handover of facilities, in line with resolution 2429
(2018). In that regard, we commend the realignment
of the Sudanese authorities in relation to the future of
UNAMID and the use of its facilities. The capacity of
the Sudanese State and of the transitional Government
to extend its authority over the entire territory is very

19-3215311/17

S/PV.8643

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

limited. Appropriate conditions must therefore be
created before the closure of the mission.
We hereby wish to request that any measures
mandated by the Council in relation to the drawdown,
withdrawal and exit of UNAMID take into account
the regional situation, the aspirations of the Sudanese
people and the views of the authorities, particularly
regarding the time of the closure.
As the report under consideration makes clear, the
security situation in the Darfur region is fragile and
volatile. There is a high risk of intercommunal violence,
violent disputes and increased crime and illicit activity
in a context where the humanitarian situation is already
desperate owing to forced displacement and ongoing
human rights violations, including conflict-related
sexual violence.
To put it clearly and unequivocally, there can be no
place for spoilers in the Sudanese peace process. Anyone
who refuses to commit to an inclusive dialogue designed
to reach a permanent and peaceful solution gives up all
claims to legitimacy, and we should therefore consider
punitive measures for those who obstruct the peace
process. Côte d’Ivoire, South Africa and my country,
Equatorial Guinea, affirm their condemnation of the
Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid militia and urge
Council members and the international community to
do the same.

17/10/2019

I
will
focus
today
on
three
main
points — the upcoming renewal of the mandate of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), the mission’s exit and national
ownership. Regarding the mandate renewal, we
emphasize once again our willingness to work with our
colleagues inside and outside the Security Council to
ensure that UNAMID’s upcoming mandate is adapted
to the developments on the ground. First, it must be
clear and concise in stressing that the mission will
definitely end. Secondly, it should align with the wishes
and capacities of the Sudan as the host country. Thirdly,
it should be precise regarding the mandate itself and the
various areas of the mission’s work, such as capacitybuilding, enhancing the rule of law, human rights and
strengthening national ownership. Fourthly, it must
promote a smooth transition process by consolidating
cooperation and coordination with the United Nations
country team in Darfur. Fifthly, it should pave the way
for the post-exit phase.

In conclusion, we reiterate our appreciation for
the great work that UNAMID has done over the years
to stabilize the situation in the Sudan. We also thank
all United Nations and African Union staff and the
Member States and international stakeholders that have
helped to make this possible. We believe that the work
done by the hybrid mission and the transition itself in
the Sudan exemplify the fact that when the relevant
actors’ efforts are concerted and genuine, significant
results can be achieved on the ground. We stand ready
to engage constructively with all the parties on the
future of UNAMID and the peace process in the Sudan.

At a previous Council meeting, we invited the armed
groups to participate in a dialogue. We are pleased to
note today that most of them did take part in the Juba
dialogue in good faith and without preconditions, with
a view to reaching a political solution and enhancing
peace in Darfur and the whole of the Sudan. With
regard to UNAMID’s exit, the Juba dialogue creates
a new opportunity for a comprehensive peace in the
Sudan, especially in the Darfur, South Kordofan and
Blue Nile regions. For that reason, the withdrawal
should take account of opportunities for dialogue and
agreements reached among the Sudanese parties. We
will continue to follow the developments in Darfur
after the mission’s exit, especially with regard to issues
related to the voluntary, safe and dignified return of
displaced persons, land and the effects of climate change
on sustainable development. We must appreciate all the
sacrifices that have been made during the years that
the mission has been deployed, and above all the lives
that have been sacrificed in order to achieve peace and
protect civilians. We hope that the future of Darfur and
its people can be fully assured.

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank Mr. Lacroix for his
briefing. The current delicate phase in the Sudan’s
history requires a concerted effort to respond to the
aspirations of our brothers and sisters in that country
to a bright future. We hope that our deliberations today
will serve their interests.

With regard to national ownership, we thank the
brother country of the Sudan for its cooperation and
look forward to seeing that continue for the remainder
of the mission’s existence, whatever its exit path may
be. The Sudan’s views must be considered at every stage
in order to consolidate national ownership, support the
country’s capacities, meet the aspirations of its people

12/17

19-32153

17/10/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and ensure sovereignty. A comprehensive peace is
possible if we work and agree together before we ask
the Sudanese to do so. It will be easy to achieve peace
if all Sudanese of different visions remain determined
to build their nation, as we have witnessed in their
historic consensus on the political agreement and the
Constitutional Declaration.
In conclusion, we reiterate our firm position
in support of the unity, sovereignty, stability and
territorial integrity of the Sudan. The new Sudan needs
all of our support, and the first thing we can do is to
lift the sanctions on it and remove its name from the
list of State sponsors of terrorism, as well as by ending
the international sanctions whose review we have
called for since last year. Then we will be talking about
supporting the Sudan in both word and deed.
Ms. Morrison González (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Lacroix for the
information he provided and acknowledge the presence
of the Permanent Representative of the Sudan in the
Chamber with us today.
We would first like to acknowledge the efforts
of the transitional Government of the Sudan and the
Forces for Freedom and Change for the commitment
they have obtained to addressing the challenges facing
the country. In that regard, we welcome the peace
talks between the Sudanese Government and various
armed movements in Juba, as well as the agreement
among five factions of the armed movements to form
a Sudanese alliance for change and the signing of the
Juba Declaration for Confidence-building Procedures
and the Preparation for Negotiation. Those initiatives
for continued dialogue among the parties on core
issues are crucial to building trust and developing
strategies to address the root causes of the conflict.
We urge the parties to negotiate in good faith, maintain
momentum and make the necessary compromises in
order to restore the confidence of the Sudanese people
in their authorities.
However, those political achievements should not
detract from the reality of the crisis in the Sudan. Darfur
continues to be plagued by unresolved intercommunal
conflict and a serious humanitarian situation, with
nearly 2 million people facing food insecurity and
approximately 55 per cent of its arable land affected
by drought. We are also concerned about the ongoing
violations of human rights, mainly against children
and women. Above all, we are alarmed by the acts of

S/PV. 8643

conflict-related sexual violence. It is imperative that the
judicial system be strengthened and perpetrators held
accountable. In that regard, we welcome the opening
of human rights offices in six cities in the Sudan and
the appointment of Ms. Nemat Abdallah Khair as the
first woman Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. These
developments are vital elements in the promotion of
the rule of law, the administration of justice and the
empowerment of women. Women’s voices must be heard,
and women deserve to play an active role in the peace
process. In a sign of what the future could look like,
Sudan’s new Cabinet also includes the country’s first
female Foreign Minister, Ms. Asma Mohamed Abdalla.
Similarly, the achievement of 40 per cent representation
of women in the legislature and the establishment of
national advisory committees on women and youth at
all levels give us hope.
The situation in Darfur is linked to the political
process currently under way in the country. For that
reason, it is vital that the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur exit process be considered
in the context of those developments and that any postexit presence be equipped with the capacity to monitor
the ceasefire as well as disarmament and demobilization.
Finally, we would like to express our gratitude
to the UNAMID personnel, through the Special
Representative, and to all international stakeholders
and humanitarian personnel for their continued efforts
for the benefit of the Sudanese people.
Mr. Soemirat (Indonesia): Let me begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing. We also thank the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for their
special report on the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2019/816),
as requested by resolution 2479 (2019).
We have witnessed some encouraging developments
since the Council last deliberated on the Sudan
(see S/PV.8603), including the signing of the Juba
Declaration between the transitional authorities and
the coalition of armed groups, the agreement to open a
United Nations human rights office in the Sudan and the
commencement of peace talks in Juba a few days ago.
In order for the peace talks to move forward, all parties
must restrain themselves and refrain from actions that
could undermine trust among them. Inclusive dialogue
is the key to resolving any differences, and for that, the
cessation of hostilities is a must.

19-3215313/17

S/PV.8643

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I wish to focus on three important issues. First,
we have consistently underlined the importance of
the responsible drawdown of UNAMID, guided by
a careful assessment of the situation on the ground,
including on whether the current challenges still
require UNAMID’s continued presence. The drawdown
of UNAMID must be done in a manner that preserves
its gains and does not create a security vacuum. My
delegation values the role of State liaison functions in
enabling UNAMID, the United Nations country team
and the Sudanese authorities to together address critical
conflict drivers in Darfur through joint programmatic
activities. Focusing the future mandate of UNAMID on
supporting and strengthening the State liaison functions
is something that the Council should positively consider.
We take note of the options presented in the special
report regarding the appropriate pace of UNAMID’s
drawdown and stand ready to discuss them with other
Council members in a constructive manner.
That brings me to the second issue — the followon mechanism. My delegation cannot overemphasize
the imperative of ample, timely and meaningful
consultations with the Sudanese authorities in
developing a follow-up mechanism for UNAMID.
National ownership and support is a precondition
for the implementation of a successful follow-up
mechanism. The United Nations and the African Union
must leverage their full strength, including the various
tools at their disposal, and harmonize the work of
existing initiatives.
The third issue we would like to highlight relates
to international support. We must not lose sight of the
fact that efforts to promote peace in the Sudan are
taking place against a backdrop of persistent economic
difficulties and a dire humanitarian situation. As a
brotherly nation of the Sudan, Indonesia is heartened
to see the outpouring of international support for the
country, including during the General Assembly’s
high-level event on the Sudan last month. For current
political gains to be sustainable, the Sudan needs
mobilized financial assistance, investment and trade.
We also call for the removal of the Sudan from the
list of State sponsors of terrorism and the lifting of
unilateral economic sanctions against the country,
as we emphasized during the high-level event last
month. The international community should do more
to alleviate the humanitarian suffering of the Sudanese
people, including internally displaced persons and
those affected by food insecurity and the recent floods.
14/17

17/10/2019

A peace process is never an easy venture. It is a
long and arduous journey that requires the utmost
care, political will, compromise and constant support.
Indonesia stands ready to accompany the Sudan on this
historic journey.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the timely convening of this meeting and the
valuable briefing delivered by Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations.
Peru welcomes the recent political developments
that have been taking place in the Sudan. We hope
that the recent political agreements reached — such
as the agreement of 17 August on the establishment
of a new civilian-led transitional Government, the
Constitutional Declaration and the Juba Declaration for
Confidence-building Procedures and the Preparation
for Negotiation of 11 September — mark the beginning
of a new era of peace in the history of the Sudan. We
believe that for peace to be possible, the commitment
of all Sudanese people will be necessary. In this regard,
we value the efforts of the Sovereign Council and the
Government aimed at bringing all armed groups that
are not yet participating in the negotiations to the
negotiating table. We wish to emphasize that until an
inclusive agreement is reached, it will be very difficult
to transition towards peace and the achievements made
to date will not last long.
We are concerned about the security situation in
Darfur. We note an increase in the levels of crime,
particularly in internally displaced persons camps, the
destruction of farmland and the illegal occupation of
land, as a result of security gaps and the lack of effective
civil authorities in Darfur. We regret that the violence in
the Jebel Marra area continues to represent a challenge
for the Government. The Sudan Liberation ArmyAbdul Wahid faction (SLA-AW) continues to count
civilians among its victims, including personnel from
non-governmental organizations and humanitarian
organizations. In the same vein, the special report
(S/2019/816) indicates that, in general, the humanitarian
and human rights situation has not changed in the period
since the previous report. Intercommunal violence and
clashes between the Government and the SLA/AW have
caused numerous displacements and led to subsequent
humanitarian repercussions.
We condemn the recurring violations and abuses
of human rights. Incidents of sexual violence continue
unabated against women and children, who are not safe
19-32153

17/10/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

from these horrific actions, even within the camps for
internally displaced persons. In this context, we wish to
stress the importance of the agreement to open a United
Nations human rights office in the Sudan, and we hope
that its operationalization will succeed in curbing the
human rights violations taking place in Darfur.
We commend the joint work being carried out by
the United Nations and the African Union with the
Sudanese authorities. The peace process in the Sudan
will require the support of both organizations, as well
as of the international community as a whole, in order
to ensure that the people of the Sudan can address the
root causes of the conflict and achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals. We support the prioritization
of gender equality, the empowerment of women
and youth as well as respect for human rights in the
plans to carry out a peace process in the Sudan. We
believe that the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) could contribute to
this process through a renewed mandate that is tailored
to current circumstances.
We wish to highlight the responsibility of the
Security Council in ensuring a successful drawdown
of UNAMID that does not create a vacuum leading to
tensions or new risk factors and that does not jeopardize
the achievements made in the areas of protection,
the rule of law, human rights and the realization of
lasting solutions for internally displaced persons and
communities throughout Darfur.
Finally, we encourage the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
United Nations and international partners to provide
the necessary support to the transitional Government
of the Sudan in this vital phase for the country’s future,
as well as to continue to pool efforts so that the Sudan
may achieve peace and reconciliation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Siddig (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
I thank the Secretary-General and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for their special
report (S/2019/816), which is before the Council today.
I also thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing
and members of the Council for their statements and
kind words addressed to my country and Government.
Their words will encourage us to work towards the

S/PV. 8643

achievement of our objectives and to fulfil the vision
that motivated our glorious revolution.
We have examined the report before the Council
today. We agree with much of its analysis on the
history and nature of the conflict in Darfur in all its
aspects, including the political, security, economic
and social aspects. It can be said that the period under
review in the report has seen a great transformation
in my country, with the adoption of the Constitutional
Declaration and the establishment of such civilian
institutions as the Sovereign Council and the transitional
Government. This transformation is a new start for
the Sudan after the glorious December revolution and
a major step towards fulfilling the aspirations of the
proud Sudanese people for a democratic, free, just and
peaceful Sudan.
The transitional Government has committed to
addressing a number of priorities during the transitional
period, which will end in December 2022. At the top of
these priorities is the achievement of a comprehensive
peace across the Sudan. Meetings have already begun
between the representatives of the Government and
the armed movements with a view to reaching an
agreement on comprehensive peace. The Government
of sisterly South Sudan has played a key role in
launching the negotiations and hosted the first meeting
on 11 September, which led to the signing of the Juba
Declaration for Confidence-building Procedures and
the Preparation for Negotiation. Negotiations began
on 14 October in the capital of South Sudan and
were attended by Lieutenant General Abdel-Fattah
Al-Burhan, President of the Sovereign Council, the
Vice-President and a number of other members of
the Sovereign Council, leaders from countries of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and all
the signatories of the Juba Declaration. We hope to
reach an agreement that will herald a new era of peace
in the Sudan.
In our pursuit of comprehensive peace, on
30 September, in Paris, our Prime Minister, Mr. Abdalla
Hamdok, met the leader of the Sudan Liberation ArmyAbdul Wahid faction, Mr. Abdul Wahid Al-Nour.
We wish to emphasize the importance of convincing
Mr. Al-Nour to take part in the current negotiations. We
call on countries with influence to take every possible
measure to persuade him that dialogue and negotiations
are the only path to getting demands met.

19-3215315/17

S/PV.8643

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

17/10/2019

We strongly condemn the flagrant violations
committed against children in areas in the Jebel Marra
controlled by Mr. Al-Nour, which, as detailed in the
special report, have been perpetrated by his forces.
The representative of the United States has also made
reference to these violations.

Secondly, to assist the Government in addressing
the economic situation, the economic sanctions need to
be lifted, and the Sudan needs to be removed from the
list of State sponsors of terrorism. It is important to
note that the Sudanese people have never taken part in
any terrorist acts.

The special report details a number of options
relating to the future of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
We hope that any decision taken by the Council will
contribute to peace and stability in Darfur and pave
the way towards a transition to peacebuilding and
the strengthening of stability in Darfur. As Council
members are aware, the situation in Darfur today
should not be seen through the lens of Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations, as it is no longer a
matter of peacekeeping, but rather of peacebuilding,
stability and development. Further, in order to enable
law-enforcement agencies in Darfur to do their jobs,
the Council must consider the recommendation set
forth in paragraph 49 of the report, namely, to lift the
sanctions imposed under resolution 1591 (2005).

Thirdly, for the rule of law to take hold, there must
be international support for our efforts to build the
capacity of competent national institutions.

We agree with paragraphs 38 and 39 of the joint
report, on the objectives and scope of the priorities
of the Government of the Sudan towards achieving
comprehensive peace not just in Darfur, but throughout
the country. The current negotiations in Juba will
address the root causes of the conflict in the Sudan in
order to end the era of infighting that has lasted too
long in the country. Efforts to achieve comprehensive
and lasting peace in the Sudan will be guided by the
Constitutional Declaration of 17 August and the Juba
Declaration of 11 September. Achieving peace entails
commitments and obligations, as well as international
and regional support. The peace process, which is set to
be implemented by the end of this year, requires, above
all, security arrangements, ceasefire monitoring, the
end of hostilities and urgent humanitarian assistance.
In order to ensure a seamless and effective
transition, there must be national ownership of any effort
requiring the assistance of the United Nations, whether
in Darfur or any other conflict area. Accordingly, the
following priority areas, all of which require United
Nations assistance, will be the subject of our focus.
First, the transitional Government’s efforts aimed
at achieving comprehensive peace are essential and
need the Organization’s support.
16/17

Fourthly, the human rights situation needs to be
improved. In this regard, I would like to recall that
last month the Sudan signed an agreement to establish
a full-fledged Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights in the Sudan, to which we pledge our
full support.
Fifthly, support will be needed for sustainable
solutions and quick-impact projects.
Sixthly, the transitional Government requires
assistance in its efforts aimed at addressing the situation
of internally displaced persons and in disarming,
demobilizing and reintegrating former combatants, as
well as in issues related to land, transitional justice and
other aspects of peacebuilding.
The Sudan of today is totally unlike the Sudan
the Security Council has come to know over the past
three decades. It is a new country that seeks to join the
international community as a peace-loving member
that seeks international cooperation, is committed to
international law and respects the basic rights of its
citizens. As a first step in that direction, my Government
has focused on women by appointing the first woman
Chief Justice in the history of the Sudan and in the
history of the region. We have also appointed a woman
Foreign Minister for the first time in our history. The
Government has shown its respect for religious and
gender diversity by appointing a Christian woman
to the Sovereign Council and four women Ministers.
The number of women in the transitional legislative
assembly will soon exceed 40 per cent; the women of
the Sudan deserve this, and more.
Behind me today sit four young Sudanese women,
who are among the six female diplomats who have
joined the Sudanese delegation to the United Nations.
Sudanese women have contributed significantly to the
transition that has led to these changes. In the period
following the conclusion of the peace process, the
United Nations must appoint skilled and experienced
19-32153

17/10/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

people to lead various United Nations agencies in
the Sudan in working in close coordination with the
Government of the Sudan, in line with the plans and
projects of our Government and its priorities.
In conclusion, we applaud the unwavering and
ongoing integrated efforts to bring a definitive end
to all manifestations of conflict in my country so that
the peace and development process in the Sudan may
be completed. The Sudanese delegation wishes once
again to express its gratitude to the Security Council,
the Secretary-General, the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission and UNAMID. We commend the

S/PV. 8643

sacrifices made by peacekeepers over the years and
thank the troop- and police-contributing countries.
Finally, we reiterate the Sudan’s readiness to cooperate
with all regional and international partners to resolve
all UNAMID-related issues until the mission’s full and
final withdrawal.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

19-3215317/17
