United Nations

A/RES/56/205

General Assembly

Distr.: General
26 February 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 102

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/56/565)]

56/205. Special session of the General Assembly for an overall
review and appraisal of the implementation of the
outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements (Habitat II)
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Habitat Agenda 1 and the Istanbul Declaration on Human
Settlements 2 adopted in Istanbul in 1996,
Recalling also the report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the
twenty-fifth special session of the General Assembly, on an overall review and
appraisal of the implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on
Human Settlements (Habitat II), held in New York from 6 to 8 June 2001, 3
Stressing the importance of the Declaration on Cities and Other Human
Settlements in the New Millennium, 4 which was adopted by the General Assembly
at its twenty-fifth special session,
Recognizing the need for renewed political will and for the mobilization and
allocation of new and additional resources at the national and international levels in
order to achieve full and accelerated implementation of the Habitat Agenda and the
Declaration on Cities and Other Human Settlements in the New Millennium,
Reiterating that strengthened international cooperation is an essential element
for the effective implementation of the Habitat Agenda and the Declaration on Cities
and Other Human Settlements in the New Millennium,

_______________
1

Report of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), Istanbul, 3–14 June 1996
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.97.IV.6), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
2
Ibid., annex I.
3
Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth Special Session, Supplement No. 3
(A/S-25/7/Rev.1).
4
See resolution S-25/2, annex.

01 49321

A/RES/56/205

Recalling the goal contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration 5 of
achieving a significant improvement in the lives of at least 100 million slum
dwellers by the year 2020, as proposed in the “Cities without Slums” initiative,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 6

2.
Reaffirms the importance of the full implementation of all the
commitments undertaken in the Habitat Agenda;1
3.
Emphasizes the importance, at all levels of policy-making and in the
context of sustainable development, of giving high priority to the implementation of
the Habitat Agenda and the Declaration on Cities and Other Human Settlements in
the New Millennium, 4 including achieving the goals of adequate shelter for all and
sustainable human settlements development in an urbanizing world, particularly in
developing countries;
4.
Recognizes that the overall thrust of the new strategic vision of the
United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) 7 and its emphasis on
the two global campaigns on secure tenure and urban governance are strategic
points of entry for the effective implementation of the Habitat Agenda, especially
for guiding international cooperation in respect of adequate shelter for all and
sustainable human settlements development;
5.
Recognizes also that Governments have the primary responsibility for the
implementation of the Habitat Agenda and the Declaration on Cities and Other
Human Settlements in the New Millennium, and stresses that the international
community should fully implement its commitments to support Governments of
developing countries and countries with economies in transition in their efforts, by
providing the requisite means of implementation and through the creation of an
international enabling environment;
6.
Requests the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, including the
specialized agencies, programmes, funds and regional commissions, as well as the
World Bank and regional development banks, consistent with their respective
mandates, to support fully the effective implementation at all levels of the Habitat
Agenda and the Declaration on Cities and Other Human Settlements in the New
Millennium;
7.
Invites local authorities and other Habitat Agenda partners to contribute
to the implementation of the Habitat Agenda and the Declaration on Cities and
Other Human Settlements in the New Millennium, and encourages them to
participate, as appropriate, in the Urban Forum and the Advisory Committee of
Local Authorities, in their roles as advisory bodies to the Executive Director of the
United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), bearing in mind the
decisions of the Commission on Human Settlements on the establishment of those
two bodies;
8.
Urges the Executive Director of the Programme to assess the role and
funding of the regional programme activity centres of the Programme with a view to
providing improved technical cooperation services to Governments to implement

_______________
5

See resolution 55/2.
A/56/477.
7
Formerly known as the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) (see resolution 56/206
of 21 December 2001).
6

2

A/RES/56/205

the Habitat Agenda and the Declaration on Cities and Other Human Settlements in
the New Millennium at all levels;
9.
Invites Governments and the Habitat Agenda partners, including local
authorities, to facilitate the dissemination of the Declaration on Cities and Other
Human Settlements in the New Millennium;
10. Invites the Executive Director of the Programme to transmit the
outcomes of the relevant intergovernmental processes relating to sustainable human
settlements development to the preparatory processes of the International
Conference on Financing for Development and the World Summit on Sustainable
Development, bearing in mind the relevant decisions of the preparatory processes of
those two conferences;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-seventh session
an item entitled “Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference
on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and of the twenty-fifth special session of the
General Assembly”, and requests the Secretary-General to submit to the Assembly at
its fifty-seventh session a report on the implementation of the present resolution.
90th plenary meeting
21 December 2001

3
