United Nations

S/PV.6467

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6467th meeting
Friday, 14 January 2011, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Barbalić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bosnia and Herzegovina)

Members:

Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. Dunn

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2010/675)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-20690 (E)

*1120690*

S/PV.6467

as they may be, remain the basis for advancing the
peace process and must be consolidated.

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2010/675)
The President: I should like to welcome the
Prime Minister of the Transitional Federal Government
of Somalia, His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed, and the First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia, His
Excellency Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Omaar, and invite
them to take part in today’s meeting under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Mohamed to a seat at the Council table.
Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed, Prime
Minister of the Transitional Federal Government
of Somalia, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.
The President: Under rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite
Mr. Augustine Mahiga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/675, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mahiga.
Mr. Mahiga: I thank the Security Council for the
opportunity to introduce the Secretary-General’s report
on Somalia (S/2010/675). I will focus my statement on
developments since the issuance of the report. I take
this opportunity to welcome the presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina during this month. I welcome and
congratulate the new members of the Security Council:
South Africa, India, Portugal, Germany and Colombia.
Allow me also to thank the Council for having
adopted resolution 1964 (2010) on 22 December 2010,
which approved the expansion of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). In this final leg of the
transition, the gains of the Djibouti Agreement, modest

2

Last week, I travelled to Mogadishu, where I had
useful discussions with President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh
Ahmed and Prime Minister Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed, who is with us this morning. We discussed
the draft road map prepared by the Government for
ending the transition, which emphasizes good
governance, institution-building and the provision of
basic service to ensure its legitimacy. The draft road
map is being circulated for comments and refinement.
We look forward to its finalization.
Parliament has approved a budget for the first
time. A plan of action for the first 100 days for each of
the 18 ministries has also been prepared. Those are
unprecedented initiatives by the Government — no
previous Government has ever undertaken them. The
new Cabinet is also unique in other ways. It is lean and
technocratic and its members have distinguished
professional qualifications and experience.
During my discussion with President Sheikh
Sharif Sheikh Ahmed on 4 January, he reaffirmed his
commitment to the Djibouti Agreement, to moving
forward with the transition process and to
endeavouring, as much as possible, to accomplish the
priority tasks within the given timeframe. While
recognizing the importance of the constitution-making
process, President Ahmed is also of the view that the
process may not be sufficiently exhaustive or inclusive
owing to access and security limitations, especially in
the south-central part of the country. The President is
keen to ensure the participation of Somaliland,
Puntland, other areas of stability and the diaspora in
the constitutional consultative process.
The President recognizes the need to end the
transition and to engage in open and inclusive
discussions with all stakeholders, using the mechanism
of the high-level committee provided for in the
Djibouti Agreement, and in the newly reactivated
Coordination and Monitoring Committee. The United
Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS) has led
extensive consultations on the composition and
functions of those mechanisms and on ways to ensure
effective monitoring and support for the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG).
We have reached consensus that the high-level
committee will act essentially as a vehicle for SomaliSomali dialogue, with the participation, as appropriate,
11-20690

S/PV.6467

of some of the guarantors of the Djibouti Agreement.
The Coordination and Monitoring Committee will be
the platform for the TFG and all its partners to discuss
the implementation of the Djibouti Agreement and
transition issues. The discussions in the coming months
will focus on developing consensus on the transition
with all stakeholders and on the new political
arrangements after August 2011.
The constitution-making process has reached the
public consultation phase. In recognition of the critical
role that the Transitional Federal Parliament is
expected to play in the public consultations, the
Independent Federal Constitution Commission and
members of the Parliamentary Constitution Committee
held a workshop in Nairobi from 14 to 16 December
2010 to build awareness among members of Parliament
and to discuss ways in which Parliament could support
the consultations in the constitution-making process.
In the coming weeks, UNPOS will more
proactively
support
the
Transitional
Federal
Government and institutions, groups and entities that
are open to a constructive dialogue and peace. As set
forth in the UNPOS political strategy, we will
coordinate international efforts to help the Transitional
Federal Institutions create a political platform to allow
as many Somalis as possible to participate in the
ongoing constitutional initiative. That will provide the
country with a viable alternative to the current
transition.
In the meantime, stabilizing the security situation
in Mogadishu is the key to paving the way for the
expansion of political space by Government forces and
AMISOM beyond the capital. That will help the
Government to expand its outreach, deliver services
and create the political space required for the
engagement of other groups, starting with Mogadishu
and the adjacent Benadir region.
In that regard, the recent upsurge in violence by
insurgents to gain control of new territories and regain
areas under TFG control is a matter of concern. The
Government is seeking the assistance of the United
Nations and the international community in the
provision of basic social services in the areas under its
control and in other parts of the country. In that regard,
the expeditious implementation of resolution 1964
(2010) is essential to facilitating the implementation of
the political strategy and to addressing the
humanitarian challenges in Somalia.

11-20690

In recognition of that goal, the United Nations is
increasing its efforts to develop coherent and integrated
support to Somali institutions, including by
establishing a light footprint in some parts of Somalia.
Recent months have seen regular interactions between
UNPOS, the United Nations Support Office for the
African Union Mission in Somalia (UNSOA) and the
United Nations country team at both the senior and
working levels to ensure greater coherence and
coordination among United Nations entities.
As we move forward, conditions of service for
United Nations personnel in Somalia must be reviewed
and improved in order to attract staff members to serve
in this challenging and dangerous environment. I
intend to take up this matter with the relevant bodies of
the United Nations and would welcome the support of
Council members.
The increase in troop strength will provide
AMISOM with much-needed additional personnel to
fully implement the first phase of military operations
and gain full control of Mogadishu. UNSOA is
working closely with AMISOM to ensure that the
logistics package for the additional 4,000 troops is
made available once deployments begin.
However, as Council members are aware, critical
gaps remain in the United Nations support package to
AMISOM. In particular, the reimbursement of
contingent-owned equipment and self-sustainment
costs are not covered under the logistical support
package. It is essential for the success of the Mission
that these costs are fully covered from contributions by
Member States to the United Nations Trust Fund for
AMISOM. In addition, AMISOM faces significant
equipment shortfalls that limit its ability to achieve its
mandated tasks. African Union member States may
also require assistance in mobilizing the specialized
enabling units that are required for the Mission.
While commending Member States for the
bilateral support extended thus far to troopcontributing countries, I appeal for more assistance to
narrow equipment shortfalls, in addition to training and
further support for specialized enabling units.
I am also pleased to report that AMISOM has
become increasingly aware of the need to protect
civilians in conflict areas. AMISOM has also accepted
responsibility for investigating civilian casualties
caused by its troops.

3

S/PV.6467

The Government faces the daunting task of
building an army and other security organs in the midst
of a conflict. There is an immediate need to mentor and
establish a command and control structure by training a
capable officer corps. The continued lack of a
command structure affects troop discipline and morale.
Two countries in the region have offered to train both
commissioned and non-commissioned officers for
Somalia. I appeal to our partners to support those
offers. I thank all those who have contributed
bilaterally and through the Trust Fund to support
Somali security institutions, in particular the police,
which will be key to developing the sector.
In addition, the issue of receiving and
rehabilitating defectors requires immediate attention. I
encourage action by the Transitional Federal
Government to receive the growing number of fighters
who are defecting from the ranks of the insurgents. As
a matter of priority, we are still initiating and seeking
to coordinate an inter-agency response to the issue of
defectors from Al-Shabaab. I ask the international
community to support these efforts to weaken the
insurgents.
The unfolding situation of severe drought in
Somalia is cause for serious concern as the short rains
have failed in most parts of the country. Already,
2 million people are affected, and that number is
expected to rise as water supplies dwindle, livestock is
decimated and internal displacement escalates. To
support the drought-affected population, the United
Nations country team in Somalia released $4.5 million
from the Common Humanitarian Fund for emergency
response, focusing on water, sanitation, nutrition and
health, and called on all parties to facilitate
humanitarian access. A further $15 million from the
Central Emergency Response Fund has also been
allocated for drought response as the number of
affected is likely to increase. The World Food
Programme food pipeline will be depleted in three
months’ time; it is facing an acute funding shortfall of
$40 million.
In our efforts at UNPOS to address the issue of
piracy, I held constructive discussions with the
Secretary-General’s Special Adviser on Legal Issues
related to Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, Mr. Jack
Lang, whose report will be out soon. At UNPOS, we
have established a task force on piracy to support
international and regional efforts to combat piracy and
armed robbery off the coast of Somalia. However,

4

UNPOS still needs additional capacity to enable it to
play a meaningful role in this area. We shall seek to
pursue a comprehensive counter-piracy approach
through the pillars of deterrence, prosecution and root
causes on land. We intend to begin by reactivating the
Kampala Framework of cooperation between the TFG,
Puntland and Somaliland.
Finally, let me express my deep gratitude to the
international community for its continued support for
Somalia in its quest to achieve durable peace and
stability.
The President: I thank Mr. Mahiga for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed, Prime Minister of
the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia.
Mr. Mohamed (Somalia): Let me congratulate
you, Sir, on assuming of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. Let me also pay tribute to the
able leadership shown by the President of the Council
last month.
I am grateful for the privilege to address the
Security Council, and I take this opportunity to update
members on the progress made by our new
Government in our first 50 days, as well as some
urgent news regarding the humanitarian situation in
Somalia and the situation in Somalia more generally.
Our message remains firm and clear. We are
focused on security, reconciliation, transitional tasks
such as making progress on the constitutional process,
humanitarian assistance, and effective, transparent and
accountable governance. Our hope is that we will
quickly fledge into a stable and secure Government
catering to the needs of our people and able to provide
services to them. We want space for our enterprising
population to return home and establish flourishing
businesses as they have done around the world.
As to security matters, our forces, with the
support of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), are winning the security battle. Gradual
and incremental though it may be, the secure space in
Mogadishu grows daily. That is the nature of urban
conflict, in which the protection of civilians is as
important as expelling insurgents. While about 60 per
cent of the city of Mogadishu is now recognizably
under Government control, 80 per cent of the
population now lives in our area, and that is the true

11-20690

S/PV.6467

measure of our success. The people of Mogadishu have
overwhelmingly voted with their feet and moved to the
more secure Government-controlled areas of the city.
Furthermore, we are starting to see a rise in the
number of young Al-Shabaab fighters surrendering to
the Government and AMISOM forces. Seven young
men handed themselves over to the Government just
last week. Many are evidently weak, starving and
distressed. We hear the most disturbing tales of
oppression, and we know very well that a generation of
young Somalis will endure long-term emotional and
psychological damage if we cannot bring an end to this
violence soon.
The additional 4,000 troops mandated to join
AMISOM, for which we are most grateful to the
Council, will have a dramatic impact on this process,
and we welcome their arrival as soon as possible.
Within our first 50 days, our Government has
openly and transparently completed our first monthly
payment of stipends to our soldiers. We are ready to
repeat this each month, and systems are being put in
place to establish a full biometric register our forces by
our fourth month. This simple act of transparent
Government is evidence of our intent.
We await the return to Mogadishu in February of
940 soldiers who have completed training with the
European Union in Uganda. The next cadre of recruits
is ready to go.
In the context of the ultimate aspect of the wider
security issue, our cabinet has debated at great length
the issue of indirect fire and civilian casualties. The
incessant allegations and the effect they have on public
perceptions must be addressed. We stand side by side
with AMISOM, which we know conducts its military
operations with integrity and discipline. However, we
must do more together to reduce accidental damage
and loss of life, better control the use of indirect fire,
and reassure our population against enemy propaganda
claiming that they are targeted indiscriminately.
We have recognized the need to establish a joint
committee with AMISOM at cabinet level to work with
the AMISOM Force Commander to establish
communication and maintain protocols within which
we must all work. The most effective policy, of course,
would be to create the strength to eject Al-Shabaab
from Mogadishu outright, thereby entirely removing
any need for indirect fire within the city.

11-20690

Undoubtedly, the most important of the
transitional tasks is the completion of the new
constitution for our nation. If such a constitution is to
have absolute legitimacy and binding authority, both
the process and the eventual content must be beyond
reproach and solely in the interests of the Somali
people.
An important step in the constitutional process
has been taken within the past month as Parliament
approved 15 additional members of the independent
constitutional commission. We have asked the
commission to expedite its work and expand its
consultations. We have engaged Somali constitutional
scholars, lawyers, religious scholars and experts in
Somali culture to review the draft constitution, along
with the independent commission. We intend to be
ready to move to the new stage of parliamentary
approval and then to public consultations within the
next few months. The constitution is such an important
document, with profound implications for the future of
our people and country, that it is essential that we take
the time needed to do it right, without having to
respond to artificial external pressure.
On two separate occasions within the past month,
I have dispatched high-level delegations to Galguduud
and Puntland. In both cases, our delegations have
successfully diffused clan disputes that threatened
stability in those regions. We continue to reach out to
all communities in our country and to lead the process
of peacebuilding and reconciliation. Ahlu Sunnah Wal
Jama’a and the Government have a good relationship.
Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jama’a is part of the Council of
Ministers, and its members hold other key positions,
such as Deputy Commander of the Somali army.
Our Government acknowledges the pressing need
for immediate progress towards open and transparent
governance. I have taken a number of steps very early
in our administration to set standards and provide clear
statements of intent. The Cabinet has signed a code of
ethics and a full declaration of wealth. An
anti-corruption commission has been instituted, with
the power to investigate and review Government
procedures and decisions. Ministerial travel can be
undertaken only with my consent, and a full registry of
Government property and vehicles is being prepared.
Our Government is committed to Mogadishu and
Somalia, and that is where you will find us.

5

S/PV.6467

A full budget providing a comprehensive outline
of Government spending in 2011 has been submitted
by our Cabinet and approved by Parliament. Ministers
have been allocated their budgets for the year, with
priority placed on the payment of civil servants. In
November 2010, the port of Mogadishu collected and
deposited into the Central Bank of Somalia record
revenues of over $2 million. This is the highest
monthly revenue in the past 20 years.
Transparency and accountability are the
watchwords of our Government. The technical experts
within the Cabinet have immediately found ways of
demonstrating good processes and sound administration;
registering and paying troops; formulating, processing
and implementing our budget; and instituting new
measures of accountability and transparency within the
Government. There are a lot of simple but demonstrable
processes that we can deliver to inspire confidence. This
is just the beginning, but in 50 days we have done more
than has been done previously. The Transitional Federal
Government requires budgetary support from the
international community if it is to deliver services to its
citizens.
Success has brought and will continue to bring
with it a variety of challenging consequences. As many
Council members may know, Somalia is in the grip of a
potentially devastating drought. Agriculture is in the
early stage of collapse. A crisis looms as over 2 million
people face starvation. The Government has started
delivering aid to internally displaced persons and the
poor as best we can in areas under Government control.
We have also identified ways of reaching out and
delivering aid to areas under rebel control. We have
called on the Somali people to help each other and on
businesses and people in the diaspora to donate and
support their extended families.
We are grateful for the generous donation of
149 tons of food from our friends and brothers in the
United Arab Emirates. We thank them and ask others to
respond similarly. United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations must accelerate their
arrival in Mogadishu and assist in organizing the
provision of services and humanitarian aid. The longterm questions of disarmament, demobilization and
rehabilitation must also be addressed. People who have

6

escaped the terror of Al-Shabaab need and deserve all
our help.
Our forces, together with AMISOM, have our
security in hand. The Government is opening up, police
are being trained, the Mayor is cleaning and organizing
the city, and the people are ready to rebuild their lives.
We are all ready to work with the United Nations.
Currently, AMISOM is the sole agent for international
support operating in Mogadishu. It cannot continue to
carry the weight of military strategy, security, police
mentoring and training, medical aid and humanitarian
aid alone. It needs support, and it needs it now. We
need support and we need it now.
The debate concerning the future of the
Government in Somalia beyond August this year will
undoubtedly have begun within the international
community. We do not intend to be bystanders in this
debate. We will demonstrate repeatedly between now
and August that we are a legitimate and effective
Government. We accept that the international
community needs a partner it can depend upon and
work with. We will be that partner. We will show that
we have a coherent and transparent programme for the
future and that, despite the most difficult of
circumstances, we have laid the foundation for a secure
Government. Our political development will not
always be pretty, but given time within a secure
environment and with the support of the international
community to relieve the humanitarian crisis, Somalia
will lead Somalia out of its darkest days.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia, Ambassador Augustine Mahiga,
for the extraordinary job that he is currently doing,
working with my Government to create lasting peace
and stability in Somalia.
The President: I thank the Prime Minister of
Somalia for his statement.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on this matter.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

11-20690
