S/PRST/2002/35*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 December 2002
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4663rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 12 December 2002, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“1. The Security Council, recalling its previous decisions concerning the
situation in Somalia, in particular the statement of its President of 28 March
2002 (S/PRST/2002/8), resolution 733 (1992) of 23 January 1992 and
resolution 1425 (2002) of 22 July 2002, and taking note of the report of the
Secretary-General of 25 October 2002 (S/2002/1201), reaffirms its
commitment to a comprehensive and lasting settlement of the situation in
Somalia and reaffirms its respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
political independence and unity of the country, consistent with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
“2. The Security Council firmly supports the unified approach of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) to national
reconciliation in Somalia, and reiterates its strong support for the Somalia
National Reconciliation Process and the ongoing Somalia National
Reconciliation Conference in Eldoret, Kenya, as sponsored by IGAD. The
Council urges all parties throughout Somalia to participate in the process in
accordance with the framework established by IGAD, and expects the
decisions adopted throughout the process to be abided by and implemented
expeditiously, including the Declaration on Cessation of Hostilities and the
Structures and Principles of the Somalia National Reconciliation Process,
signed by all delegates in Eldoret on 27 October 2002 (hereinafter referred to
as the ‘Eldoret Declaration’).
“3. The Security Council welcomes the Eldoret Declaration as an important
step towards the overriding objective of ending the violence and the suffering
of the Somali people and bringing them the peace they so dearly deserve. The
Council calls on all parties to cease all acts of violence and to respect the
cessation of hostilities.

* Reissued for technical reasons.

02-73717* (E) 131202

*0273717*

S/PRST/2002/35

“4. The Security Council further welcomes the Joint Declaration issued by
the involved parties in Mogadishu on 2 December 2002 (hereinafter referred to
as the ‘Mogadishu Declaration’), including their stated commitment to cease
all hostilities and jointly bring an end to all killings and abductions of innocent
people and hijacking of public transportation in the city, as well as to solve all
differences through dialogue and goodwill. The Council notes the further
agreement reached on 4 December 2002 by involved parties to cooperate
through peaceful means in order, inter alia, to reopen the International Airport
and Seaport in Mogadishu and to restore public services in the city.
“5. The Security Council notes with satisfaction the commencement of the
second phase of the Somalia National Reconciliation Process in Eldoret on 2
December 2002 and welcomes this as a significant step forward. The Council
will continue to follow this process with keen interest and strongly encourages
all parties to continue to participate constructively, in accordance with the
framework established by the IGAD Technical Committee, in a spirit of
tolerance and mutual accommodation during each phase of the Process.
“6. The Security Council commends the Government of Kenya for its special
commitment as host and IGAD’s Technical Committee, comprised of the three
frontline states, Kenya, Ethiopia and Djibouti, for its crucial role in facilitating
the process. The Council strongly encourages their continued active and
positive role in promoting the process.
“7. The Security Council encourages Member States in a position to do so
urgently to provide further contributions in support of the process through the
IGAD Technical Committee.
“8. The Security Council, condemning recent attacks on humanitarian
personnel and civilians in Somalia, welcomes the agreement by all delegates in
Eldoret to guarantee the security of all humanitarian and development
personnel and installations, and urges them to take practical steps to grant safe
and unfettered access to humanitarian personnel in their efforts to deliver
assistance throughout Somalia.
“9. The Security Council expresses serious concern regarding the situation of
displaced persons in Somalia and urges relevant authorities and Member States
to provide support for the return and reintegration of Somali refugees and the
provision of urgent humanitarian assistance to, and protection for, those who
have been internally displaced. It notes with particular concern the situation of
150,000 internally displaced persons in areas of Mogadishu that remain
inaccessible to humanitarian workers. The Council calls on the armed factions
to provide immediate safe access to these and other vulnerable populations
throughout the country, consistent with the Eldoret Declaration and the
Mogadishu Declaration.
“10. The Security Council calls again on all Member States, entities and
individuals to respect fully the arms embargo established by resolution 733
(1992), as strengthened by resolution 1425 (2002), and urges all Somali and
regional parties as well as government officials and other actors contacted
outside the region to cooperate fully with the Panel of Experts in its quest for
information related to the embargo, in accordance with resolution 1425 (2002)
and article 2.5 of the Eldoret Declaration. The Council appreciates the Panel’s

2

S/PRST/2002/35

oral briefing on 14 November 2002 to the Council, through the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning
Somalia, and looks forward to the Panel’s written report at the end of its
mandated period.
“11. The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to continue putting
in place, in a coherent manner, preparatory activities on the ground for a
comprehensive post-conflict peace-building mission in Somalia once security
conditions permit, as stipulated in the statement by the President of the
Council of 28 March 2002.
“12. The Security Council recognizes that a comprehensive post-conflict
programme for disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation and reintegration
will be an important contribution for peace and stability in Somalia.
“13. The Security Council encourages the Secretary-General to support
actively the IGAD-sponsored Somalia National Reconciliation Process and the
ongoing Conference in Eldoret.
“14. The Security Council expresses its commitment to assist the parties in the
implementation of the steps and conclusions for peace, as adopted throughout
the Somalia National Reconciliation Process.”

3
