S/2008/65

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 February 2008
Original: English

Letter dated 1 February 2008 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 23 January
2008, which I received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

08-22773 (E) 070208

*0822773*

S/2008/65

Annex
Letter dated 23 January 2008 from the Secretary-General of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization to the Secretary-General
In accordance with Security Council resolutions 1386 (2001) and 1510 (2003),
I attach a report on the operations of the International Security Assistance Force
covering the period from August to November 2007. I would appreciate your
making this report available to the Security Council.
(Signed) Japp de Hoop Scheffer

2

08-22773

S/2008/65

Enclosure
Quarterly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
International Security Assistance Force
Introduction
1.
By resolution 1510 (2003) the Security Council requested the leadership of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to provide reports on the
implementation of its mandate. This is the fifteenth such report by NATO and it
covers the period from August to November 2007.
2.
As at 28 October 2007, ISAF had 35,523 personnel from 26 NATO countries
and 1,806 from 13 non-NATO countries.
Overall assessment
3.
Throughout the reporting period, ISAF has continued to assist the Government
of Afghanistan in accordance with Security Council resolutions 1386 (2001),
1510 (2003) and 1776 (2007). From 1 August to 31 October 2007 ISAF suffered
356 casualties in total: 39 killed in action, 283 wounded in action, 4 non-battle
deaths and 30 non-battle injuries.
Military Operations: Countrywide military operations involving ISAF and the
4.
increasingly competent Afghan National Security Forces continued. While the
capacity and capability of the security forces are still not sufficient for them to
conduct fully independent operations, ISAF continued to support them as they
increased their numbers and capabilities. In some cases, the Afghan National Army
has taken a lead role for specific operations.
Outlook: ISAF will continue to engage in a continuum of operations through
5.
the winter months into 2008. Having been planned and coordinated in cooperation
with the Government and the Afghan National Security Forces, these operations will
continue to assist in establishing an improved security situation, and support better
governance, thus facilitating further reconstruction. ISAF will seek to prevent a
possible resurgence of violence following the end of the winter period, and
encourage the authority of the Government to further take hold nationwide.
Security situation
6.
Opposing militant forces a have continued their attempts to disrupt, frustrate
and destroy the process of establishing peace and security in Afghanistan. Opposing
militant force activity throughout Afghanistan follows already established patterns,
and overall support for the opposing militant forces is proportional to the lack of
Government and ISAF security presence and levels of sustained influence, in
particular in Pashtun areas. Reported activity continues to be highest in the southern
and eastern regions of Afghanistan, where the Afghan National Security Forces and
ISAF continue to increase their operational presence. Owing to increased losses and
tactical setbacks, the opposing militant forces focused on asymmetric tactics during
__________________
a In the present document, the term “opposing militant forces” refers to any of the four primary

groups: the Taliban, the Haqqani Network, the Hezb-e-Islami Gulbuddin, and Al-Qaida and
affiliated groups.

08-22773

3

S/2008/65

the reporting period with an increased use of kidnappings, hostage takings and
suicide attacks in an effort to intimidate the population and undermine the
Government’s ability to govern the country. Improvised explosive devices remain
the preferred asymmetric weapon. In many incidents, the opposing militant forces
have increased the risks to the civilian population by hiding among them, operating
from civilian dwellings and using civilians as human shields. During the reporting
period security situations in the regional commands were as follows:
(a) Regional Command Capital: The situation was assessed as tense but
stable, notwithstanding that planned attacks against selected high-profile targets are
expected to continue, particularly in Kabul.
(b) Regional Command North: The security situation was relatively calm but
with pockets of instability, with increased suicide and improvised explosive device
attacks, most notably in Kunduz, Meymanah and Baghlan early in November.
However, the main cause for instability continues to be opposition to the authority
of the Government by regional powerbrokers and criminal elements.
(c) Regional Command West: The security situation remains relatively calm
but fragile. The opposing militant forces have continued to exploit the limited
footprint of ISAF and the Afghan National Security Forces to expand their
influence. Attacks along the ring road continued in an effort to disrupt ISAF and
Government lines of communication and maintain freedom of movement for the
opposing militant forces.
(d) Regional Command South: Regional Command South continued to see
high levels of activity on the part of the opposing militant forces, which continued
to undertake low-scale conventional operations as well as increased asymmetric
attacks throughout Regional Command South in an attempt to increase their
credibility and create shadow governments. Their activities were also focused on
disrupting ISAF and Security Force movements along Highway 1.
(e) Regional Command East: Opposing militant force operations continued
at high levels during the reporting period, benefiting from suitable grounds in
Pakistan and from their illegal movement from Pakistan to the eastern provinces of
Afghanistan. Meanwhile Pakistan armed forces have increased their operations in
Pakistani border regions. This, coupled with the onset of winter, has contributed to a
downward trend in cross-border movements of the opposing militant forces. By
early December 2007, these cross-border movements reached their lowest levels
since March 2006. Opposing militant force tactics continued to include small-scale
conventional attacks on ISAF and/or Security Force border positions and lines of
communications as well as attacks on soft targets, including Government officials,
non-governmental organizations and reconstruction and development contractors.
Counter-narcotics
7.
The link between the illicit narcotics industry and insurgency has been
apparent over this reporting period, further fuelling instability and the corruption
that threatens all levels of governance including police authority and the wider rule
of law. Ultimately this also prevents meaningful reconstruction and development.
8.
The existing counter-narcotics policy must be underpinned by a joint coherent
underlying delivery mechanism involving the international community and driven
by the Afghan Government across the eight pillars of its National Drug Control

4

08-22773

S/2008/65

Strategy. A piecemeal approach will result only in limited short-term counternarcotics progress.
9.
Within its mandate, resources and operational plan, ISAF continues to fully
support the implementation of the Government’s counter-narcotics strategy.
Afghan National Army
10. The development of the Afghan National Army into a capable and competent
fighting force continues, even in the midst of considerable rebuilding and
organization. Marked improvements in the ability to plan operations, and significant
gains in the ability to undertake operations are evidence of steady and positive
growth of the army:
(a) Capability. Afghan National Army combat units continue to improve,
over half being considered capable of performing counter-insurgency operations
with external support. Collective combat skills also continue to improve. However,
work still remains to be done in the training of headquarters and support units in
order for the army to eventually achieve a true independent capability.
(b) Manning. The current army strength is approximately 38,500, with
approximately 21,000 available for operations as from 31 October 2007. b
(c) Equipment. The overall equipment situation is improving, but there are
still significant shortages that need to be rectified. Although some national
contributions are being made, more needs to be done to ensure that the army is fully
resourced.
(d) Training. The pivotal role that both operational mentoring and liaison
teams and the United States embedded training teams play in the development of the
Afghan National Army cannot be overstated. Therefore, generating operational
mentoring and liaison teams in sufficient numbers as the army grows remains a
matter of priority for NATO.
Afghan National Police
11. The Afghan National Police still falls behind the desired level of capability.
Coordination among international bodies involved in police development through
the International Police Coordination Board, as well as training and equipping of the
Afghan National Police, is critically important to extending the authority and reach
of the Government. Underdevelopment in this area results in greater reliance on
ISAF forces whereas the Afghan National Army and Police should hold the ground
cleared by ISAF forces and offer the population continuity in security.
12. With a current strength of 75,500 personnel, the Afghan National Police
requires more police mentor teams, which — as with operational mentoring and
liaison teams for the Afghan National Army — are essential elements in achieving
success. NATO welcomes the focused district development programme which the
Combined Security Transition Command-Afghanistan has developed. Commencing
on 1 November 2007, the programme aims at enhancing police capabilities,
__________________
b These figures reflect solely the manning of the five Afghan National Army corps. Ministry of

Defence, General Staff, intermediate commands and sustaining institutions personnel are not
counted here, neither are the Air Corps and the Commando kandaks counted in the original
70,000 personnel target. The final authorized number of all five corps in 2008 would be 50,274.

08-22773

5

S/2008/65

transforming the Afghan Uniformed Police into a service loyal to the Afghan people
and Afghan national interests, building a “prosecutor-driven justice system”,
strengthening the Afghan Uniformed Police linkage to provincial, regional and
national leaders and staff, and developing Afghan Ministry of the Interior
capabilities by mentoring its leadership.
13. Against the background of the existing substantial United States efforts and the
bilateral efforts conducted through the ISAF provincial reconstruction teams, NATO
has also welcomed the decision of the European Union to launch a European Police
Mission (EUPOL) — which will be fully deployed by March 2008 with its
160 mentors and trainers to help further develop much-needed Afghan National
Police capacity.
Neighbouring countries
14. The political situation in Pakistan was volatile during the reporting period. The
political instability does nothing to assist in the provision of a more enduring and
stable security environment in the region. Mass returns of Afghan refugees from the
Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan, due to the closure of refugee camps, might
cause complications for the ISAF mission.
15. NATO welcomed the Turkish initiative, following the Ankara Declaration, to
further encourage the development of trilateral relations with Afghanistan and
Pakistan, including the establishment of the Istanbul Forum which will constitute a
multiplier for the relations in terms of economic gains. The first meeting was held in
Istanbul, and the second is scheduled for Islamabad in January 2008.
16. The continuing lack of control over the Afghanistan/Pakistan border areas is a
major obstacle to achieving overall security and stability in Afghanistan. The next
Tripartite Commission c will focus in more detail on the synchronization of
operations in response to opposing militant force activity in the border region.
Programme Takhim-e-Sol
17 The programme Takhim-e-Sol remains ongoing, although there were no
Commission meetings during the month of October because of Ramadan and the
unavailability of the Commission President. As at 1 October 2007, 4,599 have
reconciled via the programme. ISAF remains committed to supporting the
programme within means available.
18. President Karzai made reconciliation calls to the opposing militant forces,
offering non-conditional talks. While hard-line opposing militant forces continued
to demand the departure of the United Nations-mandated international forces from
Afghanistan as a precondition, there were indications that others were considering
whether to accept the notion that a military solution alone cannot be reached and
would therefore be willing to increase their dialogue with the Government. It
remains as yet unclear who among the opposing militant forces might be convinced,
__________________
c The Tripartite Commission is a military forum to discuss matters of common concern to the

three parties (Afghanistan, Pakistan and ISAF, each at four-star level). The Tripartite
Commission was established initially under operation “Enduring freedom”, and since October
2006 has been under ISAF auspices. With the aim of improving security along the AfghanPakistan border, the Commission normally meets every three to four months; however, the last
meeting was held late in May 2007.

6

08-22773

S/2008/65

or under what conditions they would be willing to commence meaningful
reconciliation. However, it is essential that any reconciliation efforts must not
permit power-sharing or carving out of “protected areas”. Any former Taliban
members must recognize the Constitution and the authority of the democratically
elected Government, refrain from criminal activity and have no association with
Al-Qaida.
Judicial reform and rule of law
19. ISAF estimates that across Afghanistan, widespread corruption combined with
a general lack of awareness and understanding of the rule of law results in
70 per cent to 90 per cent of Afghans reverting to tribal law and sharia.
20. Under-resourced and with a limited reach, the formal State institutions of
justice require a renewed, more coherent and robust restructuring effort. The
establishment of an effective justice system not only requires overcoming such
obstacles, it also demands a coherent vision for Afghanistan’s justice institutions.
ISAF can only be partially successful in its task of assisting the Government to
establish security in the country when the necessary structures to maintain the rule
of law are absent.
21. The National Justice Strategy, which is currently under development, sets out a
more focused and integrated strategic approach to developing the Government’s
justice system. The legal adviser to the ISAF Commander is a direct participant in
the International Coordination Group for Justice Reform responsible for developing
the Strategy and the related National Justice Programme. ISAF planning will remain
aligned with priorities for justice reform developed in the post-Rome process.
Disbandment of illegal armed groups
22. The process of disbandment of illegal armed groups has so far failed to
produce tangible results. The district implementation, which aims at implementing
disbandment at a more practical level by addressing those districts that can more
easily be brought and held under compliance, has been introduced and this initiative
is currently in its second implementation round:
(a) When combined with the first round, 52 out of a total of 398 districts in
22 provinces will have been affected by district implementation, 12 districts having
already been declared compliant. To assist with the enforcement process, the
Government is creating an enforcement unit. However, the Government has put
additional enforced compliance operations on hold at the political level.
(b) It should also be noted that the disbandment process is less effective in
those areas of Afghanistan that are struggling to cope with security and narcotics
challenges, and the process is further challenged where there is a lack of sustained
ISAF and/or Afghan National Security Force presence.
(c) The Government is on the verge of legislating on private security
companies, to legitimize the weapons they hold under the regulatory control of the
disbandment structure. The draft regulation is currently in the Ministry of Justice,
which is refining its implementation details.
(d) ISAF support to the disbandment of illegal armed groups remains
unchanged. While the Government still sets the pace of the programme and

08-22773

7

S/2008/65

establishes programme direction, ISAF representatives attend weekly joint
secretariat meetings to ascertain the support and assistance required from ISAF.
Such support is offered within ISAF resource availabilities.
Governance
23. The legitimacy and authority of the Government of Afghanistan has continued
to be eroded by the wide experience of corruption at all levels and throughout all
government institutions, including the police and the judiciary.
24. The development of fair, robust and sustainable government institutions at
national and subnational levels is critical to establishing and maintaining the
legitimacy and authority of the Government across the country. It is hoped that the
creation of the Independent Local Directorate for Local Governance will
successfully address the hitherto problematic area of subnational government.
However, the complex ethnic and historical landscape, the lack of institutional and
human capacity, coupled with ineffective and corrupt officials, means that the pace
of governmental reform will be slow.
25. ISAF makes every effort to facilitate the efforts of those local Afghan officials
known as honest and supportive of the Government to extend the writ of governance
in their areas. This support is underpinned by the development and reconstruction
activities of regional commands and provincial reconstruction teams, often with
funding provided by ISAF troop-contributing countries.
26. ISAF headquarters has continued to work closely with the Government and
with the international organizations in those ad hoc structures, including the Policy
Action Group, that support and coordinate the efforts of the international
community and the Government.
Development
27. Afghanistan continues on a slight upward trend with regard to macroeconomic
indicators and most basic social programmes such as education and health, yet there
are still numerous difficulties associated with gaining the popular support of the
average Afghan citizen.
28. Provincial reconstruction teams remain a key mechanism for delivering
development and extending the reach of the Government and the international
community to the majority of the provinces. In order for this to be effective, security
and development efforts must be aligned with the priorities of the Government and
the capabilities of the international community. To this end, NATO has increased the
focus on mechanisms for coherence of provincial reconstruction teams with the
Government’s development priorities as outlined in the Afghan National
Development Strategy. The recently established Japanese funding mechanism,
coupled with national funds and the Post-Operational Humanitarian Relief Fund
continue to be key programmes for positively assisting the local populace and
supporting the overall security situation.
29. The Afghan country stability picture continues to be an important tool for civil
information management. NATO is currently testing a web-based prototype version
of the Afghan country stability picture and anticipates having a system accessible to
the international community on the World Wide Web within the year.

8

08-22773

S/2008/65

Simultaneously, ISAF is in the process of transferring the know-how and the
responsibility for the database to the Government through a USAID-funded project.
Conclusion
30. The reporting period has seen improved liaison with the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) including ISAF assistance to
UNAMA campaign planning. Welcome as these developments are, a critical gap
remains in identifying a single, suitably empowered and capable agency, or
individual, to better synchronize and coordinate the pan-Afghanistan development
efforts of the international community. This is essential if we are to maintain
momentum with successful security operations quickly followed by effective
reconstruction and development initiatives.

08-22773

9
