SECURITY COUNCIL
Q FFI Cl A L RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURlTE
PROCES.VERBAUX OFFICIELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 100
214eme seance
27 octobre 1947

214th meeting
27 October 1947
Lake Success
New York

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Two hundred and fourteenth meeting

Deux..cent-quatorzieme seance

Page

Pages

394. Prpvisional agenda . . . . . .

2623

394. Ordre du jour provisoire.

395. Adoption of the agenda.

2623

395. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

. . . •

. . .
. .

2623
2623

396. Continuation of the discussion on the
Indonesian question. . . . . . 2623

396. Suite de la discussion de la question
indonesienne . . . . . it. . . 2623

DOCUMENTS

DOCUMENTS

The following document, relevant to the two
Le document suivant, se rapportant cl la deuxhundred and fQurteenth meeting, appears as fol-cent-quatorzieme seance, figure dans la publicalows:
tion suivante:
Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year:

Proces-verbauz officiels dz£ Conseil de securite,
Deuzieme Annee:

Special S1tpplement No. 5

Supplement special No 5

Report by the Consular Commission at Batavia
to the Security Council (5/586)

Rapport de la Commission consulaire a Batavia
au Conseil de securite (5/586)

•
..
NATIONS UNIES

UNITED NATIONS

)

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL'
D-E SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES.VERBAUX OFFICIELS

SECOND YEAR

No. 100 DEUXIEME ANNEE .

No 100

TWO HUNDRED AND FOURTEENTH
MEETING

DEUX.CENT.QUATORZIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Monday, 27 October 1947, at 3 p.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York,
le lundi 27 octobre 1947, a15 heures.

President: Sir Alexander CADOGAN
(United Kingdom).

President: Sir Alexander CADOGAN
(Royaume-Uni).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Colombia,
China, France, Poland, Syria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom, United
States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants;
Australie, Be1gique, Bresil, Colombie, Chine,
France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
d'Amerique.

394. Provisional agenda (document
S/Agenda/214)

394. Ordre du jour provisoire
(document S/Agenda/2l4)'

L Adoption of tbe agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. The Indonesian question:
(11-) Report dated 14 October 1947 from the
Consular Commission at Batavia (documents S/586, Sj586/Add. 1, S/586/Add.
2)1 ;

2. La question indonesienne:
a) Rapport de la Commission consulaire de
Batavia en date du 14 octobre 1947 (d0CUments S/586, S/586/Add. 1, S/586/Add.
2)1;
b) Lettre en date du 26 ·septembre 1947
adressee au President du Conseil de securite par le representant de l'Australie
(document S/569)2.
:

(b) Letter dated 26 September 1947 from the

representative of Australia addressed to
the President of the Security Council
(dociunent S/569).2

395. Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

395. Adoption de I'ordre du jo~r
L' orare d·lt jour est adopte.

396. Continuation of the discussion on
the .Indonesi~n question

396. Suite·de la discussion de la
question indonesienne .

At the invitatioJt of the President, .Mr. Pillai,
1'epresentative of India; Mr. van KlefJens, representative of the Netherlands; Mr. L6pez, representativ~ of the Philippines, and Mr. Palar, representatwe of the Republic of Indonesia, took their
places at the Council table..
.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. Pillai, 1'epresentant de l' lnde; M. van KlefJens, representant
des Pays-Bas; M, L6pez, representant des Philippines, et M. Palar, representant de la Rep,ublique
d'Indonesie, prennent place a la table du Conscil.

1

See Off!cial Recor.ds of the Security Coullcil, Second
Year, SpecIal Supplement No 5
• Ibid., Second Year, No. 93. .

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels dll COllseil de sccurite, Deuxieme Annee, Supplement speciaf No 5.
2 Ibid., Deuxieme Annee, No 93.

Wl.

l..-.z:?

g

2624

-

Mr. PILLAr (India): I should not have inter- ,
M. PILLAI (lnde) (tradttit de l'amglais) : Je ne
vened in this debate again, but for tl~efact that serais pas intervenu a nouveau dans ce debat si
there are some statemetlts in the ConsuUir Com- certains 'passages du rapport de la Commission
l11issiQn's repoTt which call for comment.
consulaire n'appelaient certaines observations.
Speaking on the first interim report1 of the , .<;)ommentant le' premier rapport pro~isoire de
Consular Commission, I said that the' responsi" la Commission consulairel, j'ai declare que si la
bility for the continuance of the war in Indonesia gt..lerre se poursuit en Indonesie, aprec; l'adoption
after the Security Council's resolution of 1 August par leConseil de secu~ite de la resolution en date
19472 caliing for a cease-fire should, in the opinion. du ler <lout 19472, tendant a la cessation des
of my Government, be placed on the Netherlands hostilites, la .responsabilite, aux yeux de mon
Government. s That view is confirmed by the find- Gouvemement, doit en etre imputee au Gouverings of the Consular Commission contained in nement neerlandais8 • Cette opinion est aujourchapter. H of the full .report now received by the d'hui confirmee' par les conclusions de la CommisCouncil.
sion consulaire qui, figurent au chapitre II du
rapport complet, maintenant entre les mains du
ConseiJ.
'
The order issued' on 4 August 1947 by the
;L'ordre donne le 4 aont 1947 p~r le President
President of the Indonesian Republic as supreme de la Republique indonesienne en sa qualite de
commander of the Indonesian forces, which is Commandant en chef des forces indonesiennes,
quoted in, chapt~r II, paragraph' 11 of the re- cite au paragraphe 11 du chapitre II, donnait a
port, called upon all the armed forces of the In- . toutes les forces armees de la Republique indonedonesian Republic and upon the Indonesian people sienne et au peuple indonesien en general la conin general "to remain in the positions which they signe de "rester sur les positions occupees en ce
now occupy and to cease all hostilities".4 This moment et de cesser toute hostilite"'. Des mewas followed up bv official action through army sures officieUes ont ensuite ete prises par l'inter• channels and, according to chapter H, paragraph mediaire des. autorites militaires et d'apres le
16, even forward sentinels and patrol leaders were paragraphe 16 du c:;hapitre H, l'ordre a ete intemade fully acquainted with the order.
gralement porte cl la connaissance des sentinelles
avancees et des cgefs de patrouilles .eux-memes.
While the term "cease all hostilities" mayor
Le terme "cesser toute hostilite" peut ou non
m;lY not have a considerably wider significance avoir une signification considerablement pillS large
than the term "cease-fire", paragraph 13 of chap- que le terme, "cesser le feu", mais le paragraphe
ter II makes it clear that the Government of the 13 du chapitre H etablit nettement que le GouverIndonesian Republic and the Indonesian troops nement de la Republique d'Indonesie et les trouunderstood the cease-fire order in the sense in pes indonesiennes ont compris l'ordre de cesser
which it is generally understood. That is to say, le feu dans le sens oit on l'interprete en general.
they were not to fire unless fired upon and were En d'autres termes, eUes ne devaient faire feu
not to initiate any offensive action.
que si 1'0n tirait sur eUes, et ne prendre l'initiative
d'aucune action offensive.
Bien plus, au paragraphe 3 du chapitre IV, la
Furthermore, in chapter IV, paragraph 3, there
is the Consular Commission's statement that the Commission consulaire declare que lesforces reRepublican forces "remained in their positions in publicaines "sont r~stees sur .leurs positions conaccordance with the ... cease-fire order". It is formement a l'ordre ... de cesser le feu". On ne
impossible to think of a plainer way of stating saurait concevoir une fa~on plus claire d'exprimer
that th,,-, Government of the Indonesian Republic que le GO:lvemement de la E.epublique indoneand its military forces have in fact complied faith- sienne et ses troupes se sont, en fait, fidelement
fullv with the Security Council's recommenda- conformes a la recommandation du Conseil de
tion.
.
securite.·
.
Si la Commission consulaire avait eu la possiIf the Consular Commission had found it pos• siDle to make simi1~ statements in respect of the bilite de formuler des declarations .analogues en
Netherlands forces, there would have been no ce qui concerne les .forces neerlandaises, it n'y
reason to question the. sincerity or the willingness aurait eu aucune raison de mettre en doute la sinof the Netherlands Government to conform to the cerite du Gouvemement des·Pays.. Bas ni son dedecisions of the Security Council. But, while the sir de se conformer aux decisions du Conseil de
Netherlands cease-fire order, quoted in chapter securite. Mais, alors que 1'0rdr'e de cesser le feu,
rr. paragraph 17,. enjoined the cessation of all donne par les Pays-~as etdte au.paragraphe 17
operations to claw' new territories, it also' con- du chapitre n, .enjoignait la' cessation de toutes
tained the following pregnant sentence: "To safe- operations tendant a des gains nouveaux de terguard population, our troops and objects within ritoire, il contenait egalement la phrase suivante,
now occupied territory, operations continue with- lourde .de consequences: "Pour sauvegarder la
out interruption. . . No actions allowed outside population; nos' troupes et les6bjectifs situ~s a.
now occupied territoryoandobjectsY·
l'iilterieur' •' .. dit territo1re 'occupe 'aetuellement,
les operations se poursuivront sans interruption
.. : aucune action n'est autorisee a l'exterieur du
territoire et des objectifs occupes actuellement"
Mais l'armee neerlandaise a decide de consiBut the Netherlands army chose to regard as
territory occupied by it on 4 August 1947 even deter comme territoire oCc~pe par, elle ab 4 aout
:l See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 91~ Ibid., No. 68, 173rd meeting.
S Ibid., No, 94.
• llr.d., No. 72.

1Voir les Proces-verbafts t1ff;ciels dft COllsei(de securite. Deuxieme Annee, No 9L
• Ibid., No 68, 173eme seance.
• Ibid., No 94.
• Ibid., No 72.
.......

•

26~5

terr.itory actually occupied by the In~onesians .at , 1947 des territoires qui en fait ,etaient- occupes
that date. In chapter H, paragraphs 18, ~9, 20, an!1 par les: Indonesiens a cette date. Les paragraphes
22 show that the Netherlands authorities acted, to 18, 19, 20 et 22 du chapitre II montrent que les
quote paragrap~ 18, "on the principle tha~ it ,is autorites neetlandaises ont' agi, pour reprendre
possible to donuna;te and control a~ ~rea; Without le .texte du paragraphe 18, d'apres "le principe
necessarilyoccupy111g the whole of It . Paragraph qu'il est possible de Gominer e:t de controler une
20 states: "Although it was fully realized by the region sans enoccuper necessairement la totalite".
Netherlands authorities that, in their yery rapid I1 est dit dans le paragraphe 20: "Bien' que les
advance they kept to the main roads and by- Hollandais se rendissent parfaitement compte que
passed ~lany Republican formations, which re-:- dans teur avance tres rapide; its s'en tenaient
mained in their original locations, they !lid nQt 'aux routes principales et passaient a cote de
consider that' this affected their control over the nombreuses formations republicaines'qui restaient
whole area:" In paragraph 19 it is stated tJiat the ,sur leurs positions initialeS, its ne consideraient
Netherlands "Commander-in-Chief accordingly pas que cela affectat leur controle sur l'ensemble
reported to t~e Li,eut~nant GovemQr;Gen~ral that de la region". Dans le paragraphe 19, it est prethe area dommated. by those strategl(~. p0111ts was cise que, en, consequence, le' commandant en ch~f
under his control". The Netherlands forces felt n~erlandais "a fait rapport au Lieutenant Gou,.
themselves at liberty to .take such military action vemeur general en lui indiguant que les regions
as they chose within this area and, according to controIees par ces poin.ts strategiques etaient enparagraph 22, "continuous patrols and clearing tre ses mains". Les forces neerlandaises s'estisw.eeps are carried out throughout the area";
maient done libres d'entreprendre toute 'action
militaire qu'elles jugeaient utile dans cette zone
et, d'apres le paragraphe 22, "des patrouilles continuelles et des operations de nettoyage sont effectuees sur l'ensemble de la region".
Le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas et l'armee
Not only did the Netherlands Government and
army act asH all the area between their advanced neerlandaise ont done agi, nOll seulement comme
spearheads, as of 4 August 1947, fell within their si toute· la region comprise entre leurs pointes
proper sphere of military control and domination, , avancees, a la date du 4 aout 1947, faisait pame
but they also established by their unilateral· ac~ de· leur zone de controle miiitaire et etait southe so-called van Mook line as the boundary of mise a Jeur domination, niais en outre its ont, par
the territory over which, according to chapter H, une decision unilaterale, etabli la ligne dite van
paragraph 25, they had "taken over direct respon- Mook comme ligne de demarcation du territoire
sibility on 4 August".
sur lequel its avaient, d~apres le paragraphe 25
. clu chapitre n, "assume une responsabilite directe
a compter du 4 aout".
La maniere dont les Neerlandais ont considere
Their behaviour in treating territory lying, between the spearheads as N'etherlands-held terri- le territoire compris entre leurs pointes avancees
tory, even though it was actually occupied by the comme occupe par eux alors qu'it l'etait en fait
Republicans, would normally be'regarded as ex- par les Republicains, ,apparait legitimement comtremely high-handed and provocative and certain- me un acte extremement arbitraire de provocaIv at direct variance with theSecur~ty Council's tion, en contradiction flagrant.e avec la resolution
cease-fire resolution. What adjectives are we then du Conseii de securite relative, a la cessation des
to use if the so-called van Mopk line comprises hostilites. Quels termes devrions-nous alors· emterritory lying even beyond the advanced Nether- ployer si la ligne·dite van Mook englobe'des terrilands spearheads?
'
.
toires situes au dela meme desp!lintes'avancees
des 'forces neerlandaises?
A l'alinea a du paragraphe 26 du chapitre lI,
In chapter H, paragraph 26 (a), the Consular
Commission reports that the so-called van Mook la Commission consulaire rapporte que la ligne
line "act~ally e.."Ctended in many districts beyond dite van Mook "s'etendait, dans de nombreux
the line of advanced posts reached on 4 August". districts, au dela de la ligne des. pointe~ avancees
In paragraph 28 it is stated that the Netherlands atteinte le 4 aout". Dans le paragraphe 28, il est
forces subsequently fanned out and established dit que les. forces neerlandaises se sont par la
"small posts in areas which they had not previous- suite deployees et ont etabli "de petits postes dans
ly occupied, but which they claimed to control". les regions qu'elles n'avaient pas occupees preceWe read in paragraph 29 that "they therefore took demment, ma-is dont clles revendiquaient le con:,
offensive action" against Republican troops in trole .• .':. Au paragraphe 29 it est precise:
these areas, and that "as a consequence, engage- "c'est pourquoi elles entreprirent des actions ofments between the two forces occurred continu- fensives" contre les troupes republicaines qui se
ously".
trouvaient dans ces regions, et "il en resufta des
engagements continuels entre les deux forces".
Paragraph 29 further states that the actual decLe paragraphe 29 precise ensuite que la d6dalaration of the van Mook line on 29 August 1947 ration o££idelle relative a la ligne van Mook,
~as a declaraHon o£ Netherlands policy and intenen date du 29 amlt 1947, annon<;ait en fait queUes
tions, on the basis of which the Netherlands army etaient la politique et les intentions du Gouvemehad been working since 4 August; and paragraph ment neerlandais dont s'inspirait depuis le 4 aout
31 states that "there is no doubt that the continu- l'activite de l'armee neerlandaise, et le paragraphe
ance of hostile action is' due to the decision of the 31 ajoute: "it n'y a aucun doute que la pQursuite
Netherlands autorities to impose... confrol over des hostilites est due a la decision des autorites
the area defined by the van Mook line".
neerlandaises d'imposer un controle . . . a la region de£inie par 'la ligne van Mook ...".
It is clear, therefore, that the cease-fire order
I1 apparait donc c1airement que l'ordre de cesser
."jas produced no change whatsoever either in the le feu n'a amene aucun changement dans les in-

Ili1!IJJU &iW __,.._

2626
intentions of the Netherlands Government or in
its military plans for carrying out those intentions.
The Netherlands representative has contended all
along that the cease-fire order was being violated
by the Indonesians, and that those violations made.
it possib1!" +Qr the Netherlands authorities to carry
out the u. ...ler in their turn. At the two hundred
and ninth meeting1 of the Council he said that
"the Indonesian violence . . . prevented us from
observing .the Security Council's request for a
cease-fire a.s scrupulously as we had wished"~ How
untenable that contention is, is proved by the passages I have quoted from the report of the Consular 'Commission.

tentions du Gouvernement neerlandais ni dans les
plans militaires destines a lui permettre de, realiser ces intentions. Le representant des Pays-Bas
n'a cesse de soutellir que les Indonesiens avaient
enfreint l'ordre de cesser le feu, et que cette infraction empechait les autorites neerlandaises
d'executer rordre it leur tour. A la deux-centneuvieme seance du ConseiP, il a declare: "les
actes de violence qui se sont produits _en Indonesie ... nous ont empeche d'observer l'ordre de
cesser le feu que vous nous aviez adresse aussi
scrupuleusement que nous l'aurions souhaite ...".
Les passages du rapport de la Commission consulaire que je viens de citer montrent combien
cetteaffirmation est insoutenable.
Incidentally, those quotations also prove the unIncidemment, ces citations prouvent egalement
tenability of the theory, generally advanced in the a quel point est insoutenable la these e..x!?osee dans
course of chapter 11, and more particularly in le courant du chapitre n et plus particulierement
chapter IV, paragraph 3, that "different interpre- au paragraphe 3 du chapitre IV, et seIon laquelle
tations of the cease-fire order by each side thus "les differentes interpretations donnees de part
made it impossible for the order to be observed". et d'autre a l'ordre de cesser le feu ont rendu
It is rather surprising that such a theory should impossible l'e.xecution de cet ordre". It est assez
have been put forward, since it is difficult to see surprenant qu'on ait pu soutenir .une telle these
how tilere.could be any "different interpretations". puisqu'il est difficile de concevoir comment il
pouvait y avoir des "interpretations differentes".
All the expressions that the report uses in conToutes les expressions que I'on rencontre dans
nexior. with the RepubEcan forces imply that the le rapport en ce qui concerne les forces republiRepublican forces had taken up what may only caines impliquent que celles-ci ont observe ce que
be described as a passive attitude..The Republican l'on ne saurait decrire que comme une attitude
forces "remained in their positions", "defended' passive. Les forces republicaines "sont restees
themselves", "were subjected to mopping-up op- sur leurs positions", "se sont de£endues", "ont ete
erations"; and they "opposed movements" by the soumises a des v1Jerations de nettoyage" et se
N eth~rlands forces,
sont "opposees aux mouvements" des forces neerlandaises.
On the other hand, the expressions used in conPar contre, les expressions utilisees a I'egard
nexion with the Netherlands forces imply posi- des forces neerlandaises impliquent une action
tive action and initiative incompatible with the positive et des initiatives incompatibles avec la
, cease-fire resolution. They operated within ter- resolution 'relative a la cessation des hostilites.
ritory occupied by Indonesians both behind and Ces forces ont opere a I'interieur du territoire
ahead of their advanced spearheads; they "by- occupe par les Indonesiens en avant comme a l'arpassed Republican forces"; they made "rapid riere de leurs pointes avancees; elles ont "depasse
advance"; they "carried' out clearing sweeps"; les .formations republicaines"; e1les ont opere des
they carried out "fanning operations"; they made "avances rapides"; e11es ont effectue "des opera"deep narrow thrusts int,o Republican territory"; tions de nettoyage"; e1les se sont "deployees";
they "took offensive action"-and all this after elles ont pousse "des pointes etroites et profondes
the Security Council's resolution calling for the en territoire republicain"; elles ont "declenche des
cessation of hostilities.
offensi"es" - et tout cela apres que la resolution
du Conseil de securite relative a la cessation des
hostilites fUt interven)1e.
It ressort clairemerit de ceci que l'une des parties
.From this emerges the plain fact that the Security Council's resolution calling for the cessa- a accepte et observe la resolution dti Conseil de
tion of hostilities Wa3 obeyed by the one side" and securite relative a la cessation des hostilites alors
que l'autl'e n'en tenait pas compte ou la tournait.
disregarded or circumvented by the other.
The report aJso provides an illuminating comOn trouve egalement dans le rapport un commentary on I;ertain allegations that have been mentaire revelateur de certainesallegations formade repeatedly and vehement'y by the represen- mulees a rilaintes reprises sur- un r ton vehement,
tative of the Netherlands and' others of his way par le representant des Pays-Bas ainsi que par
of thinking. The Council has been told,' for ex- d'autres membres partageant sa maniere de voir.
ample, that the Indonesian ft '-. ~es are mainly On a, par exemple, declare devant le ConseiJ, que
guerrilla bands anu that .tlerefore the Republican . 1es forces indonesiennes etaient composees surGovernment could hardly be e.'rpected to initiate torit de bandes de francs-tireurs et qu'en conseand control orderly troop movements. Allegations quence on pouvait difficilement attendre du Gouof this kind have a kinship with the argument that vernement republicain qu'il ait l'initiative et le
'the Council has 'heard from the Netherlands side . controle de mouvements de troupes methodiques.
since the beginning of its consideration of this Des afiegations de cet ordre s'apparentent a l'arquestidn, namely, that there is no Indonesian Re- gument. que les Pays-Bas ont fait valoir devant
publican Government at aU worthy of, the name le Conseil depuis le debut de· cette discussion and that it is only a "microphone" government. a savoir qu'il n'y a pas de Gouve~nement republ~­
These allegations seem rather fanciful in. the light cain digne de ce nom mais settlement ungouv~t­
of the statements contained in chapter II;para- nement "microphone". Ces allegations apparaIs1 See Official Records oftlte Security Council, Second
Year, No. 95.

1 Voir les Proces-verball~ officiels du Conseil de sectlrite, Deuxif~me Annee, No 95.
~

graph 42 'of the' report to the efiect that the ('
ganization of t:he Republican regular fOr<:_:> seer crood and that orders are promptly carned ou,
b
The Commission has, however, noted that few
Indonesian troops h~ve complete uniforms, that
in other words, the Republican forces lack the
tailor-made "dignity that should hedge" a regular
professional army. But there is no suggestion t113.t
the Indonesian army's poverty in clothes has affected its morale or its discipline. The best. proof
that the Republican Government is an effective
government and that its army is a disciplined. army,
well under control, is furnished by the Commis-'
sion's own statement that the RepUblican army
faithfully carried out its Government's cease-fire
order.
The report refers to the existence of irregular
bands, whose activities certainly call for condemnation. Considering that Indonesia has been the
theatre of invasion and occupation by foreign forces, first Japanese and now Netherlands, it would
be surprising indeed if there did 'not prevail, in
certain areas at least, a state of unsettlement in
whjch lawless elements might be expected _to
flouri.sh. I believe that the last war and its aftermath crec:ted comparable conditions in some parts
of Europe, and the complete restoration of normal
conditions was not achieved without considerable
difficulty.
The Consular Commission was set up to report on the situation in Indonesia following the
Security Council's cease-fire order, and it was not
expected to express any kind of political opinion.
Nevertheless, in chapter Ill, paragr<'ph 1, of the
report, it has entered into the field of politjcal
evaluations. Let us take, for example, the statement that it is only the small educated minority in
Indonesia that is enthusiastically nationalistic and
that "the masses, who are mainly agricultural . . .
are not in general politically minded". It IS well
known to persons familiar with the history of colonial administrations that this is the stereotyped
argument of all imperiali~t Powers when confronted by a nationalist movement for independence. The imperialist has always posed in history
as the champion of the interests of the masses of
the population of the countries he has subjugated,
as against the interests of a minority of the population whiCh claims independence for its own selfish purposes.
.

Paragraph 1 of chapter III of the report, however, does not conceal the fact that this enthusiastically nationalistic educated minority is "most
influential politically" throughout the country,
even though an attempt is made to whittle down
the importance of this statement by the remark
that it does not form "more than 5 per cent of
the population". In Indonesia, as in other CD1.iiitries, it is this little leaven that leaveneth the whole
lot. They, and not the foreign rulers, are the nat~ral leaders to whom the' masses of the population look up for guidance in all nationa! movements.
It is very refreshing to read in the same para.graPh that enthusiastic nationalist feeling exists

I :

"It l..omme assez fantaisistes si 1'0n se reporte
_~ declarations contenues au paragraphe 42 du
chapitre Il du rapport, ou il est dit que l'organisation des forces republicaines regulieres semble
bonne et que les ordres sont rapidement executes.
La Commission a cependant note qu'il yavait·
peu d'unites indonesiennes ayant des uniformes
complr ~s. En d'autres termes, il manque a l'armee republicaine cette apparence soignee et cette
dignite exterieure qui sieent i une armee reguliere. Mais le rapport n'indique nullement que la
pauvrete en vetements ait affecte le moral ou la
discipline de l'armee indonesienne. Le Gouvernement republicain est un gouvernement veritable,
son armee est une armee disciplinee, bien tenue
en main, et la meilleure preuve en est fournie par
la declaration de la Commission elle-meme selon
laquelle I'armee republicaine a fidelement execute
l' ordre de cesser le feu donne par son Gouvernement.
Le rapport fait allusion a l'existence de bandes
irregulieres dont I'activite est sans nul doute condamnable. Si 1'0n considete que I'Indonesie a ere
envahie, puis occupee, par des armees etrangeres,
japonaises d'abord, neerlandaises maintenant, il
serait surprenant en verite que ne regnat pas, dans
certaines regions tout au moins, un etat de trouble,
naturellement favorable aux elements de desordre. J e crois que la derniere guerre avec toutes
ses repercussions a cree des conditions analogues
dans certaines contrees d'Europe et que ce n'est
qu'au prix de difficultes considerables qu'on a
pu retablir completement de~ conditions normales.
La Commission consulaire a ete creee pour
faire rapport sur la situation en Indonesie telle
qu'elle se presentait apres que le Conseil de secu-:
rite eut donne l'ordre de cesser le feu; on n'attend
d'elle aucun jugement poiitique de quelque sorte
que ce soit. Neanmoins, au paragraphe premier
du chapitre III du rapport, e1le a aborde le domaine des considerations politiques. Prenons par
exemple la declaration selon laquelle seule une
faible minorite d'Indonesiens instruits manifeste
des sentiments nationalistes enthousiastes, tandis
que "les masses, qui sont essentieUement agricoles . . . ne se preoccupent· pas en general des
questions politiques". Ceux qui connaissent bien
l'histoire des administrations coloniales savent
parfaitement que' c'est la l'eterne1 argument de
toutes les Puissances imperialistes lorsqn'elles se
trouvent en face d'un mouvement nationaliste
. d'independance. L'imp~rialisme ,s'est toujours
fait, au cours de l'histoire, le champion des interets des masses populaires des pays qu'il a subjugues contre les interets d'une minorite de la
population qui recIame l'indeperidance dans des
buts purel11ent egoistes.
Le paragraphe premier du chapitre III du rapport, cependant, ne dissimule pas le fait· que cette
minorite instruite et animee par U11 nationalism,e
enthousiaste est "la plus influente du point de
vue politique" dans l'ensemble dn pays, encore
qu'on ait tente d'attenrier Fimportance de cette
declaration en faisant rel11arqrier que cette tninorite ne represel1te "que 5 pour cent de la population". En Indonesie,comme dans les antres pays,
il suffit de ce peu de ferment pour animer la
masse. Ce sont ces homl11es, et non les ~rigeants
etrangers, qui sont les chefs legitil11es auxquels
la l11asse· populaire demande de la diriger clans
tous les mouvements natio'naux.
11 est tres reconfortant de lire dans le mel11e
paragraphe qu'un sentiment nationaliste enthou:-

2628
not only in the towns but also in the country areas,
and that this feeling "is not against the average
Dutchman but against the return of 'colonialism'''. This is repeated in chapter IV, paragraph
7, where it is said: "There is little hatred of the
Dutch as individuals. . ." I am sure the Council
would have been pleased if the Commission had
also reported that there is little hatred of the Indonesians on the part of the invaders. The same
paragraph goes on to say that Netherlands "assistance in running the country is recognized as essential". It is unfortunate that sweeping statements of this kind, which are akin to propaganda,
should have found a place in the consular report.
In the circumstances revealed by the consular
report, it is obvious that, before the Security
Council can take any further steps in the Indonesian affair, it must first insist on full compliance
with the resolution calling for the cessation of hostilities. Any attempt that may new be made to
water down that resolution or to gloss over the
fact that it has been disobeyed by one of the parties would be interpreted as a sign of the Cotmcil's weakness. To make the observance of the
cease-fire order contingent on the drawing-up of
a demarcation line, or to caU upon the parties at
this stage, when one of· them has been disobeying
that order for nearly·three months, to consult with
each other as to the means to be employed to give
effect to the reSOlution calling for the cessation of
hostilities would everjwhere be regarded as a
retrograde step. Besides, it is hardly necessary that
the Committee of Good Offices should be specificallv requested to assist the parties in reaching agreement as regards the observance of the
cease-fire order, since this is obviously one of the
first steps that one would regard as being implicit
in the resolution setting up that Committee. 1
Suggestions are now being made to the .Council that it should retain the services of the Consular Commission for one purpose or another. It
will be recalled that the Consular Commission
was given the clear and specific mandate of reporting to the Council on the situation in Indonesia following the resolution of 1 August 1947
caIling for the "cessation of hostilities. "Vith the
submission of its report On the e....isting situation
in Indonesia, therefore, the Commission has become functus officio. The suggestion that it should
now co-operate with the Committee of Good Offices implies a prolongation of its e.xistence. Is it
the intention that these two bodies should continue
to function side by side and that the Consular
Commission should continue to have responsibilities of its own towards the Security Council? Now
that the Committee of Good Offices has started
functioning, there seems no longer any justification for keeping this Commission alive. It is, of
course, taken for granted that the Committee of
Good Offices is free to utilize the services of military missions and other agencies needed for the.
prosecution of its war, without a new lease of
life being given to the Consular Commission.

siaste existe non seulement dans les villes mais
aussi dans les campagnes et que ce sentiment
"n'est pas dirige contre le HoJIalldais moyen mais
contre le retour du "colonialisme". Nous retrouvons la meme idee au paragraphe 7 du chapitre
IV ou it est declare: "Les Hollandais sont peu
hais en tant qu'individus .. ".". ]e suis stir que le
Conseil aurait ete satisfait si la Commission avait
egalement affirme que les Indonesiens etaient peu
hais par les envahisseurs. Le meme paragraphe
poursuit, parlant des Hollandais: "on reconnait
que leur aide est essentielle cl. l'administration du
pays". 11 est regrettable que des declarations aussi
generales, qui s'apparentent a la propaganda,
aient trouve plac~ dans le rapport consulaire.

l

Etant donne la situation que revele le rapport

consulaire~ il est evident que le Conseil de securite,

avant de prendre aucune initiative nouvelle dans
l'affaire, indonesienne, doit d'abord insister sur"
l'execution complete de la resolution relative a
la cessation des hostilites. Toute tentative que
l'on pourrait faire maintenant pour attenuer cette
resolution, ou pour masquer le fait que rune des
parties l'a enfreinte, serait interpretee comme un
signe de faiblesse de la part du Conseil. Faire
dependre I'execution de 1'0rdre de cesser le feu de
l'etablissement d'une ligne de demarcation, ou demander actuellement aux parties adverses, alors
que I'une d'elles contrevient cl. cet ordre depuis
pres de trois mois, de se concerter sur le moyen
de mettre en reuvre la resolution relative a la
cessation des hostilites, serait par-tout considere
comme un pas en arriere. En outre, il est it peine
necessaire de demander expressement cl. la Commission de bons officesd'aider les parties cl. reali,..
ser un accord sur I'e.xecution de cet ordre, puisque
c'est la, de toute evidence, rune des premieres
mesures que 1'0n peut considerer comme implicitement contenues dans la resolution aux tennes de
laquelle cette Commission a ete instituee1 •
On suggere maintenant au Conseil de continuer

a faire appel cl. la Commission consulaire dans tel

ou tel but. La Commission consulaire a, on s'en
souvient, rec;u pour mandat clair et precis de fai-re
rapport au Conseil sur la situation existant en
Indonesie apres l'adoption de la resolution du
ler aotit 1947 tendant cl. la cessation des hostilites.
Avec la remise de son rapport sur la situation
presente en Indonesie, la Commission a donc termine sa tache. Suggerer qu'elle doive maintenant cooperer avec la Commission de bOltS offices,
implique la prolongation de son existence. Desiret-on que ces deuxorganismes continuent de fonctionner parallelement et que la Commission consulaire continue d'avoir envers le Conseil de secttrite
des responsabilites qui lui soient propres? Maintenant que la Conunission de bons offices est
entree en fonctions, il ne semble y avoir aucune
raison de laisser en activite la Commission consulaire. 11 est evidemment entendu que la Commission de bons offices a" toute latitude de recourir
aux services de missions militaires et de tous
autres organismes qui 1'ourront raider it accomplir sa tache, sans qu'il soit besoin de proroger le
mandat de la Commission consulaire.

Our insistence on the withdrawal of the troops
to their QtJte bellll1U positions-an insistence which
we voiced in our very first statement before the

Si nous insistons sur la necessite du retrait des
troupes sur les positions qu'elles occupaient a~nt
les hostilites ~ et nous avons insiste sur ce pomt

• SCe Official Records of the Secllrity COllllcil, Second
Year. No. 83.

• Voir les Proc~s-'1Jerb(JlIx ot/iciels DU C(}nseil de seclIrite, Deuxieme Annee, No 83.
.~

p

2629
Council' - arises out of our conviction that the
Council has, 'in Indonesia, not only to ensure
compliance with the cease-fire resolution but also
to promote a durable and just political settlement.

In this connexion, the contrast between the attitude of the Government of the Indonesian Republic and that of the Government of the Netherlands towards the Security Council and the United
Nations generally needs to be emphasized. As
soon as hostilities commenced, the Indones~an Republic appealed to the Security Council in the full
hope and confidence that it would obtain justice
at the Council's hands. 2 Even before the Council
took up the matt(~r, the Indonesian Republic
agreed in all loyalty to accept and abide by whatever decisions th~: Council might take. In that
spirit, it accepted the request for a cease-fire and
gave immediate effect to it. When the United
States of Americaoft'ered its good offices and undertook to act as mediator, the Indonesian Republic preferred not to take the matter out of the
hands of the Securitv ....uncil. And it has now
provided another strlkl.t", proof of its absolute
faith in the Security Council. Its communication
to the Council of 15 October formally guarantees
"safety, peace and order in all areas evacuated by
Netherlands troops".s Further, "the Republic of
Indonesia . . . accepts supervision, as well as
co-operation, from the Security Council or any
other international body set up for that purpose".

des notre toute premiere declaration devant le
Conseil1 - c'est parce que nous sommes convaincus que le Conseil doit non seulement assurer
en Indonesie l'execution de la resolution tendant
a la' cessation des hostilites, mais aussi favoriser
un reglement politique juste et durable du differend.
A cet egard, il convient de souligner le contraste
entre l'attitude du Gouvernement de la Republique d'Indonesie et celle du Gouvemement des
Pays-Bas a l'egard du Conseil de securite et des
Nations Unies en general. Des le debut des hostilites, la Republique indonesienne a fait appel au
Conseil de securite avec l'espoir .et la certitude
que celui-ci lui reildrait justice:!. Avant meme
que le Conseil ait aborde l'examen de la question,
la Republique indonesienne a accepte en toute
loyaute de se conformer cl toutes les decisions que
le Conseit pourrait prend!e. C'est dans cet esprit
qu'elle a accepte l'invitation cl cesser le feu et s'y
est immediatement conformee. Quand les EtatsUnis d'Amerique ont offert leurs bons offices et
ont entrepris d'agir en mediateurs, la ~epublique
indonesienne a pre£ere laisser le Conseit de securite seul juge du differend. Elle vient maintenant
de foumir une autre preuve frappante de sa foi
absolue dans le Conseil de securite. Par son
message au Conseil, en date du 15 octobre,son
Gouvemement se porte formellement garant de
"la securite, de la paix et de l'o;rdre dans toutes
les regions evacuees Rar les troupes neerlandaises"s. En outre, "la Republique d'Indonesie
accepte ... le controle aussi bien que la cooperation du COl1seil de securite ou de tout autre organisme intemational cree it cet effet."
Le Gouvemement des Pay-Bas, par contre, a
tout au long conteste que le Conseit de securite
ait competence pour intervenir dans le differend.
Il a fait tous ses efforts pour aboutir a un reglement en dehors des Nations Unies. Il n'a accepte
la resolution relative cl la cessation des hostilites
qu'avec beaucoup de repugnance et it a formule
de nombreuses reserves du genre de celles que
le representant des Pays-Bas a emises lors de notre deux-cent-treizieme seances; maintenant en:core, it agit cl l'encontre de la resolution. Enfin,
it s'est constamment oppose cl l'idee du retrait des
troupes sur leurs positions primitives.

The Netherlands Government, on the other
hand, has all along contested the competence of
the Secudty Council to intervene in this dispute.
It put forth its best exertions to effect a settlement outside the United Nations; it accepted the
resolution calling for the cessation of hostilities
only with a great deal of reluctance and with a
great many reservations, such as were elaborated
at the two hundred and thirteenth meetingS by the
representative of the Netherlands; and it is even
now acting against that resolution. Finally, it has
been resisting all along the suggestion regarding
the withdrawal of its troops to their original positions.
C'est a la lumiere de ces faits qu'il convient de
It is against the background of these facts that
the Indonesian Republic's latest communication . considerer le demier message de la Republique
has to be considered. The present declaration of d'Irtdonesie. La presente dechiration du Gouverthe Indonesian Government effectively itisposes nement indonesien roouit a neant les objectioniii
of the objections that have been raised in regard qui ont ete elevees quant aux consequences evento the possible consequences of the withdrawal tuelles du retrait des troupes neerlandaises. Ma
of the Netherlands forces. My. delegation, there- delegationespere donc que le Consen lle securite
fore, hopes that the Security Council will now estimera desormais possible de realiser le retrait
find it possible to arrange the withdrawal of the des troupes sur les positions qu'el1es occupaient
troops to their ante bellum positions and to co- avant les hostilites, de cooperer avec le Gottoperate with and supervise the action of the Gov- vemement de la Republique' d'Indonesie et de
~rnment of the Indonesian Republic in maintaincontroler les mesures qu'il prendra pour mainmg safety, peace and order in the areas evacuated tenil" la securite, la paix et l'ordre dans les regions
by the Netherlands forces. The Indonesian case, evacuees par les troupes neerlandaises. Avec l'aflet us remember, is' the first opportunity the faire indonesienne, ne l'oublions pas, le Conseil
Council has had to exercise its authority in an a eu, pour ~ --remiere fois, l'occasion d'exercer
open armed conflict between two States, and to son autonte dans un conflit arme entre deux
act in a supervisory capacity in relation to the Etats et d'exercer des fonctions de controle relawithdrawal of troops as a prelude to a settlement. tivement au retrait de troupes qui constitue le
y 1 See Official Records of ti,e SeClln'fjl COllncil, 'Second
.
ear, No. 67.

• Ibid" ,No. 72
• Ibid., No. 99••

I

Voir les Proces-verball~ officiels du COIlSeil de secu-

ril~.

Deuxiemt. Annee, No 67.

• Ibid" No 72.

'/[na., No 99.

2630

A refusal to ac.t upon the very timely and reasonable suggestion made by the Government of the.
Indonesian Republic would cause serious misgivings in the hearts not only ot the Indonesian people, but also of peoples elsewhere, who look to
the Security Council for the enforcement of· international peace and justice.

prelude d'un reglement. Refuser d'agir con:ormement a !a suggestion aussi opportune quI" raisonnable du Gouvernement de la Rep' ,~iique
d'Indonesie, ferait naitre de tres graves apprehen'sions non seulement chez le peuple indonesien
mais aussi chez les autres peuples, qui comptent
sur le Conseil de secur:~e pour faire respecter la
paix et la justice internationales.

M. PALAR (Republique d'Indonesie) (trad1£it
Mr. PALAR (Republic of Indonesia) : With regard to Indonesia, the Security Council is faced de l'mJglais): En ce qui concerne l'Indonesie, le
with two probiems. The first problem is the acute Conseil de· securitese trouve en presence de deux
one, which has to.be dealt with immediately. The problemes. Le premier, qui se pose avec .acuite,
question now is: what steps should the Security doit etre traite immediatement. La questIOn est
Council take so that its cease-fire recommenda- , la suivante: queUes mesures le Conseil de securite
tion may be carried out? The second problem is devrait-il prendre afin de donner effet a sa recoma long-term question, namely, how can the Se- mandation tendant a faire cesser le feu? Le security Council assist in establishing a new re- cond probleme est a longue echeance : comment le
lationship between the Netherlands and the In- Conseil de securite peut-il aider a etablir des reladonesian Republic?
tions d'un caractere nouveau entre les Pays-Bas
et la Republique d'Indonesie?
The Consular r.eport puts important data at the
Le rapport de la Commission consulaire met a
disposal of the Security ~ouncil, particularly with la disposition du Conseil de securite des renseigneregard to the first problem, but a portion of the men1:s importants, notamment en ce qui concerne
information contained in the report ca~ certainly le premier probleme, mais une partie des renseibe useful for the Jong.,.term solution. It is my in- gnements contenus dans le rapport peut, sans nul
tention to examine these questions. Before I dis- doute, aider a resoudre le probleme a longue
cuss these problems, however, I wish to convey echeance. Je me propose d'examiner ces questo the Council.three impressions which the con- tions. Avant de proceder a cet examen, toutefois,
sular repert has left in my mind.
je voudrais comml,lniquer au Conseil trois observations que m'a suggerees la lecture du rapport
de la Commission consulaire.
J'ai vecu aux Pays-Bas pendant toute l'occupaThrough the period of the German occupation
I lived in the Netherlands, where we Indonesians tion allemande, et nous avions alors, nous les
formed an organized group in our efforts to re- Indonesiens qui nous efforcions de resister aux
sist the German Nazis. There are many parts of nazis aUemands, constitue un groupe organise.
the report which brought IJ;le back to the atmo- . Nombreuses sont les parties du rapport qui m'ont
sphere of the r.esistance in the Netherlands.
rappe1e l'atmosphere de la resistance aux PaysBas.
Lorsque les nazis ont envahi les Pays-Bas, ils
The Nazis invaded the Netherlands and declared that they did not come there as enemies to ont declare qu'ils n'etaient pas venus en ennemis
destroy the country. On the co~trary, they de- pour ruiner le pays. Ils ont affinlle, au contraire,
clared that they came to protect the Netherlands qu'ils etaient venus aux Pays-Bas pour proteger
against its enemies from within and without. le pays contre ses ennemis de l'exterieur et de
There, too, the German Nazis attempted to l'interietir. La ansai, les nazis aUemands se sont
make use of the whole Netherlands economic and efforces d'utiliser l'ensemble des rouages econoadministrative machinery; they largely succeeded miques et administratifs des Pay~-:Bas, et its ont
in that.
reussi dans une large mesure.
In the Netherlands also the German }Jazis put
Aux Pays-Bas egalement, les nazis allemands
their Dutch tools in key positions, There, too, the ont place aux postes-cles leurs hommes de paille
majority of the N~therlands people had to adapt hollandais, et la majorite de la population neerthemselves to the conditions which were thus landaise a rift eUe aussi s'adapter ,a la situation
created. Only a very small group-the so-called ainsi cn~ee. Seulun tres petit groupe -celui qu'on
illegal group, Which included some 80 per cent a qualifie' d'ilU~gal, auquel appartenaient 80 pour
of the Indonesians living in the N etherlands- cent environ des Indonesiens vivant aux Paysresisted in the underground organizations and de- Bas - a resiste au sein des organisations clanfended the honour of the Netherlands. Those destines et a defendu l'honneur des Pays-Bas.
small underground· forces were fighting for a Ces forces clandestines, peu nombreuses, comgood cause and even resorted to robbery, killing battaient pour une bonne cause, et eurent meme
and intimi<4ttion of their fellow countrymen who recours au vol, au meurtre et a l'intimidation a
were co-operating with the Germans. In the Neth- l'egard de ceux de leurs concitoyens qui collaboerlands also, those fighters for freedom, the her- mient avec les Allemands. Aux Pays-Bas aussi,
oes of the resistance movement, were called mur- ces combattants de la liberte, ces heros du mouvederers; looters, criminals and gangsters by the ment de resistance, se sont entendus traiter de
invaders and by their Dutch supporters, who main- . meurtriers, de pillards, de criminels et de bandits
tained that they must be destroyed.
par les envahisseurs et par les collaborateurs
hollandais qui soutenaient qu'il fallait les faire
disparaitre.
La a-ussi se sont manifestes des elements incleThere, too, could be found undesirable elements
who worked for their own benefit under the guise sirables qui travaillaient pour leur' propre c01l}pte,
sous couvert de resistance legitime.
.,
of legitimate resistance.
Dans le paragraphe 23 du chapitre II du rap:
In chapter 11, paragraph 23 of the consular
report I read the following: "In most areas the port de la Commission const11aire, je lis ce ~

W--_.. .

--~-~~-~2:;;:631

army is recruiting and training consiuer~ble ~ivil
police forces. . . They. are . ., armed wIth nfles
and work under Netherlands officers and t:0ncommissioned officers. They are gradually reheving the army of many routine duties. . ." Change
the word Netherlands to German, and we have
the situation as it used to be in the Netherlands
under German occupation.
Together with my Dutch fellow fighters, I
waited impatiently for the hour when the Netherlands Government' radio in London, Radio
Oranje, gave us words of encourage~ent, incited
us to commit sabotage and to contmue to fight
the enemy whenever and wherever possible. And
that Netherlands Government transmitter in London also threatened with heavy punishments those
fellow countrvmen who co-operated with the enemy. Radio Oranje kept -its promise. Thousands of
Netherlanders, accused of collaboration with
the Germans, were arrested when the war was
over. Several of them have been executed, and
recentlv we read that one of the greatest musical
conductors, a Dutchman by the name of Willem
Menge1berg, has been banned for six years from
any activities in musical fields because of his attitude towards the Germans during the occupation.
I can imagine that my Dutch fellow fighters
against the Nazis are shocked by the similarity
between the Gennan occupation of the Netherlands and the Netherlands occupation of Indonesia. But it is a naked reality. It is a tragedy that
there is still a large number of Netherlanders who
cannot· understand why their so-called police action is considered by the ~epublic as a full-fledged
war.
My second impression is that the destruction,
corruption, intimidation, atrocities and so on
which have been committed by both parties in
Netherlands-occupied areas of the Republic are
phenomena accompanying a war, phenomena
emerging anywhere in the world where two forces
are fighting for supremacy. These happenings cannot well be prevented in such circumstances. The
perpetrators of these acts are to be blamed, but
guilt cannot be put on them in the first place. The
blame and the responsibility lie, in the first place,
with the party which created this situation. In this
case it is clear that the Netherlallds Government
ordered its troops into Republican territory.

I should like to draw the attention of the Council to the definition given by the Commander-inChief of the Netherlands army in Indonesia, Lieutenant-General Spoor, in regard to the military
action. It appears in appendix VIII of the consular report, .from which I quote:

{(Commission: How would you define this
action, then? An action to stop destruction and
to restore law and order? Can you define that?

hr

. {(Reply: Let us describe it in this way: we
aImed at occupation of economically important
areas in order to safeguard economic objectives

suit: "Dans laplupart des regIons, .l'armee recrute et entraine des forces de police civile considerables ... Ils sont ... armes de fusils et travaillent sous les ordres d'officiers et sous-officiers
neerlandais. lIs liberent graduellement I'armee
en assurant les patrouilles courantes ...". Remplacez le mot neerlandais par le mot allemands,
et nous avons la le tableau de la situation qui
existait aux Pays-Bas sous I'occupation allemande.
Comme mes camarades de combat neerlandais, .
j'attendais impatiemment I'heure a. laquelle la radio gouvernementale des Pays-Bas a Londres,
Radio Oranje, nous communiquait des paroles
d'encouragement et nous incitait a. commettre des
actes de sabotage et a poursuivre la luttecontre
l'ennemi partout et chaque fois que cela etait possible. Et cet emetteur du Gouvernementneerlandais de Londres mena\ait egalement de chatiments severes ceux de nos concitoyens qui collaboraient avec I'enllemi. Radio Oranje a tenu sa
promesse. Des milliers de Neerlandais accuses de
collaboration avec les Allemands ont ete arretes
a la fin de la guerre. Un certain nombre d'entre
eux ont ete executes, et nous avons appris recemment par les journaux qu'un des plus grands
chefs d'orchestre, le Hollandais \iVillem Mengelberg, s'etait vu interdire pour six ans I'exetcice
de toute activite professionnelle el'l raison de I'attitude qu'il avait adoptee a I'egard des Allemallds
au cours de l' occupatiofl.
Je coti\ois que mes camarades de combat hollalldais, qui ont mene avec moi la lutte contre les
nazis, soient choques par I'analogie qui existe
entre I'occupation allemande des Pays-Bas et l'occupation neerlandaise de l'Indonesie, mais cette
analogie n'est que trop reelle. Il est tragique qu'il
y ait encore un grand nombre de Neerlandais qui
ne puissent comprendre pourquoi leurs operations
dites de police sont considerees par la Republique
comme une gtlerre ouverte.
La deuxil~me observation qui m'est venue a.
I'esprit, c'est que le!? destrnctions, les tentatives de
corruption, les actes d'intimidation, les atrocites,
et ainsi de suite, qui ont ete commis par les deux
parties dans les regions republicaines occupees
par les troupes neerlandaises sont des phenomenes nes de la guerre, qui se manifestent partout au monde lorsque deux forces se disputent
I'hegemonie. Il est bien difficile, en de telles circonstances, d'empecher ces faits. On doit certes
blamer les auteurs de ces crimes, mais on ne
'saurait leur en faire porter la responsabilite au
premier chef. Ce,tlX qui sont responsables, ceux
qui doivent encourir le blame, ce sont ceux qui
ont cree cette situation. Dans le cas present, il
est clair qu~ c'est le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas
qui a donne l' ordre a ses' troupes de penetrer en
territoire republicain.
J'aimerais attirer I'attention du CO!iseil sur la
definition des operations militaires donnee par le
geneml Spoor, Commandant en chef de l'armee
neerlandaise en Indonesie. Cette definition figure
a I'annexe VIII du rapport de la Commission
consulaire dont j'extrais le passage suivant:

"La Commission: Comment 'definiriez-vous
ces operations, alors? Des operations destinees
a. arreter les destructions et a restaurer le
regne du droit et l'ordre public? Pouvez-vous
les definir ainsi?
"R6ponse: Nous pouvons les a.ecrire comme
suit: notre but etait d'occuper les regions importantes au point de vue economique afin de

2632
and, in general, foodstuffs. In article XIV of
the Linggadjati Agreement it is stated: 'The
Government of the Republic recognizes the
claims of all non-Indonesians to the restoration
of their rights and restitution of their goods,
as far as they are exercised or to be found in
the territory over which it exercises de facto
authority. A joint commission will be set up
to effect this restoration and restitution'. . . and
make possible the improvement of the economic
condition of the population.

prob~ger les objectifs economiques et; en gene-

ral, les reserves de produits alimentafres. L'a,rtide XIV de l'Accord de Linggadjati stipule:
"Le Gouvernement de la Republique reconnait
"les revendications de tous les non Indonesiens
"visant au retablissement de leurs droits et a la
"restitution de leurs biens dans la mesure ou
"ces droits sont exerces et ou ces biens se trou"vent dans le t~rritoire sur lequel il.exerce une
"autorite de facto. Vne commission mixte sera
"instituee afin de proceder a ce retablissement
"des droitset a cette restitution des biens ..."
et permettre l'amelioration de la situation economique de la population.
"La Commission: C'est ainsi que vous definiucommission: That would be your definition
riez les operations de police?
of police action?
Reply: Yes."
"Reponst: OuL"
C'est la une definition tres prudente d'ou sont
This is a very cautionus definition from which
is omitted deliberately the phrase "to restore law omis de propos delibere ies mots "pour restaurer
and order". In fact, before Netherlands. troops la loi et l'ordre". En fait. la lQi et l'ordre removed into Repl,blican territories, there was law gnaient avant que les troupes neerlandaises peneand order, as is amply evidenced by the consular trent sur le territoire republicain, comme le dereport. Only in the neighbourhood of the demar.ca- montre amplement le rapport de la Commission
tion lines was there some unrest and tension, both consulaire. It n'y avait de troubles et de tension
on the Netherlands and on the Indonesian side. qu'a proximite de la ligne de demarcation, tant
The truce of October 1946 was violated on both du cote neerlandais que du cote indonesien. La
sides: according to the Netherlands more than treve d'octobre 1946 a ete violee par les deux
a thousand times by the Indonesians and, accord- parties: selon les Neerlandais, les actes de violaing to the Indonesiaf1,s, more than three hundred tion commis par les Indonesiens se. mont~raient
times by the Netherlands.
a plus d'un millier, et selon les Indonesiens, les
Neerlandais auraient viole cette trev~ en plus de
trois cents occasions.
,
It convient de noter toutefois que la ligne de
It should be noted, however, that the demarcation lines, as agreed upon by both parties, was demarcation, telle qu'elle avait ete tracee d'un
not changed unilaterally by the Indonesians in commun accord par les deux parties, n'a pas ete
spite of the alleged truce violations. The Nether- modifiee par un acte unilateral de la part des Inlands authorities, on the other hand, did change donesiens, en depit de leurs pretendues violations
the demarcation line of 14 October 1946. It seems de la treve. En revanche, les autorites neerlanto be their habit. They actually annexed Krian, daises ont modifie le trace de la ligne de demarcaModjokerto, Buitenzorg, and Palembang, to state t-ion du 14 octobre 1946. Elles semblent etre couonly a few instances.
"
tumieres du fait. EUes ont, en efIet, annexe Krian,
Modjokerto, Buitenzorg et ~alembang, pour ne
citer que quelques exemples.
En ce qui concerne le blocus dit alimentaire, je
With regard to the so-called food blockade, I
should like to point out most emphatically that voudrais insister sur le fait qu'it a ete rendu nethat blockade was necessitated by the naval and cessaire par le blocus naval et militaire impose a
military blockade imposed by the Netherlands on la Republique par les Pays-Bas. Le materiel de
the Republic..Necessary transport equipment and transport et les produits pharmaceutiques necesmedicines were prohibited. As a consequence of saires furent frappes d'interdit. L'une des consethis blockade, even major surgical operations quences de ce blocus a ete que, sur le territoire
within the Republic had to be carried out without republicain, it a meme faUu prqceder aux interanaesthetics. 'When people entered into Republi- ventions '«hirurgicales graves sans anesthesique.
can territory, every tube of aspirin was seized by Lorsqu'on penetrait en territoire republicain, les
the Netherlands military posts. The consequences postes militaires neerlandais effectuaient jitsqu'a
of the Netherlands blockade for the Republic of la saisie du moindre tube d'aspirine. On ne sauIndonesia can hardly be underestimated. That is rait guere sous-estimer les consequences 'qu'a eues
why I should like to go into the matter more le blocus neerlandais pour la Republique d'Indofully.
nesie, et c'est pourquoi je voudrais etudier la
questio~ plus en detail.
Le blocus neerlandais a ete soutenu par les
. The Netherlands blockade was carried out by
Netherlands naval forces from the very beginuing forces navales neerlandaises et des leur retour ·en
of their return to Indonesia at the end of the .Indonesie a la fin de la' guerre du Pacifique; il a
Pacific war, and was extended to the fullest de-' atteint son intensite maxima apres que le Gouvergree after it was codified by the decree unilaterally nement colonial des Pays-Bas en eut codifie les
issued by the Netherlands' colonial Government modalites dans un decret publie unilateralement
on 29 January 1947. I stress the word unilater- le 29 janvier 1947. Je souligne le mot unilateally, because at that time the Linggadjati Agree- ralement parce que, a ce moment-Hi, l'Accord de
ment1 had already been initialed. The unilateral Linggadjati1 avait deja ete parapb6. Le decret
U

',See The Political Events in the Republic of Indonesia, published by the Netherlands Information Bureau,
New York.

I

r

i

'Voir "The P~liticdl Events in the Republic of jndO-~
nesia", d~ument publie par le Bureau d'information des.
Pays-Bas it New-York.

2633
N etherla~ds de\:tee· ordering a blockade contained
the following provisions:
-1. In regard to exports from Indonesia, a distinction was· made between estate products and
native prodv.<:ts. There were still under the control of th~ Republica~ Government considerable
stocks of all kinds of products, such as sugar, rubber and so on, which were considered by the
Netherlands to be estate-owned;

neerlandais unilateral ordonnant le blocus contenaif les dispositions suivantes:
1. En ce qui concerneJes exportations en provenance d'Indonesie, une distinction etait etablie
entre les produits des domaines coloniaux et l~s
produits indigenes. Le Gouvernement d~ !a Republique detenait encore des stocks conslderables
de toutes sortes de produits tels que sucre, caoutchouc, et ainsi de suite, que les Neerlandais consideraient comme appartenant a l'Etat;
En ce qui concerne ces produits, dits des doIn connexion with these so-called estate-owned
products, the Netherlands claimed that· all ex- maines coloniaux, les Neerlandais soutenaient que
ports were subject to a licence of the Netherlands toute .exportation des dits pmduits e~t soumise
colonial Government even though that colonial a la detivrance d'une autorisation par le GouverGovernment had no actual control over them. nement colonial des Pays-Bas, meme si ce dernier.
It should be noted, however:
n'exer~it aucun controle sur ces produits. It
convient de noter toutefois: .
En premier lieu, que les produits dits des do·First, that the so-called estate products are also
grown by native cultivation and that at no time maines coloniaux proviennent egalement des exis one in a position to specify what part of a cer- ploitations indigenes et que perso~ne n'est ja~.ais
tain stock of sugar, for instance, is estate-grown en mesure de determiner dans quelle proportlOn
or native-grown;
un certain stock de sucre, par exemple, est le
produit d'exploitations des colons ou d'exploitations indigenes;
.
En deuxieme lieu, lorsque les Neerlandais ont
Secondly, when the Netherlands forces retreated before the Japanese invasion, their Gov- battu en retraite devant I'invasion japonaise, le
ernment issued an order to its military and civil Gouvernement des Pays-Bas a donne l'ordre aux .
authorities to destroy completely all the existing autoritt~s civiles et militaires neet;:landaises de prostocks. It may therefore be assumed with a great ceder a la destruction totale de tous les stocks
deal of justification that stocks owned in 1942 by existants. Aussi est-on grandement en droit de
the Netherlands had already been destroyed, so presumer que les stocks detenus en 194~ par les
that whatever stocks are available at this moment Neerlandais ont deja ete detruits, de sorte qu'auare no part of pre-war production;
cun stock existant actuellement ne .provient de
la production d'avant-guerre;
Thirdly, during the Japanese occupation and
En troisieme lieu, au cours de l'occupation japoduring the past two years under the Government naise et pendant les deux dernieres annees, sous
of the Republic of Indonesia, production was be- le Gouvernementde la Republique d'Indonesie,
ing carried on under Indonesian leadership. Thus la production ete dirigee par les Indonesiens.
by far the greater part of present stocks may be Ainsi la plus grande partie, et de beaucoup, des
considered as produced and owned by Indonesi- stocks actuels peut etre consideree comme ayaht
ans;
ete produite par les Indonesiens et comme leur
appartenant;
- Fourthly, even if amongst the present stocks
En quatrieme lieu, meme si une partie des
some part did originate in pre-war periods, we stocks actuels provenait de la periode d'avantcould claim at least that the Indonesians conserved guerre, nous pourrions faire valoir que les lndoand preserved those stocks by protecting them nesiens ont tout au moins preserve et sauve ces
and by keeping them safely warehoused. This stocks en en assurant la protection et en les garconservation of pre-war stocks and the warehouse dant a l'abri dans les entrepots. Le fait que les
charges easily outweigh in value the value of the stocks d'avant-guerre aient ete sauves, lesfrais
products_as such.
d'entrepot, tout cela represente une valeur aise. ment superieure a celle des produits eux-memes.
2. With regard to imports into Indonesia, by
2. En ce qui concerne les importations a destithe same aforementioned decree the Netherlands nation de l'Indonesie, les Neerlandais ont, par ce
prohibited the import of a wide range of goods meme decret susmentionne, interdit l'importation
under the pretext that these were considered mili- d'un grandnombre de prodults, :,ous le pretex-te
t~rr or semi-military. The selection of these pro'- que ceux-ci pouvaient etre qualifies deproduits
hlblted goods by the Netherlands was so arbi- d'usage militaire ou semi-militaire. La selection
;;ary~ h?~eve,~, and the terms ."military" and de ces marchandises interdites par les Neerlanseml-mlhtary so vague, that the Indonesian dais etait toutefois si arbitraire, et les termes
pe~ple, as a result of this unilateral and arbitrary "d'usage inilitaire ou semi-militaire" si vagues,
aC!lOn 'on the part of the Netherlands, were de- que le peuple indonesien s'est trouve, a. la suite
pnved .of .many vital necessities. The import of de ce geste unilateral et arbitraire des Neerlangoods mdlspensable for reconstruction was made dais, prive d'un grand nomhre de produits nece.simpossible because, among others, the following saires a. sa subsistance. L'importation des progoods were considered contraband by the Neth- duits indispensables a. la reconstruction a ete
erlands: machinery, instrUltlents, transport equip- rendue impossible parce que, entre autres, les proment, spare parts, mateFial for telephones and duits ci-apres etaient consideres par les Neerlante!egraph, oxygen, sulphur,' steel and copper dais comme marchandises de contrebande; les
Wlres. Among consumer goods certain textiles machines, les instruments, le materiel de transand even medicines were considered contraband. port, les pieces de rechange, le materiel telephoThe consequences· of the aforementioned blockade nique et telegraphique, l'oxygene, le soufre, les
was that t~e people living within the territory of fils de cuivre et d'acier. Etaient egalement consi-.
Re ubhc were not able to procure even in the deres comme articles de contrebande certains tex-

a

2634
smallest degree the goods, which one would rate. tiles.et·meme les produits pharmaceutiqJ1es, toutes
among the necessities of life.' And this after. all marchandises de· consommation. ,Le blocus a eu
th~ hardships my people had to endure during
pour consequence d'empecher la. population vithe years ., of Japanese occupation. Regular trade vant sur le territoire ue la Republique d'obtenirj
could not be .carried on to a satisfactory degree ,meme pour la plus petite quantite, les produits
because of seizures on. the high seas by the. Neth- consideres coinme indispensables. Et cela, apres
.
erlands naval raiders. '.' .
toutes les souffrances quemon, peuple a dd endurer pendant les annees d'occupation japonaise.
Les echanges commerciapx normaux ne pouvaient
s'effectuer de maniere satisfa:isante en raison des
saisies operees en hattte mer par les garde-cotes
~'
,
neerlandais.
. My third impressioil is that the cOJIsular report
,Ma· troisieme observation est que le rapport de
gives,fuUevidence that there was law and order la Commission consulaire apporte d'abondants
within Republican territory before the invasion temoignages au fait que la loi et l'ordre regnaient
by Netherlands troops. The RepUblic was defin- sur le territoire republicain avant I'invasion des
itely a State recognized de facto by the Nether-. troupes neerlandaises. La Republique etait "railands, and able to 'guarantee and, maintain law ment un Etat, reconnu de facto par les Pays-Bas,
and order in spite of the continuous threat and capable de gafuntir et de maintenir la loi et I'orundermining activities of the returned colonial dre en depit des menaces constantes et de I'hostiGovernment, in spite of a tight naval and military lite souterr.aine du gouvernement colonial resblockade, in spite of economic disorder wreaked taure, en depit d'un blocus naval et militaire
by the Japanese and in spite of the lack o£ for- rigoureux, en depit du desordre economique foeign credit. It was able to feed its own population mente par les Japonais et en depit du manque de
and it was on its way, with the poor means it had credits etrangers. Cet Etat etait capable d'aIimenat its ~isposal and in its isolated position, towards ter sa population, et il avait deja entrepris, avec
economic reconstruction and towards social and les faibles moyens dont it disposait, en depit de
cultural reconstruction. And this work of build- I'isolement dans lequeI it se trouvait, sa reconing and rebuilding, carried out in the most diffi- struction economique et son relevement dans les
cult Circumstances has toa great extent been domainessocial et culture!. Et cette ceuvre de
damaged by a so-called police action which was construction et de reconstruction, accomplie dans
meant, indeed, to help the Republic.
les conditions. les plus difficiles, a ete dans une
large mesure compromise par ce qu'on aappele
des operations de police, lesqueIles, en verite, auraient ete destinees a aider la Republique.
J e nemets aUCun sarcasme dans ma declaration.
I submit this without any sarcasm. This is one
of the factors that lies at the deepest root of the Il,s'agit la d'un des facteurs qui est a I'origine
conflict between the Netherlands and Indonesia. meme du conflit survenu entre les Pays-Bas et
The self-complacent Netherlands claims to know !'Indonesie. Avec suffisance, les Pays-Bas p~ebetter what is good for us Indonesians and im- (tendent savoir mieux que nous, Indonesiens, ce
poses upon us what it considers to be good be- qui nous convient, et nous impose ce qu'ils jugent
cause it is in accordance with its s~nse of respon- bon p'our nOllS, parce .que cela est conforme a
,sibility. But. what is considered goo~ for us In- I'idee, qu'its se font de leurs responsabilites. Mais,
donesians is at the same time strongly linked with ce que les Pays-Bas htgent conv'enir aux Inclo,the Netherlands own interests, its own prestige, its nesiens, c~est ce qui sert, en 111eme temps, les inown selnsh position in the world.
terets propres des Pays-Bas, ~ur prestige, la position qu'ils occupent egoisterr~ ,nt dans le monde.
J e repeterai la .definition donnee par le general
I shall repeat the definition given by General
Spoor in connexion with the so-called police ac- Spoor des operationsdites de police: "Notre but
tion: "We aimed' at occupation of economically etait d'occuper les regions importantes au, point
important areas in order to safeguard economic de vue economique afin de proteger les objectifs
objectives and, in general, foodstuffs. . '; and economiques et, en general, les reserves de promade possible. the improvement of the economic .duitsali!TIentaires ... et de permettre ramelioracondition of the population." Indeed~ one could tion de la situation economique de la population".
. find no stronger expression if one wished to stress En verite, on ne pourrait s'expdmer d'une mathe link between Netherlands-owned interests and niere plus convaincante si l'on desirait faire, reswhat the Netherlands 'considers to be good for the sortir les liens qui existent entre les interets que
Indonesians. It is a complete definition of the possedent les Pays-Bas et ce que les Neerlandais
sense of responsibility of the Netherlands in rela- , jugent convenir aux Indonesiens. Cette declaration" to Indonesia. When the Netherlands repre,. tion .definif integralement I'idee que se font les
sentative speaks, with great conviction indeed, of Neerlatidais de leurs responsabitites a I'egard de
Netherlands stewardship and the responsibility I'Indonesie. Quand ,le representant des Pays-Bas
connected with that stewardship, his words must parte, avec une extreme conviction en verite, de
b~ interpreteda.gainst the background I have outl'administration neerlandaise et des responsabililined here.
'h~s qui ~ncombent aux Pays-Bas du fait de cette
ad~inistration, it faut interpreter ses paroles a
la lumiefe de I'historique des faits que j'ai retraces ici.
.
Qu'il me soit permis d'exposer brievement ce
Let me briefly reveal what Netherlands respon·sibiIity. brought to the Indonesian people up to que le sentiment de responsabilite des HoIlandais
the time when the Republic took the fate of the In- a apporte aupeuple indonesien jusqu'au moment
.·donesian people into its own hands.
;:u~~e~epublique a pris en charge le destin de c~
"'-_

__

_._ _•

~~

~

~,.

~

__

..• ,._,_._

,_~~._._,_._

_ ••.

~

a

_

p

2635
. Quels sont les criteriums essentiels du degre
d'evolution d'un peuple? 11s sont au nombre de
trois, a savoir le criterium intellectuel, les normes
econcimiques et le degre de maturite politique.
Examinons d'abord le criterium intellectuel.
Sous la domination des Pays-Bas, 93 pour cent
de la population indonesienne etaient illettres, soit
un pourcentage plus eleve que clans l'Inde ou aux
Philippines. Au point de vue economique, il y avait
dans l'Inde une c'lasse puissante d'hommes d'affaires et .d'entrepreneurs. AuxPhilippines, le
niveau de vie, pour un pays d'Orient, etait tres
acceptable. 'Toutefois, le peuple indonesien, qui
habite l'une des regions les plus riches et les plus
fertiles du monde, est l'un des plus pauvres de la
terre. En ce qui concerne la matur.ite politique,
l'Inde et les Philippines etaient, avant la guerre,
bien plus avancees que l'Indollesie. Est-it possible que devant de tels resultats, les Neerlandais
puissent s'enorgueillirde leur administration?
Pour nous, Indonesiens, c'est la principale raison
pour laquelle nous avons pris en nos propres
mains le destin de notre peuple et desirons conserver les renes de notre Gouvernement.
Je reviens maintenant au rapport de la ComLet me return now to the consulflr report. Let
me consider, in the first place, the carrying out mission consulaire. Qu'it me soit permis d'exaof the Security Council's recommendation to cease miner, tout d'abord, l'application de la recommanhostilities forthwith. I repeat, forthwith. The.re- dation du Conseil de securite tendant a faire
port states that there are two interpretations, the cesser immediatement les hostilites; je dis bieri
Netherlands and the Indonesian, which do not co-, immediatement. Le rapport indique que cette
incide with one another, and that as a consequence recommandation donne lieu a deux interpretathe Security,Council's recommendation could not tions, l'une par les Neerlandais, l'autre par les
be complied with.
Indonesiens; que ces deux interpretations ne concordent pas, et qu'en consequence, il a ete impossible de se conformer a la recommandation du
Conseil de securite.
Well, we now hav~ ample information before
Eh bien, maintenant, nous avons sous les yeux
us. The Consular Commission,has composed a re- d'amples renseignements. La Commissionconsu'port for the information and guidance of the laire a elabore un rapport pour informer et ec1aiCouncil. I venture to say that the SecurityCoun- rer le Conseil de securite. Je me permettrai de
ciI, on the basis of the consular report, is J"lOW able faire remarquer qu'en se fondant sur le rapport
to decide. which interpretation is the right one. de la Commission, le Conseil de securite est
To my mind this is necessary because, according maintenant en mesure d'etablir queUe est l'interto the Netherlands interpretation, even those areas pretation correcte. A mon avis, it est indispenin which Indonesian administrative headquarters, sable qu'ille fasse, parce que selon l'interpt;etation
divisional headquarters and the whole organiza- des Neerlandais, c:eux-ci en viennent a considerer
tio~ of a division are still functioning are concoml'ile deja occupees par les troupes' neerlansidered as already occupied by Netherlands troops. daises certaines regions ou le quartier general des
This is mentioned in appendfuc I, paragraph 17 services administratifs. indonesiens, le quartier
of the consular report. With such an interpreta- g-eneral divisionnaire et l'ensemble de l'organisation; one could very easily extend the van Mook tion d'une division continuent a fonctionner. Ce
line up to Jogjakarta, the Republican capital. With fait est mentionne au paragraphe 17 de l'annexe I
such an interpretation, it is quite possible for du rapport de la Commission consulaire. En inNetherlands troops to march on t<;> such points as terpretant ainsi la recommandation,l'on pourrait
are necessary and useful, according to their own . tres aisement etendre la ligne van Mook jusqu'a.-·
considerations. This is a way to achieve strong Djokjakarta, capitale de la Republique. On pouradvantages which can and will he used later on rait tres bien ainsi permettre aux troupes neerduring the eventual negotiations. Such actions can lan laises de s'avancer jusqu'aux points qu'il leur
be carried out under the protection of the Security serait utile et opportun d'occuper, selon leur proCouncil's cease-fire order. Such is undoubtedly the pre jugement. C'est la une maniere de s'as,surer
intention of the Netherlands.
.
des atouts puissants qui pourront etre utilises plus
tard au cours des negociations definitives, et qui
le seront. Ces operations peuvent etre effectuees
sous le couvert de l'ordre de cesser le feu emanant
du Conseil de securite. Et teUe est, sans aucun
doute, l'intention des Neerlandais.
Puis-je faire observer, en toute franchise, que
Allow me to submit frankly that the prestige
of the Security Council is at stake. This i, to us c'est le prestige du Conseil de se .A'ite qui' est en
Indonesians a matter of paramount interest. be- jeu. Cette question presente pour nous, Indonecause the Indonesian Republic and the Indo- siens, un interet supreme, parce que la Republinesian. people put all their hope in the Security que indonesienne et le peuple indonesien placent
CounCIl. On the basis of the faith it has in this tous leurs espoirs dans le Conseil de securite.
the ~publ~c of Indone~ia has repeatedly Forte de la foi qu'eIle a dans le Conseil, la Republi-

What are the most important criteria for the level
of a people? There are three~ namely, the intellectual criterion, economic standards and the dearee of political maturity. Let us take the intellectual criterion. Under Netherlands rule 93 per
cent of the Indonesian population was illiterate, a
percentage higher than in India or the Philippines.
Economically, in India there was a strong class
of business groups and entrepreneurs. In the
Philippines there was a decent standard_of living
for an oriental country. The Indonesian people,
however, living in one of· the richest, most fertile
areas of the world, is one of the poorest oh earth.
With regard to political maturity, in pre-war
times India and the Philippines were ahead of Indonesia. Is it possible that with such a record the
Netherlands can take pride in its stewardship?
For us Indonesians it was the main reason why
we took the fate of our people into our own hands
and why we wish· to retain the reins of our own
Government.

r

liIIIfS.ci\

2636
~ declared that it hopes'the Security Council will

que indonesienne a declare a, maintes reprises.
qu'elIe .espere voir celui-ci pr~ndre des tnesures
decisives visant cl .resoudre le conflit entre les
Pays-Bas. et ia Republique d'Indonesie.
.
Aussi ma delegation n'a-t-elIe cesse de demander que la Commission de bons offices se voie
confier des pouvoirs d'arbitrage. Je regrette de
devoir dire qU'cl mon avis le prestige du ConseiI
de securite est maintenant menace. Pourquoi?
Le 1er aoot 1947, le Conseil de securite a invite
lesJ:lays-Bas et la R~publique d'Iridonesie cl cesser' immediatement les hostilites. Et je repete:
immediatement. Le 26 aoot 19471, le Conseil de
securite a invite Je Gouvernement des Pays-Bas
et le Gouvernement de la Republique indonesienne
cl se conformer strictement cl la recommandation
de cesser le feu, adoptee par le Conseil de securite le ler aoot 1947. QuelIes ont ete les mesures
prises respecwvement par le Gouvernement des
Pays-Bas et le Gouvernement de la Republique
d'Indonesie ,pour donner suite cl I'ordre de cesser
immediatement les hostilites?
The Republican Government advised the Se-.
Le Gouvernement de la Republique indonecurity Council that orders had been given for the sienne a fait savoir au Conseil de securite que
cessation of hostilities. 2 The Consular Commis- des ordres avaient ete donnes en vue de la cessamission's report gives evidence that the Repub~ tion des hostiIites 2 • Le rapport de la Commission
lican Government did indeed order its troops to consulaire foitrnit la preuve qne le Gouyernement
remain in their positions and to cease hostilities. de la Republique a vraiment ordonne cl ses troupes de rester sur leurs positions et de cesser les
hostilites.
What did the NetherIands Government do? It
Qu'a fait le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas? Il a
also advised the Security Council that· orders had' egalement fait savoir au Conseil de securite que
been given for the cessation of hostilities.3 How d~s ordres avaient He donnes pour la cessation
are these orders being carried out? Did the Neth- des hostilites3 • Comment ces ordres sont-ils exeerIands Government order its forces to remain in cutes? Le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas a-t-il ortheir positions and to cease hostilities, as the Re- donne cl ses forces de rester sur leurs positions et
publican Government did? No, it is t!le same old de .cesser-Ies hostilites, comme I'a fait le Gouverstory as after the signing of the Linggadjati Agree- n~ment de la Republique? Non, ilen va exactement. The NetherIands again has its own inter- ment de meme qu'apres la signature' de l'Accord
pretation, its own interpretation of the cease-fire de Linggadjati. Iei encore, les Pays-Bas donnent
order; and, as could be expected, it puts this leur interpretation cl eux, e:: comme on peut s'y
attendre, c'est d'apres cette interpreta~on de caunilateral
interpretation into effect. .
,
ractere unilateral qu'ils observent l'ordre de cesser le feu.
Is there any better evidence possible of the
Peut-on trouver meiIleure preuve des grandes
great difficulties faced by' the Indonesian Republic difficultes auxqueUes la Republique d'Indonesie
after signing the Linggadjati Agreement with the doit faire face depuis la signature de l'Accord de
Netherlands, a Government which obviously can- Linggadjati avec les Pays-Bas, avec un Gouvernot refrail1from acting in accordance with unilater- nement qui, de touteevidence, ne peut s'empecher
al interpretations? It 'cannot be sufficiently em- d'agir d'apres des interpretations de caractere
phasized that it is the Netherlands unilateral in- unilateral? On ne saurait trop insister sur le fait
terpretation of the Linggadjati Agreement which' que c'est I'interpretation unilaterale donnee par
caused the armed conflict in Indonesia.
les Pays..,.Basa l'Accord de Linggadjati qui a ete
la cause dti conflit arme en Indonesie.
The Corisular Commission's report shows.clearLe rapport de la Commission consulaire montre
ly that the Security Council also has to put up cIairement que le Conseil de securite doit, lui aussi,
with the fact that the NetherIands Government se resigner cl voir le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas
acts in accordance with unilateral interpretations. agir en suivant des interpretations unilaterales.
May I be permitted to give another example.
J'en donnerai un autre exemple au Conseil. II
The Security Council's resolution of 25 August est precise dans la resolution du Conseil de secu1947, setting up the Consular Commission,4 . states rite en date du 25 aoot 1947 portant creation
in paragraph 2 that the Council "notes with sat- de la Commission consulaire4 , que le Conisfaetic:m the statement issued by the NetherIands seil de securite "prend acte avec satisfaction de
Govermnent on 11. August, in which it affirms its la declaration du 11 aoot par laqueUe le Gouverintention to organize a sovereign, democratic 'nement des Pays-Bas affirme son intention drorUnited States of Indonesia in accordance with the ganiser les Etats-Unis d'Indonesie, Etat souvepurposes of the Linggadjati. Agreement".
rain et democratique, comme le prevoit l'Accord
de Linggadjati".
.
take decisive steps with regard to the' solution of
the' conflict between the· Netherlands and the Republic of Indonesia.
My delegation has therefore repeatedly asked
that the' Committee .of Good. Offices should be
given powers of arbitration. I regret to say that
in my opinion the prestige of the Security Council
is now being endangered. Why? On ] .August
1947 the Security CQuncil called upon the Netherlands and the Republic of Indonesia to cease
hostilities forthwith. I repeat, forthwith. On 26
August 19471 the Security Council called upon
the Government of the Netherlands and the Government o£ the Indonesian Republi~ to adhere
strictly to the cease-fire recommendation of. the
Security Council of 1 August 1947. How did
the Government of the Republic of Indonesia
arid' the Government of the·N etherIands, respectively, act with regard to the order to cease hostilities forthwith?
.

.

1 See Official Records of the Secllrity COllncil, Seconcl
Year, No. 84, 195th meeting.
• Ibid., No. 72.
o Ibid., No. 69.
• Ibid.rNo. 83.

. ~oir les .'?:·oces-vel'bau.1: officiels dll Con.lail de secll'iU-, [;'::'X1~nl" '\nnee, No 84, 195eme seance.

'Ibid.., ,-Io n.
• Ibid. J'if" If).
~ 10::1., " f ; 133.

Ut

2637'
WhatLinggadjati Agreement? That Agreement
De quel accord s'agit-il?Les Neerlandais ont
was abrogated by the Netherlands 'before launch- .denQnce I'Accord de Linggadjati avant d'effectuer
ing its so-called police action, abrpgated. by the 'leurs operations dites "de police". Le GouverneNetherlands Government in The Hague as well ment des Pays-Basa denonce cet accord a. La
as in Batavia. Yet the Netherlands Government Haye comme a.. Batavia. Et, pourtant, le Gouveralways refers to the Linggadjati Agreement.
nement des Pays-Bas'-E'e refere toujo1.lrsa. l'Accord de Linggadjati.
I1 {aut preciser ici nettement, et c'est a. la deleIt must be made clear here, and it is up 'to the
Netherlands gelegation to. confirm or deny it, gation des Pays-Bas de confirmer ou de refuter
that whenever the Netherlands refers to the Ling- cette affinnation, que toutes les fois que Ies Paysgadjati Agreement, it does not mean the Agree- Bas mentionnent l'Accord de Linggadjati, ils ne
ment which is abrogated, but its own unilateral in- parlent pas de l'accord qui a ete cenonce, mais
terpretation,' which it carries into effect as its po- de l'interpretation unilaterale qu'ils en ont donnee
litical programme. It is in this sense that we have et qui constitue le programme politique applique
to construe the statement issued by the Nether- par eux. C'est dans ce sens qu'ilnous £aut interlands Government on 11 August, and ..which is preter la declaration -publiee le 11 aotit' -par le
mentioned in paragraph 2 of the Security Council Gouvernement des Pays-Bas et qui figure au pararesolution of 25 August.
graphe 2, de ·Ia resolution du Conseil de securite,
en date du 25 aotit.
In this .coune..xion it will be clear why we Indonesians are sceptical with regard to the Netherlands intention (I quote from the Security Council resolution) "to organize a sovereign, democratic United States of Indonesia", whkh, as can be
expected, would be carried out in accordance with
the Netherlands own unilateral interpretation.
Our experience is that Netherlands interpretations
must be dealt with cautiously.

At this point I want to go back to the question of the prestige of the Security Council. The
Consular Commission's report shows that the
Netherlands Government has been able to interpret the- order calling for a cessation of hostilities
forthwith in such a manner that, after the Netherlands itself issued the cease-fire. order, its troops
may continue to fire and to advance. The remarkable thing is that the Netherlands, according to
this interpretation, even has the right to accuse
Republican forces of having violated the ceasefire order-the very Republican forces which are
defending themselves and which are trying to re:main in their positions.
We Indonesians have learned to our cost what
the unilateral Netherlands interpretation of the
Linggadjati Agreement has meant to us. We trust,
therefore, that the Security Council will find means
to stop the Netherlands. 'unilateral interpretation
of the Security Council's cease-fire recommendation from becoming a threat to the prestige of
this Council.
.
The Netherlands "cease-fire". still continues.
The mopping-up operations are still claiming
hundreds of lives in Indonesia. Allow me to repeat what Mr. van Mook, acting Governor-General, stated in Batavia on 25 September; "We
ca!11'!'0t o~cupy only a .portion of a complete adImmstratlVe area and Ignore the rest." I repeat:
"We cannot occupy only a portion of a complete
administrative area and ignore the rest."
I wish to quote again from the same statement
of ¥r. va.n Mook: "Resumption of police action
agamst the Rep~:)l;L IJf Indonesia will be dependent on the resu:t d the Netherlands Indonesian
discussions under the' auspices of the Committee
o~ Good Offices appointed by the Security Council. Let us waI~ <.1:: see." This sounds like a chal-

011. comprendra done aisement le motif qui nous
pousse, nous Indonesiens, a. juger avec scepticisme
l'intention des Pays-Bas (et je cite ici un passage de la resolution du ConseiI .de sec~rite)
"d'organiser les Etats-Unis d'Indonesie, Etat souverain et democratique", mesure qu'on peut s'attendre a. voir executer conformement a. l'interpretation uniIaterale qu'en do~neront les PaysBas. L'experiencenous enseigne qu'il faut
toujours etre prudent lorsqu'il s'agit d'interpretations donnees par les Pays-Bas.
Et mahltenant, je voudrais revenir sur la ques-.
tion du prestige du Conseilde .securite.. Le rapport de la Commission Consulaire montre que le
Gouvernement des Pays-Bas a p~ interpreter l'or<ire de cesser immediatement les hostilites de telle
maniere qu'apres que les Pays-Bas eux-memes
aient donne l' ordre de cesser le feu, les troupes
neerlandaises puissent continuer a tirer et a. progresser. Ce qui est remarquable, c'est que les
Pays-Bas, d'apres cette interpretation, ont meme
le droit d'accuser les forces republicaines d'avoir
contrevenu a. l'ordre de cesser le feu, ces troupes
qui se defendent et qui s'efforcent de demeurer
sur leurs positions.
Nous, Indonesiens, avons appris a. nos depens
ce qu'implique pour nous l'interpretation unilaterale neerlandaise de l'Accord de Linggadjati.
Nous esperons que le Conseilde securite decouvrira un moyen d'empecher les Pays-Bas de donner de la recommandation du Conseil de securite
tendant a. cesser le feu, une interpretation unilaterale qui risquerait de porter atteinte au prestige
du ConseiJ.
Le "cessez-Ie-feu" neerlandais est toujours en
vigueur. Les operations de nettoyage content encore la vie a. des centaines de personnes en Indonesie. Je repeterai id ce que M. van .Mook, Gouve~neur general par interim a declare. a. Batavia,
le 25 septembre: "Nous ne pouvons pas occuper
une partie seulement t!'une region administratil'
qui forme un tout, et negliger le reste". Je
bieD: "Nous ne pouvons pas occuper une p'
seulement -d'une region administrative qui f(
,'.
un tout, et negliger le reste".
Je desire citer egalement le passage suivant de
cette meme declaration de M. van Mook: "La reprise des operations de police contre la Republique d'Indonesie dependra du resultat des discussions entre I'Indonesie et les Pays-Bas, qui ont
lieu sous les auspices de la Commision de .bons
offices creee par le Conseil de securite. Atten-

2638
lenge---,.a challen.ge by the Nethe.rl~nds Gov.ern-I dons." Cette phrase semble un defi, un deft lance
ment to the Council.
par le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas an Conseil de
securite.
.
Nbw I wish to speak of a possible withdrawal
Je desire maintenant parler d'un retrait evenof the forces to their respective positions ante bel- tuel des forces armees sur les positions qu'el!es
tWit. This is indeed considered a necessity by my
occupaient respectivement avant les hostilites.
Government for a satisfactory solution of the con- Mon Gouveruement estime que c'est la uue meflict. Several distinguished ~representatives have sure necessaire si l'on veut apporter une solution
expressed concern about possible undesirable con- satisfaisante au confljt.Plusieurs representa~ts
ditions in areas from which the Netherlands forces se sont montres preocctipes du fait que la situation
would be withdrawn. If I understand correctly, des regions d'ou seraient retirees les forces neerit· is· feared 'that it would be very difficult to landaises pourrait laisser a desirer. Si j'ai bien
restore law and order in areas where, before the compris, on craint qu'i! ne soi" difficile de restauNetherlands forces appeared, there was law and rer la loiet I'ordre dans les 'regions ou ils reorder. Cl.·naitions caused by undesirable elements, gnaient avant l'apparition des forces armees neerwhom the Netherlands forces provided with the landaises. .On redoute evidemment la situation
opportunity to emerge, are.obviously fear~d. This que creeraient les'eIements indesirables· auxquels
I can understand. 1V[ust control over these ele- les forces neerlandais~s ont fourni l'occasion de
ments, however, be commissioned .to the Nether- se manifester. ~e comprends ces craintes. Ce~
lands army, which brought them to the surface? pendant, est-c~ it l'armee neerlandaise, qui a permis it ces elements de se manifester, qu'it faut
donner mission de les surveiller?
Les membres du Conseil comprendront que
The memb~rs will understand that for us Indonesians, who ask for no more than justice fmm nous, Indonesiens, qui ne demandons au Conseil
the Security Council, this solution· cannot b,e in de securite que de nous rendre justice, ne sauaccordance with our concept of justice. It would rions considerer une telle solution comme comhe more in accordance with justice if control were patible avec notre conception de la justice. I1
to be ..,.:-turned to those who, before the hostilities, serait plus conforme a la justice de confier de nouwere ..aintaining law and order in those areas veau cette mission it ceux qui, avant les hostilites,
\vithout violence or intimidation.
faisaient regner la loi et l'ordre dans ces memes
regions, sans recourir a la violence ni a I'intimidation.
1'he Indone.sian Republic wholeheartedly .acLa Republique indonesienne accepte de grand
cepts international· assistance and supervision in cceur l'aide et le cOlltrole internationaux en cette
this matter. My Government has authorized me matii~re. Mon Gouvernement m'a autorlse a faire
to make the following statement to the· Security la declaration suivante au Conseil de sec~rite:
Council:
"Le Gouvernement· de la Republique de11'1.nc!e instam~ent que les troupes neerlandaises
qui se trouvent sur le territoire indonesien se
retirent sur les positions qu'e1les occupaient
avant les. hostilites. Le Gouvernement de la
Republique se porte garant de la securite, de
la paix et de I'ordre dans toutes les regions
evacuees par les. troupes neerlandaises~ La Re~
publique d'Illdonesie accepte, par les presentes,
le cqJ,1trole ~ussi bien que la cooperation du
Conseil de securite ou de tout autre organisme
international cree a cet effet."

"The 'Republican Government urges the
Netherlands troops in Republican territory to their positions ante bellm1J.
The Republican Government guarantees safety,
peace and order in all areas eVqcuated by Netherlands troops. The Republic of Indonesia thereby accepts supervision, as well as co-operation, .
from. the Security Council or any other international body set up for Jhat purpose."
withdl~awal of

Je voudrais maihtenant examiner plus longue.1 should now like to give further consideration
to the long-term problem, which· concerns the ment le prohlemea longue echeance, probleme qui
creation of a new relationship between the Nethtraira l'etablissement de-relations d'un caraceria.nds and the Republic of Indonesia. To that tere nouveau entre les' Pays-Bas et la Republique
~nd the Security Council's Committee of Three . d'Indonesie. A cette fin, la Commission de trois
has offered its good offices. The Netherlands membres du Con;;eH de securite' a offert ses bons
representative llas made a contribution bJ' what offices. Le· representant des Pays-Bas a .apporte
he called "peac.e-mongering". My delegation is sa contribution en faisant ce qu'il a appele de la
of the opinion that peace-mongering should be "prop:jgande en faveur de la paix". Ma delegadone in the right way and on a sound founda.tion. t10n ~,.f- d'avis qu'il faut se livrer a cette propaOthenvise peace-mongering, well-intentioned as g;;nde a bon escient et en s'appuyant sur des ba~es
it may be, may be dangerously dose to war- solides. Sinoll, en dt;pit de toutes les bonnes m- .
mongering.
tentions, cette "propagande pour la paix" risque
d'arriver a ressenibler dangereusement a la pro. pagande en faveur de la guerre.
.
Right at this moment, what is the siwatk:, i,l r A l'heUl-e actuelle, Oil en est le conflit entre: les
theconfli.:t between the Netherlands and :.\; .Re-· Pays-Bas et la Republique? QueUes sont les pos'public? What possibilities are there·for ~t .%Lution sibilites d'arriver a une solution acceptable pour
agreeable to both parties? The Indonesia,n'revolu-, les deux parties? La revolution indonesienne
tion,.as such, is only the Indonesian manifestation n'est, en soi, que la manifestation en Indones~e
of an irreversible world process, namely, the d'un fait historique ineluctable, a savoir: l'ema~cl'
emancipation of Asia. Asia demands-and right- pation de l'~si~. L'-,?-sie veut, a juste titre,. 0. cC:.~
..... i
ly so-·": its pla.~e in the world. What is happening I la place qUI Itll reVlent dansle monde. Les eve-

a

>

2639
now in Indonesia is only part of the gigantic task
that the Asiatic people have to fulfil. We Indonesians are only fulfilling our duty towards Asia
and the world when we demand our place in the
family of free n~tion~. Tl~is world. problem was
considered and IS stIll bemg consIdered by the
Netherlands as a domestic affair. This revolution,
a social and political event of world importance,
is being met by the Netherlands with existing and
obsolete Netherlands constitutional law, which of
course is inadequate to cope with the situation.
We even see the tragic picture of the Nether!ands
trying to solve this problem of wcdd proportions
within the limited framework of petty party controversies. Such an endeavour could achieve results only with the assistance of the Republic of
Indonesia.

nements d'Indonesie ne representent qu'une partie
de la tache gigantesque que doivent accomplir
les peuples de I'Asie. Nous, Indonesiens, ne faiSOIlS que remplir notre devoir envers I'Asie et
envers le monde entier en exigeant d'occuper la
place qui nous revient parmi, les peuples libres.
Or, lesPays-Bas ont estime que ce probleme
mondialn'etait qu'une affaire purement interieure,
et ils persistent dans cette attitude. A cette revo~
lution qui constitue un evenement social et politique d'importance mondiale,les Pays-Bas 0pposent l'actuel droit constitutionnel neerlandais qui
est desuet et qui ne permet evidemment pas de
faire face a.la situation. N ous assistons meme au
spectacle tragique des Pays-Bas s'effon;;ant de
resoudre ce probU:med'une portee'universeIle en
le ramenant 3'"X proportions etroites demesquines
controverses partisanes. Vne pareille tentative ne
pourrait avoir de resultatque si la Republique
d'Indonesie s'y pretait.
.
La Republique d'Indonesie, co~sciente des diffiRealizing the difficulties of the Netherlands,
and eager to come to a speedy and peaceful solu- cultes auxquellesse heurtent les Pays-Bas, et dew
tion, the Republic of Indonesia showed its good- sireuse de parvenir rapidement it une solution
will and made considemble concessions. The pacifique, a montre sa bonne volonte en faisant
crowning achievement of those efforts on the In- des concessions considerables. A un moment
donesian side seemed, at one time, to be the donne, on a pu croire que l'Accor4 de Linggadjati
Linggadjati Agreement The Netherlands, how- representait'le courollnementdes efforts des Inever, found itself in a very difficult pOl?ition. Not donesiens. Mais les Pays-Bas se trouvaient dans
only had Germany robbed the Netherlands of the une situation tres difficile. Non seulement l' Allegreater part of its economic apparatus; it had also magne les avaitdepouilles de la majeure partie
deprived the Netherlands of its economic hinter- de leurs rouages economiques, mais elle les avait
land. At the same time Indonesia, the second eco- au;;si prives de leur hinterland economique. Atl
nomic base of the Netherlands, demanded its own meme moment, l'Indollesie, deuxieme base econational existence. When the Netherlands ob- nomique des Pays-Bas, revendiquait son existence
served, however, that by national existence In- nationale. Lorsque les Pays-Bas comprirent que
donesia also meant its own economic existence, par existence nationale, l'Indonesie entendait austhe Linggadjati Agreement lost much of its at- si existence economique, l'Accord de Linggadjati
traction and of its value for the Netherlands.
perdit it leurs yeux beaucoup de son attrait et de .
sa valeur.
Lorsque .es Pays-Bas ont eu it faire face it une
When the Netherlands iound itself faced with
an emergency because of a shortage of fo.reign crise provoqueepar la penurie de devises etrancurrency-ma.inly the result of the expenses geres, eIle':meme due surtout. aux depenses s'eleamounting to hundreds of millions of dollars in- vant it des centaines de millions de dollars qu'exicurred in the maintenance of its military apparatus geait le maintien de leur .disposifif mi1it~ire ,en _
in Indonesia""':"it had the choice of diminishing Indonesie, its pouvaient soit ieduire leurs effecits forces in Indonesia or resorting to military tifs en Indonesie, soit entreprendre une action
action. The Netherlands chose the latter course in militaire. C'est a cette derniere solution que les
order-as it was expressed recently by an im- Pays-Bas eurent recours afin, comme l'a dit reportant foreign observer in Batavia-to regain cemment un eminent observatelll- etranger it Bapre-war economic authority by force of arms;
tavia, de retablir par les armes lenr puissance
economique d'avant-guerre.
. A cette fin, l'Accord de Linggadjati a ete deTo that end, the Linggadjati Agreement was
abrogated by the Netherlands. That happened at nonce par les Pays.,.Bas.Cette decision est intera time when, among the leadership on both sides, venueau moment rneme ou, de part et d'autre, it
there ,vere people who sincerely tried fo meet one i avait parmi les dirigeants, des hommes qui, en,
another. Now, however, Mr. Schermerhorn and toute sillcerite;s'effon;aient detrouver un terrain
Mr. van Poll, respectively Chairman and member d'entente. C'est alors qu'ont He ecartesM. Scherof the, Netherlands Commission General, who merho:-n et M. van Poll, qui etaient respectiveshowed' understanding for Indonesian aspirations, ment President'et 111embre de la Commission genehave been eliminated. On the Indonesian side rale des Pays-Baset qui avaient fait preuve de
there is, as a result of the so-called police action; comprehension a l'egard des aspirations indonean incf{:ase of distrust. Both parties, which are siennes. Du cote indonesien, a la suite des prefart1}er apart than at the time when the Nether- tendues operations de police, le sentiment de melands considered it necessary to resort to military fiance s'est accru. I1 faut que, avec l'aide de la
action, hfive to come to some agreement satisfac- Commission de bons offices du Conseil de secutory to both, with the help of the Security Coun- rite;le.> deux parties, aujourd'hui plus eloignees
cil's f:ommittee of Good Offices.
.
. l'une .de l'autre que 10r.sque les Pays-Bas ont
estime necessaire de recourir a l'aetion militaire,
parviennent a un accord acceptable pour toutes
deux.
.
The members of the Security Council will unLes luembres du ConseiI de securite comprenderstand why I am not too optimistic about a dront certainement que j\~ ne fasse pas pteuve de
voluntary accord between the parties involved. In:.. trop d'optimisme quant a la possibilitede voir

2640

ternational pt.:essure should be exerted upon both
parties, especially. since we on our side have re.,
peatedly expressed our earnest intention to adhere strictly to any. decision what.soever of the
Security Council. It is on this basis that I once
again want to submit mostemphaticaUy my reque~t that arbitration should be applied insolv itlg the problem between the N etherlar-ds and
the Republic of Indonesia. The dangerous situation in which the world finds itself today demands
a speedy and permanent solution of the Indonesian· conflict. To achieve that goal, it is vital that
powers of arbitration should be given to. the Security Council's Committee of Good Offices. Let
this be my contribution to the "p~ace-mongering"
advocated by the representative of the N etherlands.

les parties. en conflit conclure spontanement un
accord. II est necessaire d'exercer sur e1les une
pression internationale, d'autan t plus que de notre
cote, nous avons maintes fois exprime notre sincere desir de respecter strictenient toute decision
prise par le Conseil de securite. Cest en m'appuyant sur cette affirmation que j~ desire, une
fois de plus, demander, dans les termes les plus
pressants, qu'on ait rec(}urs it l'arbitrage pour resoudre le probleme quisep are les Pays-Bas et la
Republique d'Indonesie. La situation perilleuse
dans laquelle le monde se trouve aujourd'hui exige
une solution rapide et definitive du conflit indonesien. POUl: atteindre ce but, it est essentiel que
des pouvoirs d'arbitl"age soient donnes cl la Commission de bons offices du Conseil de securite.
Telle sera ma contribution a cette "propagande en
faveur de la paix" qu'a preconisee le representant
des Pays-Bas.
.
F
The PRESIDENT : Before calling on the next
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Avant de
speaker, I feel obliged to make one or two obser- donner la pai'ole
au prochain orateur inscrit, je
vations on our procedui'e.
dois formuler uoe ou de~ observations relatives
it notre procedure.
Some of my colleagues have indicated to me· that
Certains de mes collegues m'ont fait remarquer
they have some doubt as· to the exact course of qu'ils ne. savaien
t pas tres bien a quel point precis
this discussion=-whether we. are still engaged in de la discuss
ion
nous en etions: sommes-nous en:';
a general discussion of the question, whether we core engage
s
dans
une discussion generate de la
are discussing the report of ·the Consular Com- questio
n,
somme
s-nous
en train de discuter le
mission, or whether we should be discussing various draft resolutions which have already been put rapport de la Commission consulaire ou bien ne
devrions-nous pas discuter les divers projets de
forward.
resolutions deja presentes?
I am afraid it is true that the discussion has
II est vrai,
dragged on for a long time while the local situa- g'est indtiment fen ai peur, que notre discussion
tion in Java shows no notabl~ improvement. I am Java se soit prolongee, sans que la situation a
sure that all members of the Security Council tain que tous notablement amelioree. J e suis cerles menibres du Conseil de securite
will agree with me that while we must, of course, convien
have a fuil discussion, it is important to try to proced dront avec moi que, meme s'il nous faut
er aune discussion approfondie, it est imreach some conclusion within a reasonable time.
I consider that we are· still engaged in a general portant que nous. essayions d'aboutir a une condiscussion, in the course of which any member Clusion dans un delai raisonnable. A mon avis,
may, of course, either refer to the genera l situa:- nous· en sommes encore a la discussion generale;
tion or discuss any point of the Consular Commis- au cours de laquelle tout membre· peut evidemsion's report ·which he chooses or, indeed, com- mcmt pader de la situation generale ou discuter
ment on the draft resolutions which have bF~ tout point du rapport de la Commission consusubmitted. Blit meanwhile I suggest that those laire, et meme· complenter les projets de resolumembers who wish to present resolutions or ahy tions presentes. Toutefois ,daus l'intervalle, je
formal amendments to resolutions already before propose_que .Ie~ membres desireux de. pr.oposef
us, should submit the texts of such proposals as des resolutions,· ou des amendements formels a
soon as possible, eithel today ct" tomorrow. I celles dont nous sommes deja saisis. sonmettent
would also ask those members of the .Council leurs textes des que possible, c'est-a-dire aujourwho wish to take further part in the .general dis- d'hui ou demain. Je prierai egatement les memettssion to submit their names before our next bres du Conseil qui souhaitent prendre a nouveau
meeting, . or .at· least in the course 9f our next la parole pendant la discussion generale, de se
meeting. Thus, by the end of that meeting, we faire inscrire avant notre prochaine seance ou
might be able to close the list of speakers for the tout au moins au cours de cette prochaine seant.e,
general discussion. We should then know where :Nous serions ainsi peut-etre en mesure de c10re
we were and when it wmtld be possible to take a la fin de cette seance la liste .des orateurs inscnts
into cOilsideration the draft resolutions before the pour. la discussion generale; nous saurions.alors
ou nous en sommes~ et a quel moment il nouS
Council and put them to a vote.
sera possible d'aborder I'examen des projets de
resolutions dont est saisi le Conseil et de les
mettre aux voix.
I hope that my colleagues will agree that this
J'espere que mes coUegues conviendront que
is a ..easonable procedure. .
cette manlere de proceder est raisonnable.
Mr. AUSTIN (Unite d States of America).: The
Council has now had an opp<>rtunity to examine
the report of the ConsUlar Commission. At the
same time, I unclei'stand that our Committee of
Good Offi'~eshas an'i\,oo hI lndonesi~ We ought
to beprep ar.ed to take 1" &cEsion on t~is ques-

M. AUSTIN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
de l'anglais): Le Conseil a pu maintenant e~a·
miner le rapport de la Commission consula~re,
D'autre part, si je ne m'abuse, notre commisst~O
de bons' offices est arrivee en Indonesie. Si n6US
voulons jouer un role utile, nottS devons etr~

I

,~

•

2641

prets, comme l'a dit le President, a.. prendre une
decision sur cette question dans ut" avenir proche.
Il est clair que nous nous trouvons devant un
pro!· me diffiCile et complexe lorsque nous nous
effon;ons de faire cesser les hostilites et de regler'
les principales questions. Plus que jamais, je
doute qu'il soit sage d'essayer de resoudre ces
questions complexes en prenant des maintenant
une decision au sein du Conseil de securite. Quand
je regarde les cartes que nous avons entre les
mains - et, si je ne me trompe, il s'agit d'une
carte de Java et d'une carte de Sumatra - je
constate que les operations militaires doivent etre
la. d'un genre tout a. fait partiCulier, et exigent
en consequence une connaissance approfondie du
terrain et de la situati9n generale, deux elements
qu'il est tres difficile de degager de ces cartes.
Si la ligne hachuree represente les positions
Assuming that the hatched line represents the
line· reached on 5 August 1947, which I assume atteintes le 5 aout 1947, que je. presume et&:'e,
to be the date of our cease-fire order so far as the pour les parties en conflit, la date de notre or~re
two parties to the dispute are concerned, there is de cesser le feu, it n'y a pas de frontiere. Il y a
no frontier. There are sporadic ba~les and battle des combats sporadiques et des fronts mouvants,
lines, and they are quite irrero.dar. The opposing de caractere tout a. fait irregulier. Les antagoforces are not confronting each other. As for nistes ne sont pas face a.. face. Quant a. ce qu'on
what have been called "spearheads"l this may be a appeIe les "pointes avancees", c'est peut-etre la
a correct description, but it is not what I thought . le tenne exact, mais it ne correspond pas a ce
it meant. I had an idea of a frontier,· a· battle line que j'imaginais. Jecroyais qu'il s'agissait d'une
from which spearheads were advanced into the ligne de demarcation, d'un front d'ou partaient
enemy's territory; btit there are so many different des pointes avancees en territ~ire ennemi; mais
terrItories and different lines here that the situa- les differents territoires, les divers fronts sont si
tion is quite different from· that given by the. oral nombreux que la situation est tout a. fait differente
description of a battle in which spearheads had de celle que l'on imagine en entendant .la descripbeen run out and a mopping-up process undertaken tion d'une bataille ou l'on a pousse des pointes
to gain occupancy or control of the gores between avancees et entrepris des operations de nettoyage
those spearheads. From an examination. of these pour assurer I'occupation ou le .controledes enmaps, the condition in both islands is apparently claves comprises entre ces pointes avancees. A
such that there is no probability at all of mopping- en juger d'apres ces cartes, la situati:ondans les
up operations which will unite the areas so that deux iles est apparemment telle qu'il est impoothey will all, in the legal and international sense, sible que des operations de nettoyage permet1;ent
be in the occupancy of one side, or actually geo- de reunir les enclaves de manU~re que toutes
graphically united.
.
soient, au sens juridique et international du ter.me,
occupees par l'un des adversaires, ou.forment une
unite geographique.
Quelles conclusions leConseil doit-it tirer de
What does .that mean as far as the Security
Council is concerned? I think it means that we tout cela? Que nous aurions tort, je crois, d'esshould be unwise to attempt to resolve the com- sayer de resoudre ce probteme miJitaire compIiplicated military question, which is the question que, qui est la question que le Conseil doit tranto which the Council must give priority. I stand, cher en tout premier lieu. J e rrtaintiendrai done
therefore, on the statement I made to the Coun- la declaration que j'ai faite 10r5 de la: deux-centcil at its two hundred· and thirteenth meeting and treizieme seance du Conseil, ainsi que les prinupon the basic principles of the draft resolution cipes fondamentatix du projet de resolution que
j'ai presente alors.
which I put forward at that time.
.I thinkotir best hope for success in attaining
Il me parait qUt:, dans le cas present, nous auour ultimate objective in this case is to place the rons le plus de chances d'atteindre notre objectif
matter in the hands" of our Committee of Good final si nous confions a. notre Commission de bans·'
Offices. In our opinion, the report in general COD- offices le soin de regler la question. Seton. moi,
firms and supports the summary conclusion'> whicl. l'ensemble du rapport confirmeet appuie le rethe Consular Commission sent to us in its tele- sume des conclusions que la Commission consugram of 11 October; the text of which appears laire nous a adresseespar telegramme1 le 11 octoas chapter IV of the report.
bre .et dont le texte figure au chapitte IV du
rapport..
.
I must say that in the short opportunity I have
. Je dois dire que j'ai pit constater, dans le court
ha?, in view of my other work, to examine the laps de temps, qu'il m'a ete possible, en raison de
eVidence upon which this report is based, I think I mesautres travaux, de. consacrer a. l'etude des
that the evidence supports the report. For exan.l- documents sur lesquels se fande le rapport, que
pIe, let us I'efer to a witness who, I think, is Gen- c~s tlerniers corroborent le rapport. Je citerai,
e~al Sp~or. This testimony, contained in appendix I ...' , :emple, les paroles d'un b~moin qui est, je
'VIII, ~V'es me the same impression that the re- t.us, le general Spoor. Ce temoignage, qui figure
port gIves:
a l'annexe VIII, me donne la meme impression
que le rapport:
.

tioo, as the President has said, at an early date,
if we are to be of help..
It is clear that we face a difficult and complex
problem in our efforts to bring about a cessa?on of
hostilities and a settlement of the broad Issues.
I am more than· ever convinced of the doubtful
wisdom of attempting to resolve these complicated
issues· by a decision here in the Security Council
at this time. Looking at the maps 'Yhich we have
, before us-if I correctly understand the legends
on these maps, one of them is of Java and the
other of Sumatra-I see that here is a type of
warfare that is peculiar and therefore requires
familiarity with the ground and the general situation, which is very difficult to ascertain from these
maps.'

1 Voir Ies Proces-verballs officielsdfl COllseil de securite, Dewdeme Annee, No 97.

. "Lac..om-mission: Nous comprenons qu'ily
a des formations republicil.ines a I'interieur du
territoire que vouspretendez detenir. Estimez~
vous que les Republicains auraient egalement
le dmit d'avoil' une ligne de communication
avec leur propre territoire?
. "Reponse: Je crois CLU'ils feraient mieux de
"Reply: I think they had better move out.
s'en aller. Je sais cependant que ce n'est pas
I know, however,it does not apply to military
conforme atix regles .militaires. En vertu dll .
-law. According to international law, a coundroit des gens, un pays ou un territoire est
try or territory :s considered occupied when the
occupying forces are able to send troops in,
considere commeoccupe lorsque les forces d'ocwherever and whenever, to control the councupation peuvent envoyer des detachements a
try. The same is true her~.
n'importe quelendroit du pays·et a n'impotte
que! moment pour le controler. Cela s'applique egalement id.
'
"La Commission: Void de quoi il s'agit. Sup"Commi.ssioll: The point is this-that supposons qu'il y ait une formation republicaine
posing there is a Republican' formation behind
a l'interieur de vos ligpes. Cette formation a
your lines. That fornlation has been ordered to
re<ju l'ordre d~e pas. avancer et de cesser le
stand fast and to cease fire but it is presumably
£eu,mais eUe a sans aucun doute le droit de
entitled.to. receive supplies and rations from its
own territory and therefore, if you consider it
recevoir du ravitaillement en munitions et en'
vivres de son propre territoire; par consequent,
to be a breach of cease-fire for the Republicans
to attack your lines of communication, would it
si vous considerez que les. Republicains violent
not also be a breach of cease-fire for you to atl'ordre de cesser le feu en attaquant vos lignes de
tack theirs even though that is within your
communication, n'enlreindriez-vous pas vousline?
memes c.et ordre en attaquant leurs voies de
communication l11eme si elles sont situees sur
le territoireque vous tenez?
"Reponse: C'estjuste. S'il' est exact que ces
"Reply: Quite right. If it is true that these
formatio.ns ont rec;u l'ordre de cesser le comformations are ordered to cease fighting-but
bat. Mais la est toute la question. Si elles.
that makes all the difference, because if they
restaientsut leurs positions, sans agir,nous
would stand fast and keep quiet, then we could
pourtions attiver a un accord. M ais elles ant
come to some arrangement. But they are orrec;u l'ordte de combattre et d'attaquer.
.
dered to fight and to attack.'
"La .C01-/f,1'I,t-ission: Pensez-vous que les Re"Co11t1nis.rion: Do you consider your moppublicains puissent considerer vos operations
ping-up operations likely to be interpreted by
de nettoyagecQmme une infraction a l'onlre de
the· Republic to be a breach of the cease-fire
cesser le feu?
by the other side?
"Reponse: l'en 'suis certain, puisque nons sa"Reply: I an~ sure they will, because we know
vans que les Republicains ont adopte ce point
, that the Republican side considers it this way.
de vue, Par exemple, dans la region de TasikFor instance, in the Tasikmalaja area and sevmalaya .et 'dans plusieurs autres regions, nous
eral . other places we occupied certain posts
occupions certains postes le 4 aout a minuit, et
on 4 August at 2400 hours and when on6 Aulorsque nous sommes arrives a Tasikmalaya,
gust we went to sec1,1re another place in Tasikle .6 aout, pour. occuper tin autre endroit, les
malaja, the Republic considered this ,as a breach
of the cease-fire order· because we did ·.not
Repu15licains .' ont estime que nous transgresstand fast."
.
sions l'ordre de~esser le feu parce que nous ne
I
restions pas sur nos positions."
. ~.
i
C'est la upe situation qui presen:tedes p~~
That is a situation which has peculiarities that
we are unable to handle right here, far away larites qu'il' nous est impossible d'apprecier id,
from the scene and far away from more availa- loin du theatre des operations et de toute source
ble facts.
.
.
de renseignements cOl11plementaires.
In our opinion, then, the .report in general con- , A mon avis, l'ensemble du rapport conflrme et
firms· and supports the summary conclusions corrobore le resume des conclusions- que la Com':'
which the Consular Commission sent to us in. a mission consulaire nous a adresse le 11 octobre
telegram 01 11 October and which appear as chap~ par tetegramme et dont le texte figure au chapitre
ter, IV of the report. It fills in a good many of IV du rapport. Le rapport donne un grand nomthe detail!? for u.s and provides essential informa- bre de details complementaires et nous fournit
tion on which it is possible for us to take action.. les renseignements essentiels qui nous permettent
It is apparent that, while major military action! de pr~ndre les mesures qui s'imposent. De toute
has ceased in accordanre with our resoIutioL c:::.H- . evidence, les operations l11ilitaires d'envergure ont
ing for a Cease-fire, hostilities are continuing "i"ith I pris fin, conformel11ent a notre resolution relative
substantial loss of life on both sides. Our re <+.!- i .\ la cessation des hostilites, mais ceUes-ci n'en
tion calHng for a cease-fire is really not yet. tiny continuent pas moins, avec des pertes importantes '
effective.
. des deux cotes. Notre resolution relative a la,
cessation des hostilites n'a pas' encore en fait ete
pleinement suivie d'effet.' ,
Le rapport des consuls signale comnle pdndThe report of the consuls indicates. that the
. major source of difficulty in bringing about a ces- pale source de difficultes rencontrees pour fake
sation of hostilities has .been the difference of cesser les hostilites les divergences d'opinion -enopinion between the parties as to the proper. in- tre les parties quant a l'interpretation- qu'it con"Commission: It is understood that there do
exist a number of Republican formations which
are actually insiqe the area which you claim
to control. Would you regard Republicans. in
the same way as having. the right to a line of
communication with their own territory?

i

p

2643 .
t~rpretation of the Council's re~olution. ~t seems

vient de donner de la resolution· du Conseil. Nous
estimons qu'il appartient au Conseil de securite
d'elimirter ce grave obstacle et de'dissiper ce malentendu ainsi que l'a suggere le. representant de
la Colombie lors de la deux.-cent..onzieme seance1 •
S'il y reussit, il parait probable que les parties
eUes-memes, avec l'aide de la Commission de
bons offices, parviendront cl conclure une treve
effective.
Comme je l'ai dit cl la deux.-cent-treizieme
seance, mon Gouvemement jugequ'il faut interpreter notre· resolution'du ler aout· comme interdisant cl l'une ou l'autre partie de recoul'ir a l'action militaire pour modifier substantieUement le
territoire qui etait sotimis au controle del'une ou
de l'autre, c'est-a-dire qu'eUes occupaient en fait
cl la date ou devait s'effectuer la cessatio1,1 des.
hostilites, j'entends le J. aout. Pour ces cartes,
on s'est servi du 5 aout. Nous sommes evidemment prets a adopter cette derniere date. ou toute
autre date qui nous paraitra raisonnable.·'
"Ve believe that the forces of either party are
Nous estimons.que les forces armees des deux.
entitled to remain undisturbed in the positions parties ont .le droit de rester sur les. positions
which they held on 4 August. It is my view that, qu'elles occupaient le 4 aout. A mon sens, il seit would be advisable for the Council to clarify its rait souhaitable que le Cunseil.precise .sa· resoluresolution of 1 August along the above lines. In tion du 1er aotit ~n s'inspirant des donnees dfact, it seems to me that it will be extremelydif- dessus. En fait, je crois qu'il sera tres difficile a
ficult for our Committee of Good Offices to be of la Commission de bons offices d'aider les parties
assistance' to the parties in reaching agreement on a aboutir cl un accord. sur la cessation des hostiHthe cessation of hostilities unless the Security, tes, si le Conseil de securit~ n'a <ieja fait connaitr~
Council has .in advance advised the parties and the aux. parties et a la Commission l'il1terpretation
Committee as to the proper interpretation. of that qu'il convient de G.vnner cl sa resolution. Ces preresolution. Even with this clarification, it seems cisions meme, n'empecheront pas les parties ni ,la
clear that the parties and the Committee of Good Commission de bons offices de 'se trouver en preOffices will face' a very confused. and difficult sence d'une situation tres confuse et tres difficile
situation during the peiiod before an agreement au cours de laperiode qui precedeta· la conclusion
has been reached for an effective truce.
d'une treve effective.
.
,
The report of the Consular Commission indiLe rapport de la Commission consulaire indi.,.
cates that the Indonesians claim that between -S que que, selon les Indonesiens, les N ~er1andais
August and 26 September, the Netherlands h~<i ont, entre le 5 aotit et le 26 septembre enfreint
violated the resolution calling fora cease-fire in la re~olution tendant a faire cesser le feu dans
811 specific instances; on the other hand, according 811 cas determines; d'autre part, selon lesNeerto the Netherlands, the Indonesians had violated landais, les Indonesiens ont, pendant la meme
the re~olution calling for a cease-fire in 1,792 periode, enfreint cette resolution 1.792 £ois. Le
specific instances during the same period. More- rapport des consuls cite egalement de multiples
over, the consuls' report is replete with instances exe111ples de cas particuliers ou l'une ou l'autre
where one or the other party considered itself partie s'est jugee en droit d'entreprendredes acjustified in particular cases in taking military ac- tions militaires qu'on peut considerer comme des
tion which could. be held to be a technical viola- quasi-infractions a. l'otdre de cess~r le feu.
.
tion of the cease-fire order.
In addition, -certain specific cases have been
De plus, on a signale au ,Conseil certains ··r::tf
mentioned in the Council where it seems clear that precis dans lesquels, cl ce qu'il semble,. de .qua~;,
technical violations for one or another. reason infractions de ce genre pourraient se justifier. a
might be justified. As has been pointed out, with quelque titre. Comme on l'a fait )bserver, les
the best of goodwill it has been and will undoubt- . deux. parties en cause, avec la meilleure volonte,
edly continue to be impossible for each party to du monde, se' trouveront· dans l'impossibilite .a
know in a particular situation whether in taking l'avenir, tout comme eUes 1'0nt ete dans le passe,
certain action it is technically violating the' Coun- de determiner si, dans une situation donnee, eUes
cil's resolution f)f 1 August, or whether the ex- commettent, en prenant certaines mesures, une
isting circumstances justify such il.ction.. There quasi-infraction a la resolutiortdu Conseil en date
again I think we must rely upon our representa- du 1er aotit, ou si le:; circonstances justifient les
tives on the spot to help the parties and the Coun- dites mesures. La encore, je crnis que nous decil reach a solution of these problems.
vons laisser cl nos representants qui se trouyent
sur les. lieux. le soin d'aider les ,parties intel'essees
et le Conseil a resoudre ces problemes.
Our Committee of GOl).d Offices, I understand,
Notre Commissjon de bons offices est sur place,
has arrived and is available, for such a purpose. je crois, et prete a remplir cette mission. LIes cas
Particular cases of this nature, which are 'import- particuliers de cette n.ature, qui sont as~\ez imant enough to warrant special consideration, will, portants. pour meriter un examen special, seront
of. course, be brought to· the attention of the Com:" naturellement portes a l'attention de la Commismlttee or of the Consular Commission~ Such cases sion de bons offices ou de la Commission COll.SUto us that it is up ~o the Secunt:y CouncIl to. remove this serious dffiiculty and ~lsunderstandm~,
as suggested by ~he rept~sentat1ve o! Colomb~a
at the two hundred and eleventh meet1D~.;I. If thIs
is done, it seems quite likely that the partIes themselves, with tIle aid of the Committee of G~d
Offices, would be able to work 011t an effective
truce.
As I said at the two hundred and thirteenth
meeting, my Government's view is that our resolu':'
tion of 1 August should be interpreted as. not
permitting the use of the armed forces of e1ther
party by military. action to. alter ~ubstantially the
territory under ItS control 01',1"-, other words,
the territory which it actually occupied on the effective date of the cessation of hostilities, which, as
I understantl it, was 4 August. These maps. evidently use 5 Auglfst. Vie are willing to have 5
August, of course, or any reasonable date. '"

1

_b.. . .

"

See OfJiciai Records of the Security Comu:i!, Sedond

1IIi,;';O.97.

~:.,.

.,

1 Voir !es Proces-verbatt:>: officiels dn Collseil de SeCfV'
rite, Deuxieme Annee, No

97.

2644
5houlO not cause'great difficulty if the two parties laire. Ces cas ne devraientpas soulever de :grandes '
adopt 'a' co-operative attitude. 1;'he facts regard- difficultes 'si les deux parties adoptaient une attiing 'the 'observance of the Council's resolution tude conciliante; Entre temps, la suite dannee cl
calling for a cease-fire in the meantime continue la resolution du Conseiltendant a faire cesser le
to be reported t6 the' Co.uncil by" the' Consular feu continueta a faire I'objet de rapports' de la
Commission. '
Commission' consulaire au Conseil.
I should like to make certain revisions in the
. J'aimerais apporter certaines modifications au
draft resolution which lplaced before the Coun'" projet de resolution que j'ai soumis atr Conseil
cil at the two hundred and thirteenth meeting, in lors de la deux-cent-treizieme seance, afin de tenir
order to bring it up to date and to incorporate in compte des elemei:ltsnouveaux et d'y fa~re figurer
it the views which lhave expressedtoday.l I have les considerations que j'ai exposees aujourd'huil,
made purely formal changes in the first two para- Je n'ai apporte anx deux premiers paragraphes
graphs. I have changed the date, ·11 October 1947, .que des modifications' de pure forme. J'ai remplace'
which'appears in the original, to 14 October 1947. la'date du 11 octobre 1947, qpifigurait dans le
That date' is changed because I am now dealing texte primitif, par celle du 14 octobre f947. J'ai
with the full report instead of the summary.
ete amene a in~roduire ce. changem~tit, parce qu'il
s'agit desorm~is dll rapport lui-meme et non plus
de son r e s u m e . '
.
In the second paragraph, I ~ow refer to "reDans le deu.x~me paragraphe, j'ai remplace
port" instead of "summary of the report". '
les mots "resume du rapport" par "rapport".
In. the third paragraph, I have taken out the
Dans le troisieme paragraphe, j'ai supprim6 les
words "directly or indirectly". That is because I mots "directement ou' nort" Et ceci parce que,
n~w ,recogni~e, after hearing stateme~ts here and
apres avoir entendu les declarations faites au Conreading this r.eport, that there may be sped~l oc- seil etlu le rapport, j'admets que 1'0n peut qualicasion& which look like technical violations, but fier certaines mesures de quasi-infractions, alors
which are not really such and should not be .so qu'elles n'en sont pas en realite et ne doiyent pas
treated.
'
etre considerees comme telles.
The next two patagrap~s remain the same.
Les deux paragraphes suivants demeurent sans
However, I hav~ added a last paragraph on the changement. J'ai toutefois ajoute un demier pasubject of interpretation. It is as follows:
ragraphe relatif a l'interpretation de la resolution.
En void le texte:
"Advises the parties concerned, the Committee
"Fait cotmaitre aux parties interessees, a la
of Good Offices and the Consular Commission that Commission de bons offices et a la Commission
its resolution of 1 August should be interpreted as consulaire ,qu'elles doivent interpreter sa resolunot permitting the use of the armed forces of either, tion du'ler aout comme ii:lterdisant a l'une ou
party by military action to alter substantially the 'l'autre partie de recourir a la force armee clans
territory under its control on 4 August 1947."
le cadre d'op.erations militairespour modifier
substantiellement le territoire qui etait soumis a
l~ur controle a la date du 4 aout 1947".
I might say in passing that our attitude as to
J~ ferai remarquer inddemment que nons ne '
what is "under its control" is not exactly the same sommes pas exactenient du meme avis 'que le ge, 1 The 'following is the text of the revised draft resolution submitted by the representative of the United States:

Document S/588

27 October ,1947

[Origi1Uzl text: English]
The SecurityCoullcil,

"Voici le texte revise du projet de resolution soumis
par le representant des Etats~Unis:

27 .octobre 1947

Document S/558

[Texte origillal t!IZ allg1ais]
Le CO'nseil d.e securite,

A:\'ant ete saisi etayal~t prls acte du rapport de la O>mH avil~g received and takm lIote of the report of the Consular Commission dated ,14 October 1947, indicating that mission consulaire en date du 14 octobre 1947, indiquant
the Council's resolution of 1 August 1947, relating to the que la resolution du Consei! du ler aout 1947 relative a. la
cessation of hostilities, has not been fully effective;
cessation des hostilites n'a pas ete' completement suivie
. d'effet;
Havillg taken lIote that according to the report· no at- , ,Ayallt pris acte de.ce que ~e rapport signale q1A~ ._, deux
tempt was made by either side to come to an agreement parties n'ont fait aucune tentative pour conc1ure un accord
with the other about the means of giving effect to that sur les moyens de donner effe~ a cette resolution;
res:olution;
Calls upon the parties concerned forthwith to consJ11t
with each other as to the means to be employed in order to
give effect to the case-fire resoluti,onand pending, agree-,
ment to cease any activities which contravene that resolution;'
Requests the Committee of Good Offices' to assist the
partit:s in reaching agreement on an arrangement which
will ensure the observ~nce of .the cease-fire resolution;,
Requests the' Consular Commission, together with its
military assistants, to make its services available to the
Committee of Good Offices;
Advises'the parties concerned, the Committee of Good
Offices and the Consular Commission that its resolution
of 1 August should be interpreted as not permitting the use
of the armed forces of either party by military action to
alt€r substantially the territory under its control on 4
:' !gust 1947.
'".
,
nAfittrr

Invite les partie~ in,tere;;~ees a se consulter im~ediat~ment sur les moyens a utIliser pour donner effet a la resolution concernant la £essation du feu, et, en attendant la,
realisation d'un accord, de mettre fin a toutes les activites
qui vonl: a l'encontre de cette resolution:
Prie la 'Commission de bon offices cl'aider les parties a
arriver a un accord sur les ,dispositions qui permettront
d'appliquer la resolution concernant la cessation du £eu;
Pyie la Commission consulaire de mettre ses serviCes,
ainsi queceux de ces adjoints militaires, a"la disposition
de la Commission de bons offices;
'Fait co1t1uzUre aux parties'interessee, a la Commission
de bons offices et a la Commission consulaire qu'elles
doivent interpreter sa resolution du ler' aout comme interdisant a l'une DU l'autre partie de recouvir a la .f~rce
armee dans le cadre d'operations militaires pour modifier
substantiellement le territoire qui etait soumis a leur ~
controle a la date du 4 aout 1941~
......

'M'Y~'g;)?'''~~~1'I.-'~Ti'L~~;J,J.>Jl:K;"-~·~~~,,,,~~M.::'''~-''''_~· ~...,....,.. ~_.~-;ae..or.">;:_"'="","".:i~'k>==-;Wok:ii~~
_"""""""""",..

__

· -...

---------264-5-.-~~-~~--~------

as that expressed by General Spoor. I think I
ought to say this at this time, in advanc~, so t~at
everybody here may understand that 111 US111g
che term "territory under its control" we preclude
~he use of military force to ob!ain control o~ those
gores between spearhea~s whIch were not m any
way. occupied by armed forces. ';)11 4 August. We
are forced into taking that posItIOn largely by ~he
picture that is before us of these areas separatmg
the different battle fronts.

neral Spoor quant a ce qui est "sous son contrOle".

Je crois devoir declarer cela des maintenant, par
avance;afin que chacun ici sache qu'en employant
l'expression "territoire qui etait souri:lis cl leitr
controle", nous excluons tout recours cl la force
armee pour s'assurer le controle des enclaves,
situees entre les pointes avancees, qui n'etaient
pas occupees militairement au 4 aout 1947. C'est
surlout en constatant comrrlent ces divers ironts
sont separes par des poches que nous nous trouvons contraints d'adopter cette attitude.
,

The PRESIDENT: If there is no objection, I propose to adjourn the ~eeting. It will be diffi~ult
to arrange for a meeting tomorrow, as the -FIrst
Committee meets in the morning and afternoon.
The Council will meet on Wednesday, 29 October} at 3 p.m., if there is no objection.
Will members who desire to take part in the
discussion kindly submit their names, if possible,
before the next meeting. Also, I should be greatly
obliged to members who have draft resolutions or
amendments to propose, if they would put them
in writing before the next meeting.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de lJanglais): Si personne ne s'y oppose, je propose de lever la seance.
n sera difficile de tenir seance demain, car la
Premiere Commission doit sieger le matin et
l'apres-midi. S'il n'y a pas d'opposition, le Conseil se reunira le mercredi 29 octobre cl 15 heures.
Je prie les membres qui desireraient 'prendre
part cl. la discussion de se faire inscrire, si possible,
avant la prochaine seance.' Je serais aussi tres
oblige aux representants desireux de presenter
des projets de resolutions ou des am~T',dements
de bieh vouloir en soumettre le texte par ecrit
avant la prochaine seance.
-

The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

La seance est levee a18 h. 05.

AGENTS OF THE UNITED .NATIONS PUBLICATION
DEPOS,rA'RES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIoNS UNIES
ARGENTINA-ARGENTINE

FINLAND-FINLANDE

AUSTRALlA-AUSTRALlE

PHILIPPINES

Editions A. PedoDe
13, rue Soumot
PARIS, ye

BELGIUM-BELGIQUE

Spotdzielna Wydawnicza
"Czytelnik"
38 Poznanska
WARSZAWA

GUATEMALA

Libreria Cientifica y Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla 972
LA PAZ

Jose Goubaud
Goubaud & Cia. Ltda.
Sucesor
Sa Av. SOl' No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUATEMALA

CANADA

The Ryerson Press
299 Queen Street West
TORONTO

HAITI

CHILE-CHILI

Edinundo Pizarro
Merced 846
SANTIAGO

ICELAND-ISLANDE

Bokaverzlun Sigfuear Eymund8Qnnar
Austurstreti 18
REYKJAVIK

CHINA-CHINE

The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
SHANGHAI

INDIA-INDE

Oxford Book & Stationery Company
Scindia House
NEW DELHI

COLOMBIA-COLOMBIE

Libreria LaOOa Ltda.
Apartado Aereo 4011
BOGOTA

IRAN

COSTA RICA-COSTA·RICA

Bongahe Piade!ow
731 Shah A,renue
TEHERAN

Trejos Hermanos
Apartado 1313
SAN JOSE

IRAQ-IRAK
:Mackenzie & Mackenzie

CUBA

La Casa Belga
Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LA HABANA

The Bookshop
BAGHDAD
LEBANON-LlBAN

Librairie universelle
BEYROUTH

CZECHOSLOVAKIATCHECOSLOVAQUIE

F. Topic
Narodpi Trida 9
PRAHA 1

LUXEMBOURG

Librairie J. Schunimer
Place Guillaume
LUXEMBOURG

DEN~RK-DANEMARK

Einar Munksgaard

NI:THERLAND5-PAYS·BAS

N~rregade6

N. Y. MarOOus Nijhoff
Lange Yoorhout 9
'S-GRAVENHAGE

KPBENHAVN
DOMINICAN REPUBLICREPUBUQUE DOMIN!CAINE

NEW ZEALANDNOUVELLE·ZELANDE
Gordon & Goteh, Ltd.

Libreria Dominicana
Calle Mercedes No. 49
Apiutal!o 656
CWDAIJ TRUJILLO

Waring Taylor Street
WELLINGTON

ECUADOR-EQUATEUR

United Nations Association of
New Zealand
P. O. 1011, G.P.O.
WELLINGTON

Mufioz Hennanos y Cie,.
Nueve de Octubre 703
Casilla 10·24
GUAYAQUIL
EGYPT-~GYPTE

NICARAGUA

ETHIOPIA-El'HIOPIE

NORWAY-NORVEGE

Ramiro Ramirez V.
Agenda de Publicaciones
MANAGUA, D. N.

Librairie"La Renaissance d'Egypte"
9 Sh. Adly Pasha
CAIRO

SWEDEN-SUEDE
A.-B, C. E. Fritzes Kungl.

{

Hofbokhandel
Fredsgatan 2
STOCKHOLM
SWITZERLAND-SUISSE

Max Bouchereau
Librairie "A la Caravelle"
BOlte postale 111·B '
PORT-AU·PRINCE

.Printed in the U.s.A.

POLAND-POLOGNE

"Eleftheroudakis"
Librairie intemationale
Place de la Constitution
ATHENES

BOLlVIA-BOLlVIE

Agence ethiopienne de publicite
P. O. Box 8
ADDIS·ABEBA

. DC:P. Perez Co.
132 Riverside
SAN JUAN, RIZAL

GREECE-GRECE

Agence et Messageries de la
Presse, S. A.
14-22 rue de PersU
BRUXELLES

~.k.,~~;;iF·~·'-V~-<'>-;;;;:;>;::-·~~·-,,--___

Libreria internacional del Perll,
S.A.
. .
Casilla 1417
LIMA

FRANCE

H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
SYDNEY, N. S. W.

..

PERU-PEROU

Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI

Editorial Sudamericana S.A.
A1sina 500
BUENOS AIRES

Johan Grundt Tanum Forlag
Kr. Augustgt. 7A
OSLO

Librairie Payot S. A.
LAUSANNE, GENEVE,. YEVEY,
MONTREUX, NEUCH.hEL,
BERNE, BASEL
Hans Ralmhardt
Kirchgasse 17
. ZURICH ~
SYRIA-SYRIE

Librairie universelle
DAMAS
iURKEY-TURQUIE

Librairie Hachette
469 Istiklal Caddesi
BEYOGLU·lsTANBUL
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICAUNION SUD·AFRICAINE

Central News Agency
Commissioner & Rissik 8ts.
JOHANNESBURG and at CAPETOWN
and DURBAN
UNITED KINGDOMROYAUME·UNI

H. M. Stationery Office
P. O. Box 569
LONDON, S.E. 1
and at H.M.S.O. Shop" in
LONDON, EDINBURGH, MANCHESTE
CARDIFF, BELFAST, BIRMINGHAM
and BRISTOL
UNITED STATES OF AMERICAETATS·UNIS D'AMERIQUE

International Documents Service
Columbia University Press
2960 Broadway
NEW YORK 27, N. Y.
URUGUAY

Oficina de Representacion de
Editoriales
Av. 18 de Julio 1333 Esc. 1
MONTEVIDEO
VENEZUELA

Escritoria Perez Machado
Conde a Pifiango 11
CARACAS
YUGOSLAVIA-YOUGOSLAVIE

Drzavno Preduzece
Jugoslovenska Knjiga.
Moskovska Ul. 36
BEOGRAD

Price in the United States: 25 cents
.' _. ~.

,~~.~

-==-=-=~-~_-"'T:.~~i:0~·~_~,~,~;"",ti;;'t.-:·'~-;:1::"~;'r't;;;:"rff";~~_;-~~;-"'-"~-<---'

."
