UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1995/163
28 February 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

REPORT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL MISSION TO BURUNDI ON
10 AND 11 FEBRUARY 1995
Letter of transmittal
Letter dated 28 February 1995 from the members of the
Security Council mission to Burundi addressed to the
President of the Security Council

We have the honour to transmit herewith the report of the Security
Council’s mission to Burundi, which took place on 10 and 11 February 1995. The
report is submitted to the Council in accordance with a decision taken by the
Council during information consultations on 6 February 1995.

95-05731 (E)

010395

(Signed)

Ibrahim A. GAMBARI (Nigeria)
Chairman of the Mission

(Signed)

Li ZHAOXING (China)

(Signed)

Karel KOVANDA (Czech Republic)

(Signed)

Gerhard HENZE (Germany)

(Signed)

Julio RENDON BARNICA (Honduras)

(Signed)

Nugroho WISNUMURTI (Indonesia)

(Signed)

Karl F. INDERFURTH (United States of America)

010395

/...

S/1995/163
English
Page 2

Annex
Report of the Security Council mission to Burundi on
10 and 11 February 1995
[Original:
I.

English/French]

INTRODUCTION

1.
On 6 February 1995, the Security Council, in informal consultations,
decided to send a mission to Burundi. The mission arrived at Bujumbura in the
morning of 10 February 1995.
2.
The mission was led by H.E. Ibrahim A. Gambari, Permanent Representative of
Nigeria. Its members included H.E. Mr. Li Zhaoxing (China),
H.E. Mr. Karel Kovanda (Czech Republic), Mr. Gerhard Henze (Germany),
Mr. Julio Rendon Barnica (Honduras), H.E. Mr. Nugroho Wisnumurti (Indonesia) and
Mr. Karl F. Inderfurth (United States of America).
3.

The terms of reference of the mission (see S/1995/112) were:

(a) To hold consultations with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on the situation regarding political and security developments
and his efforts in this regard and on additional ways in which the United
Nations might further underpin his efforts;
(b) To hold talks with the President, the Prime Minister, the leadership
of the security forces and the leaders of the opposition parties as well as
United Nations agencies, members of the diplomatic corps, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) the Office of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and
other interested parties and convey to them the serious concerns of the Security
Council over the recent political developments in Burundi;
(c) To stress to all the parties the strong support of the Security
Council for the Convention of government of 10 September 1994 and the Government
constituted on the basis of it and for the process of national reconciliation,
and the Council’s rejection of all attempts to undermine them or to destabilize
the region;
(d)

To submit a report to the Council.

4.
The mission followed up on work done by an earlier Security Council mission
to Burundi (see S/1994/1039).
5.
The mission held in-depth consultations with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah. It also held very useful
meetings with most of the important leaders of the country, the leadership of
the security forces, heads of political parties and members of the diplomatic
corps. Meetings were also held with the representative of the OAU,
representatives of NGOs and United Nations agencies active in Burundi, as well
as with other dignitaries (see appendices I and II).

/...

S/1995/163
English
Page 3

II.

BACKGROUND TO THE VISIT

6.
The political crisis of the summer of 1994, over electing the President of
the country, was resolved on 10 September 1994 when the Forum of Negotiations
reached a first agreement on power-sharing and most political parties signed the
Convention of government ("the Convention"). The Convention provided,
inter alia, for a Government of 25 members (55 per cent from the presidential
majority, 45 per cent from the opposition minority) appointed by the President;
a four-year transitional period; the appointment of a Prime Minister from among
the opposition, who would countersign the President’s decisions; and the
creation of a National Security Council of 10 members, equitably divided between
the Front pour la démocratie au Burundi (FRODEBU) and the opposition. All these
steps would follow the election of the President.
7.
On 18 September, the Forum of Negotiations reached a second agreement on
the modalities for appointing the new President, which became an annex to the
Convention. All political parties except the Parti pour le redressement
national (PARENA), headed by former President Bagaza, signed the Convention and
its annex. On 30 September 1994, the interim President, Mr. Sylvestre
Ntibantunganya, the official candidate of FRODEBU, was elected by the National
Assembly by 68 votes to 1. On 1 October, he was sworn in as definitive
President of the country.
8.
On 3 October, the Prime Minister, Anatole Kanyenkiko, was confirmed in
office and on 5 October he formed a new Government of national unity, consisting
of 13 parties (see appendix III). Six small opposition parties did not obtain
posts in the Government, and this later became a point of contention.
9.
In a report to the Security Council of 9 October 1994 (S/1994/1152), the
Secretary-General noted that, although the situation had stabilized somewhat
with the election of a new President, it still remained precarious and the
international community should therefore continue encouraging the moderate
forces in Burundi.
10. The fragility of the situation was underlined by the crisis concerning the
proposed nomination of the Speaker of the National Assembly. The presidential
appointment of Mr. Jean Minani (FRODEBU) was contested by the Union pour le
progrès national (UPRONA), which accused Mr. Minani of having incited violence
following the attempted coup of 1993. Although Mr. Minani denied these
allegations, the crisis was resolved only when he relinquished the post of
Speaker. The Secretary-General of FRODEBU, Mr. Leonce Ngendakumana, was
appointed Speaker on 12 January.
11. The Minani crisis prompted UPRONA to demand that the Prime Minister,
Mr. Kanyenkiko, who was viewed by some as having behaved too moderately during
the crisis, resign in solidarity with his party. The Prime Minister, however,
refused. UPRONA thereupon decided to expel him from the party, a decision which
Mr. Kanyenkiko considered null and void.
12. That crisis was the beginning of concerted attacks on the Prime Minister
and his Cabinet by extremist elements of his own party, UPRONA. These attacks
culminated on 30 January when Mr. Charles Mukasi, the leader of UPRONA, called
/...

S/1995/163
English
Page 4

for the Government to be "overthrown by all means" if a new Prime Minister did
not immediately replace Mr. Kanyenkiko.
13. In view of this increasingly unstable situation, the President of the
Security Council made a statement on 31 January 1995 (S/PRST/1995/5) in which
the Council called upon all parties and other concerned to give support to the
government institutions established in line with the Convention. The
Secretary-General also issued a press statement on the issue on 1 February. It
was in this highly charged atmosphere that the mission was dispatched.

III.

OBSERVATIONS OF THE MISSION

14. The political and security situation remains precarious and is potentially
explosive. Extremist elements, both Tutsi and Hutu, both within the coalition
Government and outside it, have for their own reasons not accepted the
power-sharing arrangements contained in the Convention. Those extremists have
usurped the political initiative, at the expense of the moderate elements who
constitute the majority of the population and have been silenced through threat
and intimidation. This is the root cause of continuing political instability in
the country.
15. The linchpin of the stability of the country is the Convention and the
coalition Government. There are systematic and persistent efforts by extremist
forces, notably those among the ranks of UPRONA, to undermine the coalition
Government. They use various tactics, including inflammatory statements, calls
for "dead city" strikes, street demonstrations, intimidation and incitement to
violence.
16. Other extremist influences on the political and security situation in
Burundi include the former Interior Minister Nyangoma, now active outside the
country, and Palipehutu guerillas operating in the country’s hinterland. Both
are extremist forces recruited from the majority Hutu population. On the Tutsi
side, the former President Bagaza and his PARENA party do not support the
Convention and instead call for a national conference that would in effect
ignore and cast aside the results of Burundi’s democratic elections of 1993.
Activities of all these extremist forces have also contributed to crippling the
coalition Government and putting its future in doubt, thus undermining peace and
stability in Burundi.
17. Further aggravating the situation is the fact that the security forces,
which are mainly Tutsi, constitute an independent power centre, and their
support of the coalition Government cannot be taken for granted.
18. The persistence of a culture of impunity constitutes a fundamental problem
in Burundi. In particular, there has been no accountability, political or
judicial, on the part of those directly involved in the October 1993 coup
attempt and the massacre that ensued. In addition, the judicial system has
largely collapsed and is often perceived as being partial. These factors
jeopardize the survival of the coalition Government, the Convention and even
peace and security in Burundi and in the region as a whole.

/...

S/1995/163
English
Page 5

19.
The presence of the OAU military observers is considered to be useful, but
their effectiveness is limited by the restraints imposed on them by the Burundi
security forces, which hamper their freedom of movement, and also by the fact
that the present number (46) is far from adequate.
20. The Security Council’s presidential statement of 31 January 1995
(S/PRST/1995/5) and its mission to Burundi underscored the support of the
international community for the coalition Government and the Convention and may
have contributed, however temporarily, to the easing of tension in the country.

IV.

RECOMMENDATIONS

21. An international commission of inquiry into the October 1993 coup attempt
and the massacres that followed, which was proposed by the Government in
accordance with the Convention, should be established as soon as possible.
22. The mission recommends that the Council considers augmenting the United
Nations presence in Burundi, under the direction of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and in close cooperation and coordination with the
relevant departments, in order to assist capacity-building by the Government of
Burundi in the areas of:
(a)

Building an impartial judicial system;

(b) Civilian police training, impartial investigations and support
services, especially in urban centres;
(c)

Establishing an effective administrative presence in the provinces.

23. The number (46) of OAU observers needs to be substantially increased and
restrictions on their movement should be removed.
24. The mission recommends that the Council encourage the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to deploy human rights monitors throughout the
country, as requested by the Minister for External Relations and Cooperation of
Burundi, taking into account the need for human rights monitors to operate under
secure conditions and with sufficient mobility and equipment.
25. The mission strongly supports the implementation of the provision of the
Convention of government to hold a national debate that would allow the
participation of all segments of society, as a means of fostering political
dialogue in the country.
26. The mission recommends that visits to Burundi of high-level international
delegations, which underscore the continued concern of the international
community and help to diffuse the tension, should be continued.
27. In their efforts to promote political stability and national
reconciliation, some members of the mission believe that the Security Council
should explore the possibility of imposing selective sanctions against
individuals believed to belong to extremist groups in Burundi, such as denial of
/...

S/1995/163
English
Page 6

entry visas and freezing of their foreign accounts, while other members take the
view that selective sanctions against individuals may be counter-productive.

V.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

28. The members of the mission would like to express their strong support for
the continued efforts towards peace and stability in Burundi made by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and his staff.
29. The mission wishes to express its gratitude and appreciation to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and members of his staff for the
valuable assistance rendered to it during the visit to Burundi.

/...

S/1995/163
English
Page 7

Appendix I
Programme of the Security Council mission to Burundi

Friday, 10 February 1995
1000 hours

Briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah

1030 hours

Meeting with the Minister of External Relations and Cooperation,
Mr. Jean-Marie Ngendahayo

1140 hours

Meeting with the Minister of National Defence,
Major Firmin Sinzoyiheba, the Chief of Staff of the Army,
Colonel Jean Bikomagu and the Chief of Staff of the Gendarmerie,
Colonel Sebastien Bahebura

1300 hours

Working lunch with the Minister of External Relations and the
Minister of National Defence

1540 hours

Meeting with the heads of the political parties signatory to the
Convention of government

1840 hours

Meeting with the Special Representative of OAU, Amb. Bassole

1915 hours

Meeting with former President Pierre Buyoya

2130 hours

Meeting with the President of UPRONA, Mr. Charles Mukasi

Saturday, 11 February 1995
0800 hours

Meeting with the heads of United Nations agencies

0930 hours

Meeting with Western ambassadors and ambassadors of Security
Council permanent member States

1050 hours

Meeting with the Prime Minister, Mr. Anatole Kanyenkiko

1230 hours

Working lunch with representatives of United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations

1410 hours

Meeting with the Ambassador of Egypt, the Chargé d’affaires of
Zaire and the First Counsellor of Rwanda

1500 hours

Meeting with former President Jean-Baptiste Bagaza

1600 hours

Meeting with members of the Forum of Negotiations

1645 hours

Meeting with the President of the Republic,
Mr. Sylvestre Ntibantunganya

/...

S/1995/163
English
Page 8

1825 hours

Meeting with the President of the National Assembly,
Mr. Leonce Ngendakumana

Sunday, 12 February 1995
0830 hours

Departure for Kigali, Rwanda

/...

S/1995/163
English
Page 9

Appendix II
List of official contacts

l.

Government of Burundi

Mr. Sylvestre Ntibantunganya, President of the Republic
Mr. Anatole Kanyenkiko, Prime Minister
Mr. Jean-Marie Ngendahayo, Minister of External Relations and Cooperation
Major Firmin Sinzoyiheba, Minister of National Defence
Colonel Jean Bikomagu, Chief of Staff of the Army
Colonel Sebastien Bahebura, Chief of Staff of the Gendarmerie
Mr. Leonce Ngendakumana, President of the National Assembly
2.

Former leaders of Burundi

Former President Pierre Buyoya
Former President Jean-Baptiste Bagaza
3.

Political parties and organizations

Mr. Jean Minani, President of the Front pour la démocratie au Burundi (FRODEBU)
(majority party)
Mr. Charles Mukasi, President of the Union pour le progrès National (UPRONA)
(opposition party)
Mr. Schadrack Niyonkuru, President of the Parti du peuple (majority party)
Mr. Ernest Kabushemeye, President of the Parti du rassemblement du peuple
burundais (RPB) (majority party)
Mr. Alphonse Rugambarara, President of the Inkinzo-PPO (opposition party)
Mr. Vincent Ndikumasabo, President of the Parti social démocrate (PSD)
(opposition party)
Mr. Gaëtan Nikobamye, President of the Parti libéral (majority party)
Mr. Mathias Hitimana, President of the Parti pour la réconciliation du peuple
(opposition party)
Mr. Therence Nsanze, President of the Alliance burundo-africaine pour le salut
(ABASA) (opposition party)
Mr. Vincent Kubwimana, Secretary-General of the Confédération des Syndicats
Libres du Burundi
Mr. Antoine Nijembazi, Vice-President of the Association des Employeurs du
Burundi
4.

Diplomatic corps

The mission of the Security Council met with the ambassadors of the
following United Nations Member States:
Belgium
China
Egypt
Germany

Rwanda
Russian Federation
United States of America
Zaire

/...

S/1995/163
English
Page 10

5.

Non-governmental organizations

Mr. Thomas Gonnet, Action Internationale contre la Faim (AICF)
Père Yves Brasseur, Jesuit Refugee Service
Mrs. Dina Lodolo-Zanardi, Federation of Italian NGOs
Mr. Wiles and Ms. Hall, OXFAM
Mr. Swen Lampell, International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies
Mr. Javier Gabaldon, Médecins sans Frontières - Belgium
Mr. James O’Connor, Catholic Relief Services
Mr. Philip Christensen, Care-Canada
Abbé Onesiphore, CED-CARITAS

/...

S/1995/163
English
Page 11

Appendix III
Recognized political parties*

1.

Charles Mukasi, President of UPRONA - PPO

2.

Mathias Hitimana, President of PRP - PPO

3.

Schadrack Niyonkuru, President of the Parti du peuple - FCD

4.

Cyrille Singejeje, President of RADDES - PPO

5.

Sylvestre Ntibantunganya, President of FRODEBU - FCD

6.

Ignace Bankamwabo, President of ANADDE - PPO

7.

Ernest Kabushemeye, President of RPB - FCD

8.

Nicéphore Ndimurukundo, President of the Parti indépendent des
travailleurs - PPO

9.

Alphonse Rugambarara, President of Inkinzo - PPO

10.

Thérence Nsanze, President of ABASA - PPO

11.

Vincent Ndikumasabo, President of PSD - PPO

12.

Gaëtan Nikobamye, President of the Parti libéral

13.

Jean-Baptiste Bagaza, President of PARENA - PPO

-----

________________________
*

PPO = Opposition parties.
FCD = Majority parties.

- FCD
