S/PV.8606

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8606th meeting

Wednesday, 28 August 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wronecka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Mabhongo
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Twenty-third report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2019/632)
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2470 (2019) (S/2019/660)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-26430 (E)
*1926430*

S/PV.8606

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

It may be unusual to immediately switch to
funding concerns but, with the Council’s well-received
assurances in mind, I feel the need once again to share
our concerns regarding the continued underfunding
of both the Funding Facility for Stabilization as well
as the humanitarian response plan, with gaps of over
$300 million and $500 million, respectively.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Twenty-third report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of paragraph 4 of
Security Council resolution 2107 (2013)
(S/2019/632)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution
2470 (2019) (S/2019/660)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, to participate in
this meeting.
Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert is joining today’s meeting
via video tele-conference from The Hague.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/632, which contains the twenty-third
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107
(2013), and document S/2019/660, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 2470 (2019).
I now give the floor to Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert.
Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert: I would like to begin
by recalling the historic importance of the Security
Council’s visit to Iraq on 29 June. On that day in
2014, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/
Da’esh) declared its so-called caliphate. While that is
a grim memory, during the Council’s visit we instead
celebrated Iraqi freedom and sovereignty and saluted
the enormous sacrifices made in the fight against
ISIL. The Council delivered important, well-received
assurances of its continued support to Iraq and its
people. That was highly appreciated by many in Iraq.
2/21

28/08/2019

If the Council will allow me, therefore, I would like
to use this opportunity to express my sincere hope for
the ongoing and generous support of the international
community. Progress has been made, but the road
ahead is long and complex. Right now, due to the
continued underfunding I just mentioned, Iraq’s postconflict humanitarian programming is being hindered.
For example, vital health-care services are being
suspended, schools for the internally displaced are
being shuttered and food distribution cycles are being
interrupted. Moreover, around 1.6 million internally
displaced persons are still desperately awaiting better
times, are still waiting to return to their homes in safety
and dignity.
Do not get me wrong: without a doubt, lots of
good work has been done. Thanks to the many donor
contributions, houses, roads, bridges and power lines
have been rebuilt, to name but a few examples. And yes,
4.3 million people have returned home, but the pace
has slowed, and outstanding needs are most acute in the
health, electricity and water sectors.
Understandably, donors have been asking the
Government of Iraq to demonstrate shared ownership
by taking part in the financing of this work. I am pleased
to report that, moments ago, the Government signed
a cost-sharing agreement to begin making its own
contributions to the Funding Facility for Stabilization.
Let me also briefly refer to the Kuwait International
Conference for the Reconstruction of Iraq, which took
place almost a year and a half ago. The Iraq Recovery
and Resilience Programme is being implemented
throughout the country, and resource mobilization
efforts have yielded almost half of the required funding
so far. We will continue to encourage development
partners to fund the programme, particularly through
the United Nations trust fund.
Returning to politics, Iraq’s leadership is hard
at work building on the progress made to date. As
discussed during the Council’s visit to Iraq, painting a
grim picture is never a goal in itself. More importantly,
it is not justified. Also, we cannot simply judge the
19-26430

28/08/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

current situation without putting it in the context of
Iraq’s past. Decades of trouble continue to impact the
present, and we have not seen the end of it yet. It is
equally important, however, not to sugar-coat the
current circumstances. We can all agree on Iraq’s great
potential, but perseverance is key to making the most
of that potential.
Clearly, one cannot expect the Iraqi Government
to create miracles overnight in dealing with the legacy
of the past and the many challenges of the present. The
harsh reality is that the Government needs time to fight
the many narrow partisan interests and to deliver.
Just as essentially, political parties and other actors
need to arrive at a common understanding that the
country’s interests should be prioritized above all else.
Ultimately, it must be clear that a Government cannot
act alone. It is a joint responsibility.
As the Council knows, the federal Cabinet is now
fully formed aside from the Ministry of Education.
Significant progress has been made on senior
appointments to parliamentary committees. The
Kurdistan Regional Government is also up and running,
with the critical resources portfolio still to be filled. I
note that three ministers of that Regional Government
are women, as is the Speaker of the Kurdistan Regional
Parliament. At the federal level, unfortunately, not a
single woman has not yet been appointed.
The good news is that the progress in the both
Government formation processes in both Baghdad
and Erbil has created a positive momentum to
advance negotiations between the two capitals, as
also demonstrated by the establishment of a high-level
joint committee.
I cannot deny that the expectations are high, in
particular on key files, including Kirkuk, Sinjar and
revenue-sharing. On the latter, it is important that all
parties acknowledge that, instead of counterproductive
annual budget battles, a comprehensive, lasting
agreement is far more productive. It goes without saying
that I am always ready to offer the good offices of
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
in order to advance discussions towards consensus,
followed by action.
Regarding Kirkuk, I am very encouraged by the
goodwill demonstrated by all parties involved to finally
address the normalization of the situation in Kirkuk.

S/PV. 8606

As for Sinjar, again earlier this month I travelled to
the region, where, unfortunately, I continued to witness
great devastation and slow progress on the ground. Rival
security actors and the lack of a unified administration
remain the main obstacles for progress. That situation
also greatly restricts humanitarian action. I therefore
continue to appeal to all those feeling challenged, the
federal and Kurdish authorities in particular. Indeed,
it is high time to put aside partisan interests to bridge
differences and to place without further delay the needs
of the people first.
Turning to the economy, the Government is
increasingly recognizing the urgency of reform, notably
in broadening the revenue base beyond hydrocarbons
and in increasing the role of the private sector in
areas ranging from infrastructure development to
job creation.
Discussions at the senior-most levels focus on
enhancing governance, better managing oil revenue,
protecting the investment environment from corruption
and reforming the banking sector to pave the way for
more foreign direct investment and public-private
partnerships. That is becoming more urgent, especially
as a higher budget deficit looms with rising expenditures
and oil price volatility. Within that context, we
encourage the Iraqi Government to accelerate its
structural reform, fostering macroeconomic and
financial stability, as well as promoting sustainable,
inclusive growth.
In terms of regional politics, we continue to operate
in a perilous context. Yet the Iraqi leadership must
again be commended for its unwavering commitment
to multilateral diplomacy. With great dedication, Iraqi
leaders are tirelessly engaging regional and international
actors to ensure that their country is a meeting ground
for stability, not a venue for proxy conflicts. How right
they are. With that in mind, we should be lucid and
recognize that current tensions could well deal a huge
blow to all national and international endeavours to
rebuild a stable and prosperous Iraq. We must therefore
spare no effort in avoiding that prospect.
I am also very encouraged by the Government’s
determination to bring all armed actors under State
control. Recent orders have been met with broad support
across the political spectrum. That is good news, but we
are in the early days of implementation and the next
phase will prove crucial. Clearly, zero tolerance for any
armed actor outside State control is the way forward.

19-264303/21

S/PV.8606

The situation concerning Iraq

Further work on security sector reform will be
necessary, as an effective, efficient and financially
sustainable security sector is critical to protecting
Iraq against existing and emerging threats. With the
Ministers of the Interior, Defence and Justice in place, I
sincerely hope that the Government will now speed up
the reconfiguration of its national security architecture
in terms of structure, capabilities and resources.
Also important is the rapid enactment of the joint
security mechanism. It will pave the way for joint
operations along disputed boundaries. Inadequate
coordination will continue to give Da’esh a margin
of manoeuvre. In other words, enhanced operational
performance on the ground between the federal
and Kurdish regional forces is not a nice to have but
a necessity.
Within the context of domestic security, I would
also like to commend the bravery of Iraqi security
forces. In the aftermath of ISIL’s territorial defeat, they
continue to hunt down the remaining ISIL fighters,
for example within the framework of Operation Will
of Victory, carried out throughout the country in the
past weeks.
The issue of returning ISIL fighters, including
their family members, from Syria to Iraq continues
to pose major challenges. Unfortunately, we still have
no clarity on numbers, a start date, screening/security
arrangements and/or hosting facilities upon return. As
I have stressed before, if not suitably addressed, this
issue has the potential to impact not only Iraq but also
the wider region and far beyond.
Also important to note is the fact that issues of
due process and accountability cannot be limited only
to the courtroom. A structured dialogue is required
to precisely define how the Government of Iraq will
handle this process, which will in turn inform the
modalities of United Nations assistance.
I would also like to emphasize the paramount
importance of robust safeguards for detention, due
process and fair trials. Complying with human rights
obligations would not only demonstrate commitment
to justice and accountability, but it is also a necessary
building block for reconciliation and social cohesion.
What is more, it would reduce the risk of history
repeating itself. We are well aware that a variety of
grievances, including unfair trials and detainee abuse,
have been exploited by ISIL to fuel its violent agenda.
Whether we like it or not, at this moment in time, too
4/21

28/08/2019

many communities continue to feel marginalized. As
a consequence, many people remain vulnerable to
extremist messaging. For me that was one of the most
important reasons to establish a permanent presence in
Mosul. I am pleased to report that our Mosul office will
open its doors in early September.
Unfortunately, as discussed before, rampant
corruption is not being wiped out at once. As I said
last time (see S/PV.8531), achieving tangible results is
crucial. A recent call to lift the immunity of members
of Parliament accused of corruption could be a move in
the right direction. But again, the final result is what
ultimately matters.
With regard to the elections, the Iraqi Council of
Representatives recently amended the Governorate
Council Electoral Law. I must say that certain
provisions are of great concern, as they could lead to the
disenfranchisement of many otherwise eligible voters.
In addition, the transparency and accountability of
electoral institutions and processes are not sufficiently
guaranteed at present. While the elections expected in
April 2020 are critical and overdue, I have made it clear
that free, fair and credible elections are key to the revival
of public trust. In other words, UNAMI will continue
to highlight the importance of guaranteeing the right
of universal suffrage and the need for the transparency
and accountability of institutions and processes — all
key to the inclusiveness and credibility of the elections.
With your permission, Madam President, I would
now like to turn to the issue of missing Kuwaiti,
third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property,
including the national archives. I am pleased to report
a significant breakthrough. Samples of human remains
exhumed in March from a burial site in Iraq’s Muthanna
governorate have now been confirmed as belonging
to some of the Kuwaitis we have been seeking. DNA
analysis is continuing on additional human remains. I
can also confirm that, earlier today, more than 40,000
Kuwaiti books belonging to the Amiri and national
archives were handed over by the Government of Iraq
to the Kuwaiti authorities.
In that context, as always, I would like to commend
the ongoing constructive cooperation between Iraq
and Kuwait under the auspices of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, with the invaluable
assistance of the Tripartite Commission. I truly hope
that the recent discoveries will finally bring some relief
19-26430

28/08/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV. 8606

to the families of the missing, to whom we extend our
deepest sympathies.

against the corrosive effects of armed groups whose
actions jeopardize Iraq’s recovery and regional stability.

In conclusion, I would like to underline that Iraq’s
daunting challenges neither arose overnight nor are
solely the product of Iraqi actions. As such, they will
not be resolved tomorrow. In other words, Iraqis must
press ahead in unity and, just as important, with an
engaged international community by their side.

We welcome progress on Government formation
but note, as the Special Representative has, that none
of the Cabinet positions and only two positions on
parliamentary committees are filled by women. We
urge the Government of Iraq to appoint qualified female
candidates to senior decision-making positions.

The President: I thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert for
her briefing.

Continued action on anti-corruption measures is
essential for long-term stability and economic growth
in Iraq. We urge the Government of Iraq to strengthen
its efforts going forward.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for another
informative briefing on the gains of the Government of
Iraq in increasing stability and prosperity for its people.
To achieve the enduring defeat of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) and successfully stabilize
those areas formally under its control, all communities
in Iraq must feel secure. Security depends on removing
destabilizing armed groups from liberated areas and
replacing them with professional security forces that are
responsive to Baghdad and enforce the rule of law. We
strongly support the full implementation of Executive
Order 237, announced by Prime Minister Al-Mahdi
in July, which seeks to bring all popular mobilization
forces under the exclusive control of the Government
of Iraq.
As the Council knows well, the United States has
long been concerned about Iran’s malign activities and
its destabilizing impact on the region, including in Iraq.
Recent events have demonstrated that our concerns
are well-founded. Iran’s sponsorship of destabilizing
armed groups in Iraq, operating outside Government
control, undermines Iraq’s sovereignty and threatens
the safety of civilians. We call for those destabilizing
armed groups to be removed from civilian centres
and replaced with professional security forces that are
responsive to Baghdad and responsible for enforcing
the rule of law.
United States forces operate in Iraq at the invitation
of the Iraqi Government. We support Iraqi sovereignty
and have repeatedly spoken out against any potential
actions by malign actors inciting violence in Iraq. The
Government of Iraq has the right to control its own
internal security and the responsibility to protect itself

We welcome the continued cooperation between
the Government of Iraq and the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) on provincial
council election preparations scheduled for next April.
The amendments to the electoral law passed in July
by the Council of Representatives are a significant
step forward in preparing for those elections. We
urge the Government of Iraq to expand and expedite
its efforts to register eligible Iraqi voters with the
biometric voter registration system in order to prevent
disenfranchisement. Also important to the long-term
stability of Iraq is the commitment by, and ability of,
the country’s leaders to deliver essential civil and social
services to its people, including health care, education
and infrastructure.
Such efforts will help restore public trust in
Government institutions and are crucial to paving
the way for stability and prosperity for all Iraqis.
We continue to prioritize restoring key services and
infrastructure in areas liberated from ISIS control.
Additional donations are urgently needed for the
Funding Facility for Stabilization of the United Nations
Development Programme and, as we announced earlier
this year, the United States will contribute $100 million
to that effort. We encourage other members of the
international community to also step up and do their
part. We welcome today’s announcement by the
Government of Iraq of its $33 million pledge.
Regional integration is a prerequisite to securing
a peaceful and prosperous future for Iraq. Kuwait and
other Arab neighbours have paved the way in recent
months. We welcome and support UNAMI’s role in
that effort, including the signing earlier this month
of a memorandum of understanding between UNAMI
and the Government of Iraq to establish the Iraq
Reconstruction and Recovery Trust Fund, in support of

19-264305/21

S/PV.8606

The situation concerning Iraq

Iraq’s own recovery and development framework. That
is a positive step towards urgently addressing Iraq’s
immediate humanitarian stabilization responses and
longer-term development needs by the international
community, including improving the fulfilment of
international pledges from the Kuwait International
Conference for the Reconstruction of Iraq, held in 2018.
We support continued efforts by the Government of
Iraq, UNAMI and the International Committee of the
Red Cross to address the unresolved issue of Kuwaiti
missing persons and property from the first Gulf War.
The recent discovery of human remains in Samawah
and efforts to positively identify them are a step towards
reconciliation and healing between Kuwait and Iraq. We
commend ongoing efforts to improve relations between
Baghdad and Erbil. We note with concern, however,
the continued disagreements over oil authorities and
revenue-sharing and urge the Iraqi Federal Government
and the Kurdistan Regional Government to resolve
those issues as quickly as possible.
Support for threatened religious and ethnic
communities remains a top priority for the United
States. Iraq’s diverse diversity is critical to its richness
and strength as a nation. We encourage UNAMI to
continue engaging those communities across Iraq. We
urge the Government of Iraq to make urgent progress in
support of them, including by preventing armed groups
from blocking their return to their homes and villages.
As Iraq continues to make progress, efforts to
stabilize areas liberated from ISIS, urgently address
the plight of internally displaced persons and ISIS
family members and further integrate Iraqis into the
surrounding region must all be accelerated. With
UNAMI’s continued engagement, those efforts can
help steer Iraq towards a bright, prosperous and
stable future.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, let me thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for her briefing. She has Germany’s full support, as
does the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). Germany also continues to stand by the
Iraqi Government and the Iraqi people.
Since 2014, Germany has contributed more than
€1.7 billion, and we remain committed to supporting
Iraq. As the Special Representative pointed out, a lot
has been done and much has been achieved but, at the
same time, it is true that stabilization, recovery and
reconstruction can succeed only if all actors — including
6/21

28/08/2019

the Government of Iraq, of course — intensify their
efforts and extend their financial support. In that context,
we very much welcome the signing of a cost-sharing
agreement by the Government of Iraq so as to ensure
it contributes its share to the funding requirements, as
mentioned by the Special Representative in her briefing.
We also welcome the fact that the formation of the
Government has almost been achieved. We trust that
Iraq’s political leaders will use the momentum that has
now emerged in order to fill the remaining vacancy. As
we heard today from the Special Representative, at the
federal level, not a single woman has been appointed
to a leadership position yet. We would encourage
the Iraqi Government to appoint women to senior
decision-making positions, too.
Given the near completion of its formation, the
Iraqi Government can now focus on its main task of
implementing the necessary reforms, reconciliation,
enhancing the provision of public services, addressing
the basic needs of all its citizens and improving the
lives of all Iraqis. Germany welcomes the steps taken
by the Iraqi Government and the Parliament so far, and
in the fight against corruption in particular. We urge
all relevant parties to continue their efforts in the fight
against corruption, which is crucial to building viable
and responsive State institutions and reviving trust
on the side of the public, as well as potential foreign
investors. We also welcome the decision taken to
strengthen State control over all armed forces and call
for the implementation of those decisions.
With regard to the relationship between the capital
and the Kurdistan Regional Government, we also
welcome the formation of the Kurdistan Regional
Government and the positive developments regarding
relations between Baghdad and Erbil. We call upon both
sides to further improve relations between the Federal
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government
in order to find sustainable solutions for the outstanding
unresolved issues, in particular with regard to oil and
revenue-sharing.
Accountability is a prerequisite for reconciliation
and for the return of the almost 2 million remaining
internally displaced persons in Iraq. There can be no
sustainable peace or successful post-conflict recovery
without justice. That includes accountability for sexual
and gender-based violence and a survivor-centred
approach in line with resolution 2467 (2019).
19-26430

28/08/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

Let me also reiterate our full support for the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and its Special Adviser, Mr. Karim
Khan. The work to be undertaken by the Investigative
Team will be vital for the effective prosecution of
ISIL crimes. It is crucial that all judicial proceedings
be fully in line with standards of due process and fair
trial guarantees in accordance with Iraq’s international
human rights obligations. That includes the fair
treatment of alleged ISIL defendants and their families.
Regarding the regional aspects mentioned by the
Special Representative, and on a more general note, we
need to avoid further regional escalation. It is essential to
conduct further work on de-escalation and the reduction
of regional tensions. We need to maintain dialogue, in
particular among regional partners. Such dialogue and
de-escalation are also crucial for Iraq’s own stability.
Therefore, we commend the Iraqi Government for its
active engagement and constructive role in that regard.
Before concluding, let me say a final word on the
issue of climate and security. Iraq is one of the countries
in the Middle East that is most prone to climate
change-related security risks, such as those triggered by
prolonged heat waves, increased rainfall variability and
extended periods of drought. Since May, 40,000 acres
of farmland have been on fire, causing the death of 13
civilians. Those fires were mostly caused by extreme
hot and dry weather conditions. We would therefore
encourage UNAMI to focus its regional dialogue not
only on energy, the environment, water and refugees,
but also on the adverse effects of climate change on the
ecology and, consequently, the stability of the region.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert
for her valuable and comprehensive briefing. The State
of Kuwait appreciates and supports the work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
in accordance with its mandate and pursuant to the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
We have reviewed the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/632) on the progress made in fulfilling
the mandate of UNAMI, including developments
related to the missing Kuwaiti and third-country
nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the
national archives,
Kuwait’s bilateral relations with the Republic
of Iraq have seen continued positive developments.

S/PV. 8606

Steps have been taken by the leaderships of both
countries that reflect the concepts of fraternity and
neighbourliness. The bilateral visits at the highest level
that have taken place, including a visit by the Amir of
the country, His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad
Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, in June, as well as meetings of joint
bilateral committees, are an important indicator of the
promotion of such cooperation and the closing of an old
painful chapter and the opening a new one of productive
partnership, which will translate into the resolution of
outstanding issues.
Since the fall of Saddam Hussein regime, the
State of Kuwait has provided all kinds of support and
assistance to the brotherly Iraqi people, in spite of the
circumstances that hindered us from doing so in the
past and while realizing our deep-rooted interests. We
look forward to promoting them by seizing promising
opportunities to elevate our relations so as to bring
about the progress and prosperity that our friendly
peoples aspire to.
In that regard, we commend Iraq’s commitment
to implementing all of its remaining outstanding
international obligations towards the State of Kuwait
in accordance with the relevant Council resolutions.
We stand ready to provide support and assistance to
accelerate the implementation of such obligations, in
particular with regard to humanitarian commitments
related to the remaining missing Kuwaiti and thirdcountry nationals since the liberation of the State of
Kuwait in 1991. Two hundred and thirty-six of the 605
missing persons have been identified.
The suffering of the families of missing hostages
continues, but we hope that the fates of those remaining
missing persons will soon be resolved, given the latest
developments in the exhumation and analysis of the
remains of missing Kuwaiti nationals. We hope that
more potential burial sites will be identified so as to
eventually be able to bring closure to this humanitarian
issue. Kuwait, for its part, has spared no effort to
lend support to the efforts made. We believe that it is
possible to make progress if we intensify actions and
implement the agreed programmes and plans. We urge
Iraq to continue its constructive cooperation with the
Tripartite Commission and its technical subcommittee
under the leadership of the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC). We appreciate and commend the
important role of the ICRC in that respect.

19-264307/21

S/PV.8606

The situation concerning Iraq

With regard to missing Kuwaiti property, in
particular the national archives — the whereabouts of
which are still unknown — progress is still limited.
We welcome the efforts of the Iraqi authorities, which
handed over 42,000 books to the State of Kuwait this
morning, of the nearly 120,000 books that were owned
by the National Library and the University of the
State of Kuwait, under the supervision of the United
Nations. We hope that cooperation continues in order to
restore the property seized during the Iraqi occupation,
especially the national archives.
We have also followed developments in Iraq with
great interest. There has been significant progress
recently at the security, political and economic stability
levels, despite the challenges that Iraq has been facing.
We witnessed that progress at first-hand during the
visit to Iraq co-chaired by Kuwait and the United States
of America at the end of June. We are cognizant that
the coming period is important for Iraq to surmount the
challenges it is facing. However, we are confident that
Iraq is moving with steady steps towards meeting its
aspirations in order to avoid relapsing into the turmoil
of the past.
We reaffirm our support for the Iraqi Government
in implementing its reform programmes. That requires
collective efforts to promote national reconciliation
among Iraqis of all backgrounds in order to prioritize
the public interest, address corruption, improve the
quality of public services and enforce security with a
view to restoring Iraq to its well-deserved position at
the regional and international levels. We welcome the
role of UNAMI in supporting those efforts in line with
its mandate.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait stands ready
to continue working in cooperation with Iraq during
this stage in order to support efforts at rebuilding and
reconstruction, as well as offsetting the destruction
in Iraq pursuant to the outcomes of the International
Conference for the Reconstruction of Iraq, which was held
in Kuwait. We encourage all countries that participated
in the Conference to honour their commitments. We
look forward to cooperating and coordinating with the
Iraqi Government towards establishing a mechanism to
follow up on the implementation of those commitments
so as to meet the aspirations of the Iraqi people.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert
for her briefing and for the valuable work she, together
8/21

28/08/2019

with her team of professionals, is doing at the helm of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq.
First, with regard to the political aspect, we
acknowledge the recent progress made in terms of the
appointment of the Ministers of Defence, the Interior
and Justice, thereby achieving an almost complete
Cabinet. However, we regret that no woman has been
selected for any of those posts, despite the fact that
there were two women candidates for the Ministry
of Education. In the same vein, we also welcome the
agreement on the establishment of the Kurdish Regional
Government. We applaud the appointment of three
women to ministerial posts and, for the first time, of a
woman to the presidency of the regional parliament. We
believe that those significant advances on the political
front will allow the authorities to finally implement
their Government plan aimed at promoting the stability,
development and security of the Iraqi people.
We hope that efforts to improve the relations
between the federal Government and the Kurdish
Regional Government will continue and that the two
will be able to definitively iron out their differences
with regard to oil revenues and security-related
arrangements, including the abolition of customs
control points. Similarly, we welcome the initiative to
take measures to attract investment to the country as
this is a fundamental tool for boosting economic growth
and job creation and, consequently, the population’s
quality of life.
Concerning the security aspect, we understand that
the resurgence of terrorism in Iraq poses an obvious
threat to the peace and security of that country and the
region. Therefore, we find the vibrant anti-terrorism
campaign rolled out by the national authorities
commendable but believe that greater regional and
international cooperation is necessary in order to
combat terrorism and prevent it from regaining its
past momentum.
As for the humanitarian aspect, we would like to
appeal to the national and local authorities alike to work
in a coordinated manner and to improve the bureaucratic
processes for allowing humanitarian organizations to
deliver in a timely manner the aid required by millions
of people who remain displaced. In addition, we would
like to highlight the commendable work of the Mine
Action Coordination Centre in mitigating the dangers
of explosive remnants of war in Iraq. We also applaud
the integration of women in demining activities, and
19-26430

28/08/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

the fact that there is an equal representation of men and
women in the composition of the teams.
With regard to unresolved matters with Kuwait,
we are pleased to note the steps taken as a result of
the investigations following the excavations carried out
in Samawah district last March. We acknowledge the
efforts of the members of the Tripartite Mechanism to
move forward on the search for prisoners and missing
persons reported by Kuwait and the return of human
remains, assets and the national archives.
In conclusion, we are concerned that tensions
among certain countries, including in the region, are
setting Iraq up as a stage for clashes between those
countries. Accordingly, we encourage those countries
to reflect on their position and make concrete efforts
to defuse the tensions and restore the desired stability.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Мy
delegation welcomes this briefing on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI) and congratulates
Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of UNAMI, for her
informative briefing on the latest developments and
continuing challenges to peace and stability in Iraq.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the spirit of compromise
that has prevailed in the Iraqi political class and has
made it possible to fill the vacant posts of the Ministers
of Justice, the Interior and Defence. Côte d’Ivoire
encourages Iraqi political actors to continue along
that path with a view to appointing a consensus choice
to head the Ministry of Education, whose mission is
crucial, particularly in war-affected areas. Forming a
complete Government should make it possible to meet
basic social needs, especially in the areas of health,
education, water and electricity. The election of the
chairs, vice-chairs and rapporteurs of the parliamentary
committees, an essential cog in the institutional
machinery, is also to be welcomed.
My country urges the Iraqi authorities to ensure that
the gender dimension is effectively taken into account in
their peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts. Similarly,
with regard to the particularly alarming humanitarian
situation in some regions of Iraq, my country would
like to urge the international community to pursue its
efforts to mobilize the necessary resources to finance
the 2019 humanitarian response plan, amounting to
$701.2 million, of which only 41.1 per cent has been
raised so far.

S/PV. 8606

Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the cooperation between
the federal Government and the Kurdish Regional
Government and hopes that dialogue will be maintained
in order to find mutually satisfactory solutions to the
issues of oil resource sharing and Kurdistan’s debt.
Concerning the fight against the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, which remains active despite its
military defeat, my country calls for substantial support
to be provided to the Iraqi forces in terms of capacitybuilding. In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
constructive cooperation between the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, UNAMI and the Government of Iraq. In my
country’s view, it is imperative to enforce the principle
of accountability for crimes committed by Da’esh,
in keeping with the provisions of resolution 2379
(2017), in order to guarantee victims’ rights through
fair proceedings. In addition, Côte d’Ivoire calls for
continued cooperation between the Governments of
Iraq and Kuwait in order to find a definitive solution to
the issue of missing Kuwaiti nationals and the return of
seized assets.
Given the multifaceted challenges facing Iraq, my
country would like to reiterate its call to the international
community to continue its support for the Iraqi
Government in its post-crisis reconstruction efforts.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its full
support for UNAMI and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for their continued commitment
to peace, long-term stability and development in Iraq.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): Let me begin by thanking Ms. HennisPlasschaert for her briefing.
Iraq is at a crossroads in its history. Much progress
has been made, but many challenges remain. Belgium
welcomes the establishment of the federal Government,
now nearly complete. To meet the many challenges, Iraq
needs a strong and inclusive Government, supported by
robust institutions and well-functioning public services.
Belgium also calls for the appointment of women to
decision-making positions.
Belgium encourages the Government to continue
its efforts to implement its programme. Executive Order
237, which stipulates that the popular mobilization
forces should be under the exclusive control of the
Government, is an important step forward in particular.

19-264309/21

S/PV.8606

The situation concerning Iraq

Belgium looks forward to the rigorous
implementation of that order by all parties concerned.
Moreover, as Chair of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, Belgium encourages the
Government of Iraq to develop, sign and implement an
action plan on this issue, with the support of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). That
would be a significant step towards delisting Iraq from
the annex to the Secretary-General’s annual report.
We also welcome the Government’s efforts in the
fight against corruption. Other important challenges
remain, namely, the economic situation and the business
environment. Providing basic services to the population
and creating jobs are important factors to ensure the
continued support of the people. The apparent calm
in the south of the country, compared to recent years,
is a positive development, but continued attention is
needed. In addition, given the strong influence of the
effects of climate change on Iraq and its population, it
is desirable that UNAMI step up its role in that area.
As Iraq looks to the future, reconciliation is
of paramount importance. That must continue and
families must be allowed to return to their communities
and resume normal lives. We support UNAMI’s
important mission to promote justice and the protection
of human rights.
Lastly, the security sector and its reform remain
a challenge for the Iraqi authorities. Although the
Islamic State has been defeated militarily, the causes
that allowed it to develop remain. We must therefore
do all we can to prevent the re-emergence of the
terrorist group.
Finally, Iraq and its people can only flourish anew
in a context of domestic and regional stability. The
fundamental principles of respect for sovereignty and
territorial integrity should guide actions. To that end,
we call for the joint commitment of the region and the
international community.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this meeting and thank
Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for her
insightful briefing.
We begin by highlighting the progress towards the
full establishment of the federal Government in Iraq,
with the recent appointment of the Ministers of Justice,
the Interior and Defence. That demonstrates that it is
possible to find political points of convergence, which
10/21

28/08/2019

is the responsibility of all parties, as mentioned by the
Special Representative.
However, we are concerned that the appointment
for the Ministry of Education is still pending. It
is desirable that the post be taken up by a woman,
which, we believe would positively contribute to the
consolidation of democracy in Iraqi. We recall that this
aspiration was voiced by the mission that visited Iraq at
the end of June, during which the Council reaffirmed
its full commitment to the country’s reconciliation and
stabilization process and that of the region as a whole.
We welcome the fact that the political process is also
accompanied by efforts aimed at Iraq’s reconstruction,
particularly with regard to promoting investment in
basic infrastructure and reviving the economy. We
therefore welcome the signing of a memorandum of
understanding between the Government of Iraq and the
United Nations to establish the Iraq Reconstruction and
Recovery Trust Fund, which will help best channel the
funds pledged by the international community at the
Kuwait International Conference for the Reconstruction
of Iraq and attract new investments. That must go hand
in hand with the Government’s firm commitment to
combating corruption.
We also believe that the support of the international
community is crucial to combating the terrorist activities
of the remaining members of Da’esh, including ensuring
accountability for the atrocity crimes committed. We
therefore join others in our support for the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, whose work will not only bolster
the fight against impunity but also contribute to the
reconciliation of the country.
We also welcome the issuing of Executive Order
237, concerning the popular mobilization forces, so that
the fight against the Da’esh remnants can be carried out
jointly, with a centralized framework and officers fully
committed to the vision of the State.
We also commend the readiness of the Iraqi
Government to contribute to regional stabilization
efforts and to the establishment of a conflict-free space
by fostering friendly relations and overcoming tensions
through dialogue with neighbouring States. In that
connection, we welcome the progress made with regard
to the property, national archives and Kuwaiti missing
persons, on the basis of joint cooperation between the
two countries.
19-26430

28/08/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

We conclude by highlighting the role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq in all these
processes, especially its initiatives to involve Iraqi
youth in efforts to promote peace and development, and
in its contribution to the necessary humanitarian work
in the country.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq, for her insightful briefing, which provided a
comprehensive update on developments in Iraq, as
well as on the work of all the teams of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), which I
particularly commend.
I would first like to stress the importance of
working to consolidate the current positive momentum
in Iraq. That is one of the main conclusions of the
Council’s visit to Baghdad at the end of June. The
continued efforts of the Iraqi authorities to open
a new chapter in their country’s history should be
welcomed and encouraged. That is why, following the
elections, which strengthened the democratic process
in Iraq, appointments to three of four vacant federal
Government ministerial posts is another positive step.
We also welcome the latest appointments to head the
Kurdistan Regional Government.
The Prime Minister’s issuance of Executive
Order 237, which aims to strengthen State control
over the popular mobilization forces, also supports
the stabilization process. The order’s provisions must
now be implemented to be effective. The positive
political momentum must continue in order to meet the
expectations of the Iraqi population, particularly with
regard to public services, and to improve the investment
climate, within the framework of a united, federal and
democratic Iraq that respects all its constituents. In that
regard, we encourage Baghdad and Erbil to continue
their discussions with a view to sustainably resolving
the remaining points of disagreement.
Consolidating those gains is essential now that
Iraq is at a crossroads, which means that Iraq must
be vigilant and take action with regard to at least four
points, which are challenges that Iraq must overcome
but for which it can also count on our assistance.
My first point concerns the challenge that the
current regional tensions represent for stability in Iraq.
Priority must therefore be accorded to de-escalation
through dialogue. We must spare no effort to ensure

S/PV. 8606

that Iraq does not revert to becoming another theatre of
a broader regional confrontation and risk jeopardizing
all the progress made in recent months. In that regard,
France fully supports the efforts of the Iraqi authorities
to facilitate regional dialogue and strengthen balanced
diplomacy. France recalls its commitment to respecting
the sovereignty and integrity of Iraq.
My second point concerns the threat that Da’esh
continues to pose to the stability of Iraq at a time
when it is reorganizing through clandestine cells. In
particular, there is an urgent need to reach security and
governance agreements in disputed territories where
the terrorist group is taking advantage of the political
and security vacuum to re-establish itself.
Thirdly, the stabilization and reconstruction of the
country, as well as genuine national reconciliation,
remain crucial to the long-term stabilization of the
country. In that regard, France welcomes the signing
of an agreement between the Government of Iraq and
the United Nations on the establishment of a fund to
disburse contributions towards the reconstruction of
Iraq announced at the Kuwait International Conference
for the Reconstruction of Iraq in February 2018, and
we call on the Iraqi authorities and all our partners to
honour the commitments they made at the Conference.
The reconstruction process stalled in 2019; we must
work to revive that momentum.
Lastly, particular attention must be accorded to
the areas liberated from Da’esh, as well as to creating
the necessary conditions for the voluntary, safe and
dignified return of internally displaced persons to
their places of origin. The Iraqi-led stabilization and
reconstruction process for the benefit of the Iraqi
people is necessary to ensure a lasting victory against
terrorism and foster reconciliation among the various
sectors of the Iraqi population. Finally, I welcome the
attention that the Government of Iraq is willing to
devote to the fight against corruption and call on it to
redouble its efforts to that end.
In that context, international partners must stand
alongside the Iraqi authorities more than ever. The
Security Council’s unanimous support for the Iraqi
authorities is key to supporting Iraq at this critical
juncture. The Council’s first visit to Iraq in June was
an important milestone in that regard. The international
community must also continue its support, in particular
to meet the country’s humanitarian, stabilization and
reconstruction needs.

19-2643011/21

S/PV.8606

The situation concerning Iraq

I also wish to reiterate France’s support for the
work of UNAMI and the Special Representative in
supporting the Iraqi authorities, in particular the
Mission’s efforts to promote the active participation of
women in the public arena, human rights and dialogue
between Baghdad and Erbil. We fully endorse the
priorities set out by the Special Representative. The
announcement of the opening of the Mosul office next
month is also encouraging news.
In conclusion, for its part, France will continue
to fully support the Iraqi authorities, first, in the area
of security, given the threat posed by Da’esh, and,
secondly, in the area of humanitarian concerns and
stabilization. That is the purpose of our nearly €1-billion
loan for reconstruction and our work to strengthen Iraqi
State institutions.
France will also continue to work towards
achieving lasting and inclusive reconciliation. The
fight against impunity is a crucial factor in that regard,
and that is the purpose of our support for the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, whose mandate will be renewed in
September. It is also important to shed light on the fate
of missing persons, including during the Gulf War, in
accordance with resolution 2107 (2013).
Lastly, I recall that, in the autumn, France will hold
another follow-up conference on the Paris Action Plan,
which was adopted at the 2015 International Conference
on the Victims of Ethnic and Religious Violence in the
Middle East.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI), for her very detailed, clear and
comprehensive briefing this morning.
Despite the progress observed since the successful
holding of last year’s elections, Equatorial Guinea
continues to be concerned about the difficulties that
have delayed the formation of a new Iraqi Government
this year. However, in the most recent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2019/660), we note with
satisfaction the recent consultations among Iraqi
political leaders which helped to move the process
forward with new appointments in almost every
ministerial departments to be filled. We hope that, in
the same spirit of collaboration and cooperation, the
12/21

28/08/2019

Minister of Education will be appointed as soon as
possible in order to fully conclude that process.
The completion of the formation of the Iraqi
Government is a necessary step for the new Executive
to restore the trust and support of the Iraqi people.
The Government will now be able to focus fully on
implementing its programme to improve basic services,
promoting reconstruction and economic development
and fostering a secure environment.
In order to firmly support the country’s current
approach towards development and avoid the mistrust
of the Iraqi people, it is necessary to carefully manage
the country’s revenues and resources. In that regard, we
welcome the continued focus of the Government of Iraq
on combating corruption and enhancing transparency,
as demonstrated, for example, by publicly reporting on
the implementation of the Government’s programme.
However, the Supreme Council for Combating
Corruption, which has an important role to play in that
regard, should be further strengthened.
We highlight the appointment of three women
Ministers in the formation of the Kurdistan Regional
Government, which is a very significant development.
We therefore encourage the political leaders of the
Kurdistan region to take this opportunity to fill the
vacancies in the remaining Ministries and focus
on implementing the priorities of the Regional
Government, as well as further improving its relations
with Baghdad through dialogue.
With regard to the security situation, we condemn
in the strongest terms the asymmetric attacks that
the remaining elements of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) continue to carry out on the
population and the security forces in various parts of
the country. We commend the Iraqi security forces that
have conducted large-scale clearance operations in the
liberated areas by arresting or neutralizing terrorist
fighters, defusing improvised explosive devices and
exposing ISIL hideouts, tunnels and weapons caches.
It is also important to take measures to stop
terrorists from returning to places already liberated
and to provide a secure environment so that all those
displaced by terrorist activities can return safely to
their homes. Those responsible for atrocities and
terrorist crimes must be held accountable and face
justice, without which genuine reconciliation will be
difficult. The reintegration of former combatants is
also a subject that requires careful analysis in order to
19-26430

28/08/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

find a definitive solution to what is a very delicate and
complicated issue for the entire region.
The ongoing regional tensions remains a cause
for serious concern, in particular with regard to their
possible impact on Iraq. In that regard, we encourage
Iraq, its neighbours and international partners to take
concrete steps towards and continue addressing existing
problems and disputes in the region through dialogue in
a spirit of mutual respect and cooperation.
Regarding the funding shortfall of $335 million
of the $701 million needed to implement the 2019
humanitarian response plan and stabilization efforts,
we encourage the international community to continue
to support humanitarian work, which is extremely
important for those most in need.
With regard to the issue of missing Kuwaitis, thirdcountry nationals and Kuwaiti property, we await the
results of the DNA analysis of the human remains
exhumed in Samawah to determine whether or not they
are indeed those of missing Kuwaitis. The exhumation
of those remains is a significant step forward and
revives the hopes of finding answers for the families of
the missing. A satisfactory solution to that issue would
have a very positive effect on strengthening relations
between Iraq and Kuwait.
Lastly, I would like to pay tribute to UNAMI, and
particularly to its Head, for the considerable efforts to
support Iraqi authorities in completing their long list of
reconciliation projects in the country.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert
for the work she has done and for her briefing.
Recently, thanks to the joint efforts of all parties,
Iraq has maintained overall security and stability.
Progress has been made on the formation of the
federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional
Government. The processes of national reconciliation
and reconstruction have been advancing steadily.
The Council conducted its first visit to Iraq in June,
thereby providing firm support to Iraq for its efforts
to ensure economic recovery, peace and stability,
national reconciliation and reconstruction. In the spirit
of mutual respect, equality, mutual benefit and win-win
cooperation, Iraq is developing friendly relations with
all neighbouring countries and strives to ease regional
tension. In that regard, China would like to express
its appreciation.

S/PV. 8606

China welcomes Iraq’s handover of the human
remains of Kuwaitis exhumed from the Samawah
burial site and expects the two sides to continue close
cooperation on the matter. In the meantime, Iraq
remains at a critical stage of consolidating counterterrorism results, achieving peace and stability and
taking forward national reconstruction. All parties
should fully respect Iraq’s sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity and firmly support the efforts
of Iraq.
First, support for Iraqi efforts to consolidate its
counter-terrorism results and safeguard its national
security must continue. Although Iraq has made
tremendous sacrifices in the international fight against
terrorism, it continues to face the threat posed by
terrorist remnants. Efforts should continue with a view
to settling the issue of internally displaced persons in
Iraq, in the light of the conditions and reconstruction
process in the country. Iraq’s handling of foreign
terrorist fighters and their dependants deserves strong
support. The international community should fully
respect the jurisdiction of Iraq and support the country
in bringing terrorists to justice in accordance with its
relevant domestic law. The United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant should
conduct its work according to its mandate and in close
consultation with the host Government.
Secondly, support for inclusive political dialogue
and the national reconciliation process in Iraq should
continue. China welcomes enhanced relations between
the federal Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan
Regional Government, looks forward to the conclusion
of an agreement on oil revenues, income distribution
and security arrangements as soon as possible, and
welcomes the constructive role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in that regard.
The international community should support and
facilitate the inclusive reconciliation and harmonious
coexistence of all Iraqi parties, in line with the
fundamental interests and development needs of all
Iraqi people. That will also have a positive effect on
regional peace and stability.
Thirdly, vigorous efforts should be made to
facilitate Iraq’s economic recovery and expedite its
reconstruction. China commends the Iraqi Government
for its commitment to improving its business
environment to actively attract foreign investment
and for issuing its first report on the implementation

19-2643013/21

S/PV.8606

The situation concerning Iraq

of the Government’s national development plan for
the period 2018 2022, which helps promote economic
reconstruction and development. China welcomes the
memorandum of understanding signed by UNAMI
and the Iraqi Government to establish the Iraq
Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Trust Fund, in
support of the Government’s recovery and development
framework. The international community should fulfil
its commitments in earnest and continue to provide
support for Iraq’s efforts to explore a development path
compatible with its national conditions.
China supports any and all efforts that help maintain
peace and stability in Iraq combat terrorism and
supports UNAMI in continuing its work according to
its mandate. China will continue to actively participate
in Iraq’s reconstruction in sectors, such as energy and
infrastructure, under the framework of the Belt and
Road Initiative. To the best of its abilities, China will
provide assistance to Iraq for its economic and social
development and help Iraq achieve peace, stability
and development.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): First, let me begin
by thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing and for the
excellent work that she and her team are doing on the
ground in Iraq. She has our full support.
We particularly welcome the announcement
of the memorandum of understanding between the
Government of Iraq and the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to establish the trust fund
to support the recovery and development efforts of
the Government of Iraq. We also welcome Iraq’s own
decision to contribute to the Fund. It will be important
for the new Trust Fund to work in cooperation with the
World Bank’s Iraq Reform and Reconstruction Fund,
which will, in turn, support Iraqi-led priorities in
that area.
The Iraq issue is very different from other Middle
East issues on the Council’s agenda. The key challenge
for us and for UNAMI is how we can best support Iraq
as it seeks to rebuild and strengthen the State following
the defeat of Da’esh. I agree very much with all of
the priorities that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General set out today in her intervention. I
would like to touch briefly on three of them.
First, the Special Representative highlighted
that 1.6 million internally displaced persons (IDPs)
remain in Iraq, all of whom have complex and acute
14/21

28/08/2019

needs. Finding a sustainable solution for those people
is a concern for all of us. We welcome the work that
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees is doing to support the Government of
Iraq to enable the voluntary return of IDPs. We think
that providing displaced people with basic services
should continue to be a focus of the Government of
Iraq, supported by UNAMI, in the coming months.
We encourage the Government of Iraq to expedite
the provision of identity documents to those people,
especially to those who have no documents at all,
including children.
Secondly, other speakers today have emphasized the
need for a stable and accountable security apparatus in
Iraq — both to prevent the resurgence of terrorism and
to provide greater security for Iraqis who wish to return
home. Like the United States, Peru and others, we very
much welcome Prime Minister Adil Abd Al-Mahdi’s
executive order to bring the popular mobilization
forces under State control. We look forward to the
implementation of that order. UNAMI’s focus on
security sector reform should continue to support the
Government of Iraq in ensuring that people feel safe
to return home and that all members of the security
services are held to account by the Government of Iraq.
Thirdly, I want to touch on the importance of
building strong, independent State institutions, which
will be vital to ensuring future stability in Iraq. I
particularly welcome UNAMI’s focus on tackling
corruption and, like others, I welcome the fact that the
ministerial positions of defence, justice and the interior
have been filled. That is an important step forward.
However, we share the concerns of almost all the
speakers today about the lack of women represented in
ministerial positions. We hope that will soon change
and that the Government of Iraq will ensure the broadest
possible representation of women and minorities across
ministerial positions.
With regard to strengthening institutions, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General also
touched on the relationship between the Kurdistan
Regional Government and Baghdad. We welcome the
announcement of Mr. Nechirvan Barzani as President
of the Kurdistan region of Iraq and, in particular,
we welcome President Salih’s attendance at the
inauguration. We commend the efforts of both President
Salih and Mr. Barzani to tackle outstanding issues, in
particular those relating to oil revenues.
19-26430

28/08/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

Turning briefly to the question of Kuwaiti missing
persons and property, we very much welcome the
Special Representative’s announcement today on the
good news about the confirmation of Kuwaiti missing
persons following DNA testing. We also welcome
UNAMI’s support for that work and the decision by the
United States to share the analysis of satellite imagery
with those concerned. We have every confidence that
the Government of Iraq will remain engaged on this
issue. We look forward to the results of the 110th
subcommittee meeting of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, to be held on 25 September on this
vital issue.
In conclusion, Iraq has made great progress in
recent years, especially in the military defeat of Da’esh.
But Iraq continues to face significant challenges — both
domestically and regionally — as it seeks to guard its
stability and independence in an unstable region. It is
therefore vital that the Council and the international
community remain engaged in supporting the
Government of Iraq as it tackles these challenges and
steers the country towards fulfilling its huge potential.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me first of all, to
extend our sincere thanks to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert,
for her very comprehensive briefing. In response
to the briefing, Indonesia would like to underscore
three points.
First, with efforts owned and led by the
Government and the people of Iraq, supported by the
regional and international communities, Iraq is on
the right track towards a democratic and prosperous
future. The Security Council’s first-ever visit to Iraq,
in June, demonstrated the international community’s
support for the country’s post-conflict recovery and
reconciliation efforts. Indonesia also commends
Iraq’s active endeavours to strengthen relations with
neighbouring countries. That indicates Iraq’s good
intentions to build a principle of good-neighbourliness.
Regional cooperation indeed plays a crucial role in
economic development and national stability.
Brick by brick, ranging from the formation
of its Cabinet to combating corruption and from
strengthening the environment for investment, the rule
of law to security sector reform, we believe that the
Iraqi Government will be able to respond to the needs
and the demands of its people. Those efforts should
continue, and the United Nations Assistance Mission

S/PV. 8606

for Iraq (UNAMI) plays a crucial role in supporting
them. We would like to voice our continuous support for
UNAMI and the Special Representative. We hope that
the appointment of Cabinet ministers will be completed
soon, with the inclusion of appointments of women in
senior decision-making positions.
Secondly, we recognize the complex challenges
facing stabilization and rehabilitation in Iraq. The
security situation remains fragile, as the remnants of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) continue
to attack the Iraqi people and security forces. In that
connection, we support the Iraqi security forces
anti-terrorism campaign, supported by international
efforts, to combat ISIL. We also support the work of
the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
ISIL in close collaboration with the Iraqi Government.
We stress once again the importance of international
cooperation in combating terrorism and its cells.
We also support the Government’s efforts as part of
its security sector reform to issue an executive order to
bring the popular mobilization forces exclusively under
State control. If implemented, the Government will
have the ability to manage and control weaponry and
the circulation of arms, which would hopefully improve
the security situation.
We also recognize the challenge faced by the
Iraqi Government in managing the approximately
1.7 million internally displaced persons in the country.
In that connection, it is important that the humanitarian
assistance programme remain funded and the issue
remain on the international community’s radar.
Thirdly, on the issue of the repatriation and return
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals or their
remains, we are happy to note that Iraqi authorities
handed over the remains of Kuwaiti citizens from
Samawah on 8 August. We hope that contributes to the
healing process of the families of those missing persons.
With developments in technology and the persistent
efforts of the Tripartite Mechanism, couple with the
good intentions of both Governments to continue their
cooperation, we are finally witnessing an important
breakthrough in advancing this important file. We also
applaud UNAMI’s continuous efforts in that regard.
We encourage the Iraqi Government to continue its
constructive engagement with the relevant parties to
resolve the remaining issues.

19-2643015/21

S/PV.8606

The situation concerning Iraq

28/08/2019

Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): First, we would
like to thank the Special Representative and Head
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, for her
comprehensive briefing this morning. We would like
to address the following three points in our statement
today, the political situation, the security situation and
the situation of women and children.

Iraq, in their sustained joint efforts, to locate the
missing Kuwaiti and other nationals, as well as missing
Kuwaiti property. We are encouraged by positive
developments in that regard, as reflected in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2019/632). We hope both
countries can work together with the relevant United
Nations institutions to resolve any outstanding issues
on this matter.

Regarding the political situation, South Africa
supports the mandate of UNAMI as it promotes the
strengthening of the Government of Iraq and its
subsequent electoral processes. We also welcome the
appointment of the Ministers for Justice, Defence and
the Interior. That serves to highlight the fact that,
despite political challenges, Iraq is strengthening
its democracy.

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We wish to thank Ms. Jeanine HennisPlasschaert for her useful briefing.

South Africa supports the drive for an inclusive
Government that will bring together all the diverse
sectors of Iraqi society into governance structures.
National reconciliation and unity in Iraq are vital to
avoiding future challenges resulting from the fracturing
of Government policies and actions. We would like
to urge the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan
Regional Government to deepen their cooperation
in order to bring about a greater sense of peace and
stability in Iraq. That would benefit several areas of
society, especially in the efforts to rebuild and provide
services to the Iraqi people.
On the security situation, we believe that peace
and security is fundamental for Iraq to develop its
infrastructure, grow its economy and provide basic
services to all of its citizens. In that regard, South
Africa supports the full consolidation of the Iraqi
army’s control over its territory and welcomes the
continued support for the efforts of the Government to
eradicate the threat posed by Da’esh.
Thirdly, on the situation of women and children,
we note the improved situation — according to a
recent report by UNICEF — in terms of the number
of internally displaced persons. We believe that is a
positive development that shows that Iraq is recovering
from years of conflict and instability. We would also like
to suggest the use of the Peacebuilding Commission to
support the efforts of the Government, specifically with
regard to institution-building and post-reconstruction
and development.
In conclusion, we are encouraged by the
commitment of both the Governments of Kuwait and
16/21

The Russian Federation consistently advocates
strengthening stability and security in the Republic of
Iraq. The principal role in that process must be played
by the Government and the people of Iraq. The new Iraqi
authorities still have a great deal to do in order to secure
the positive momentum building within the country’s
political situation. In that connection, we welcome the
steps taken in the formation of the Iraqi Government,
including recent appointments to key ministerial
positions. We hope that process will be concluded in the
very near future, as we believe that it will contribute to
overcoming all domestic political differences.
We note the focus of the Iraqi authorities on
modernizing the country’s financial sector and
improving its investment climate. We believe that
strengthening stability in Iraq is of major significance
for the entire region of the Middle East. We therefore
believe that it is important that the international
community support the authorities’ focus on rebuilding
the economy and developing the social sector and
agriculture. We note the role of UNAMI in helping
national authorities take a focused approach to national
reconciliation and rebuilding the country’s economy.
We welcome and applaud Baghdad’s consistent
policy in maintaining good neighbourly relations with
regional partners. We note in particular the focus and
efforts of Iraqis and Kuwaitis in restoring historical
justice with regard to what we refer to as the IraqKuwait dossier.
We note that the importance of consistent efforts in
settling differences among the various ethnic and faithbased groups in Iraq and the importance of bolstering
the unity of the Iraqi people and the integrity of the State.
In that connection, we welcome the ongoing dialogue to
establish a mutual understanding between Baghdad and
Irbil. We believe that further improving those relations
19-26430

28/08/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV. 8606

will help Iraq strengthen security, which is all the more
important given the persistent security challenges.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.

We are keen to see the elimination of the threats
posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and terrorism in general. The way to effectively
tackle this challenge is through the broadest possible
coordination on counter-terrorism efforts. At the same
time, we believe that it is necessary to engage all
stakeholders involved in a combating terrorism in Iraq,
that there be respect for the sovereignty of the Iraqi
Government and that their actions be coordinated with
Baghdad. That needs to align with the stated aim of
combating terrorism and assisting the Iraqi Government
in stabilizing the situation.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Special
Representative for her comprehensive briefing and
express our appreciation for the tremendous work that
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq is doing
in assisting the Iraqi authorities.

We are closely following the process of
strengthening the Iraqi armed forces, including the
integration of the popular mobilization forces to deliver
on security in the country.
The Russian Federation will continue to do
everything possible to support the Iraqi Government’s
efforts to restore control over all territories seized
by ISIL as well as to ensure the unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Iraq. At the same time,
we cannot but be troubled by the negative impact of
escalations in the Persian Gulf region on the process
of achieving an intra-Iraqi agreement. Attempts to
drag the country into a contrived confrontation over
the Islamic Republic of Iran are counterproductive
and further destabilize the already tenuous situation
in the country. The international community would
be well advised to avert such a scenario. We cannot
allow another geopolitical experiment, regardless of
its origin, to undermine the hard-won success that has
been achieved in counter-terrorism.
During a meeting in Moscow in July between
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation, Mr. Lavrov, of and Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert,
confirmation was voiced of the need to address all
crises through dialogue and collective efforts. In
that connection, we wish to note that we are open to
cooperation on that basis with all interested regional
and international partners through our blueprint for
collective security in the Persian Gulf. At the same
time, we are of the view that our efforts are aligned
with the mandate of the Secretary-General to design
confidence-building measures in the region in keeping
with resolution 598 (1987).

Poland welcomes that further progress has been
made in forming the Government, with the appointment
of the Ministers of the Interior, Defence and Justice,
and encourages the Iraqi political parties to continue
their positive engagement in order to complete the
process in the near future and to ensure that women
be included at all levels of decision-making processes.
We also commend the progress on the formation of the
Kurdistan Regional Government. We are encouraged
by the continued dialogue between Baghdad and Irbil
aimed at resolving outstanding disputes.
We highly commend the efforts undertaken by the
Iraqi authorities to restore stability and prosperity in
the country. We welcome in particular their continued
focus on combating corruption and on finding ways to
improve the environment for business and investment.
We encourage the Government of Iraq to make further
progress in that respect for the benefit of all Iraqis.
With regard to security issues, we highly commend
the decision of the Government of Iraq to bring the
popular mobilization forces under effective State
control. We consider that to be an important step
towards advancing security-sector reform aimed at
restoring sole responsibility for providing security in
the country to the State. The effective implementation
of this decision, as well as ensuring accountability
for noncompliance with the decree, will be critical.
In addition, we remain concerned about the continued
activity of Da’esh cells across numerous governorates,
which still pose a significant security threat.
After years of conflict, the path to stabilization
and reconciliation in Iraq will require time, extensive
reforms and the building of strong State institutions.
We believe that it is essential to meet the needs of all
Iraqis, including women, young people and members
of all religious and ethnic groups, including by
prioritizing the delivery of basic public services and
creating job opportunities.
Advancing stabilization and reconstruction
in areas recaptured from Da’esh is also of critical

19-2643017/21

S/PV.8606

The situation concerning Iraq

importance. Rebuilding damaged infrastructure and
restoring effective administration, security and public
services are indispensable for creating conditions for
the voluntary, dignified and safe return of internally
displaced persons, as well as their local integration or
resettlement. It is also vital that internally displaced
persons be treated in a non-discriminatory manner,
irrespective of their perceived affiliation, and be
provided the assistance they require.
To conclude, I would like to stress the need to
support Iraq in its efforts to restore stability after years
of conflict in full respect for its unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Fatah (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate you, Madam President, on
managing the work of the Council wisely during August.
I would like also to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for her briefing.
On behalf of the Government of Iraq, I thank the
two delegations of the United States of America and
the sisterly Kuwait for organizing the regional visit
of the Security Council mission to cities in Kuwait
and Baghdad. The first visit of its kind, it signalled
the continued strong commitment of the international
community to support the stability, prosperity,
sovereignty, independence and security of Iraq. It
marked a new phase on the country’s journey and offered
reassurance of the good intentions of Iraq and Kuwait
to build good neighbourly relations and resolve crises
in the region through political and diplomatic means.
We also thank Special Representative HennisPlasschaert for the efforts she made along with her team
to guarantee that the visit went smoothly. We thank
her as well for her close cooperation with the Iraqi
authorities while implementing her mandate as per
resolution 2470 (2019) and providing Iraq and Kuwait
with the support to implement resolution 2107 (2013).
What the Iraqi cities are witnessing today
demonstrates that Iraqis share a common objective,
namely, a determination to live a life of freedom
and dignity and to have a Government that serves its
citizens and provides them with services. Given the
circumstances and the potential available, there is great
18/21

28/08/2019

hope that my country’s Government will manage to
achieve the objectives of the governmental programme
for the period 2018 to 2022, the implementation of
which requires structural economic reforms with a
view to harnessing Iraq’s resources and putting them in
the service of the Iraqi people.
The most important challenges facing Iraq today
include bringing about economic reform, supporting the
status and rights of women, protecting and bolstering
human rights and eradicating unemployment. The
biggest challenges lie in the areas of security and social
development. However, all of those reforms require a
stable economic environment. Iraq is a country that
deserves to live in safety and to have an opportunity to
fulfil the aspirations of its people, especially after the
war it has waged against terrorism. The Government of
Iraq was recently able to take the following measures.
The Cabinet has now been formed with the
appointment of the Ministers of Defence, the Interior
and Justice by the Council of Representatives, which
chooses ministers with a high degree of professionalism
and experience. They took their constitutional oath on
24 June. That was the result of considerable integration
and coordination among the three presidencies.
Iraq in general, and the governorates that have been
liberated from Da’esh in particular, has experienced
improved security and stability. All the roads in
Baghdad that had been closed since 2003 have been
reopened. In addition, on 1 July, the Prime Minister
issued Executive Order 237, which restructures the
popular mobilization forces, regulates their military
operations and introduces terms of reference with the
aim of increasing stability and the State’s authority and
guaranteeing that weapons are strictly in State hands.
In that context, the volunteer factions have stated
their intention to abide by the Executive Order and
to implement all the orders issued by the commander
of the armed forces. All factions that operate outside
the law and use the banner of the popular mobilization
forces for illegal purposes will be held accountable.
The Supreme Council for Combating corruption
has introduced a national anti-corruption strategy in
Iraq, including establishing a national integrity index,
with the participation of the various Iraqi components
and civil society organizations, as well as putting in
place effective implementable mechanisms.
Furthermore, there has been a breakthrough in the
relationship between the federal Government and the
19-26430

28/08/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

Kurdish Regional Government, which are now working
to resolve pending issues via constitutional means.
More than one round of talks has taken place between
representatives of both Governments, in Baghdad and in
Erbil, at which both sides agreed on a raft of economic,
agricultural and financial measures, foremost of which
is the standardization of administrative procedures at
all Iraqi border crossings, including those located in
the province of Kurdistan, and the resumption of oil
exports from Kirkuk to the Turkish port of Ceyhan.
Iraq submitted its first report under the voluntary
national review procedure at the High-level Political
Forum held in New York last month. It summarizes
Iraq’s experience in implementing the 2030 Agenda
and the Sustainable Development Goals. Moreover,
the Government of Iraq, with support from partners,
has devised new strategies and plans to deal with the
challenges of transitioning from a crisis situation to an
economy conducive to sustainable development. It has
also devised a national development plan and a poverty
reduction strategy that targets the most vulnerable
segments of society, especially in the most remote
and disadvantaged areas, as well as a reconstruction
and development plan for the period 2018 to 2027.
The Government also took part in designing a Vision
2030 plan, in line with the Agenda for Sustainable
Development and its 17 Goals.
The defeat of the terrorist organization Da’esh
was without doubt a huge challenge and an important
victory for the Iraqi armed forces, including the army,
the police, the Peshmerga and the popular mobilization
forces, which fought side by side to rid Iraq of the
filth of this criminal organization. In that regard, we
are thankful for the assistance of our international
coalition allies led by the United States. Our task now
is to intensify our efforts to tackle the legacy of this
terrorist organization and establish a work plan to
care for the children it recruited and children born as
a result of rape, as well as to deal with foreign terrorist
fighters, the wives, widows and children of terrorists
and women and victims survivors of rape committed
by terrorists. Furthermore, we must step up efforts to
achieve stability in the liberated areas once occupied
by Da’esh terrorists. We must also address the tragedy
of internally displaced persons.
To that end, we must tackle the security and human
rights concerns linked to the return of terrorist elements
and their families to Iraq. However, we must underscore
that this problem is not merely an Iraqi one; rather, it

S/PV. 8606

is a problem that affects everyone in the region and
beyond. If this issue is mismanaged, we risk creating
fertile ground for a new generation of terrorists. We
must therefore eliminate the danger inherent in the
movement of hundreds of Da’esh women able to attract
and recruit new fighters. Da’esh has been among the
most successful terrorist organizations in relying on
women within its ranks to carry out operations and
spread its extremist ideology. The presence of female
elements in Iraqi camps and prisons is a great burden
that far exceeds the ability of the Iraqi Government to
address the problem. The international community,
international organizations and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees therefore
have a responsibility in that regard. It is not simply a
matter of providing medical assistance, food and water,
but also of maintaining security and limiting the spread
of the extremist ideology of Da’esh.
In that connection, we ask the international
community to fully respect Iraq’s sovereignty and
jurisdiction and to support its efforts to hold those
terrorists accountable and bring them to justice, in
accordance with relevant local laws, so as to curb
the return and the spread of terrorist activity. Iraqi
judicial institutions will apply due process with full
transparency and professionalism with regard to those
indicted or convicted of belonging to Da’esh, whether in
the investigation stage or during trials and sentencing.
Iraqi judicial institutions provide foreign detainees and
convicted persons with the necessary assistance in order
to meet with their embassies in Iraq. In that regard, we
call on the Governments of the countries concerned to
develop a comprehensive response to the repatriation of
their citizens, try them in national courts and work with
the relevant bodies for the return children associated
with the remnants of Da’esh.
Iraqi forces tasked with liberating cities referred
terrorists and their families to specialized investigative
bodies to determine their citizenship status and
identification numbers in order to complete their
investigation files — this after they had destroyed all
of their identification documents prior to entering Iraq.
That would then allow them to stand before Iraqi courts
to be tried transparently and fairly and in accordance
with Iraqi laws in effect that criminalize and punish
persons who have committed terrorist crimes, including
foreign residents law No. 118 of 1978, counter-terrorism
law No. 13 of 2005 and law No. 111 of 1969 of the
amended Iraqi penal code.

19-2643019/21

S/PV.8606

The situation concerning Iraq

The children of Da’esh terrorist families are divided
into two categories. The first, minors, are subject to the
laws in effect if they are proven to have belonged to
a terrorist group or participated in its activities. After
sentencing, they are sent to rehabilitation homes and
schools. Children below the age of criminal liability
make up the second category. After verification of their
citizenship status, those children are handed over to the
embassies of their countries to be repatriated.
Given its sensitive nature, this work requires
accuracy. It also requires exhaustive examination into
the status and citizenship of the families and children
of Da’esh, followed by determination of their specific
legal status. They are then referred to the specialized
Iraqi bodies that work in coordination with the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs, which acts as the liaison between
the specialized Iraqi bodies and foreign embassies,
both within and outside Iraq.
As a result of those efforts, Iraq has returned
a number of children to their countries of origin,
including Russia, Tajikistan, Belarus, Georgia, Finland,
Ukraine and Turkey. That number totalled 473 children
as of 10 July. Moreover, Iraq urges other embassies,
in or outside Iraq, to take in their citizens, including
women and minors, who have served their sentences or
are under the age of criminal liability.
As for offering support to internally displaced
persons, the Ministry for Migration and Displaced
Persons has issued repatriation grants to displaced
persons from liberated areas and continues to implement
social reconciliation measures in the areas where they
reside. Moreover, campaigns to rebuild liberated cities
destroyed by the Da’esh terrorist organization continue
in earnest.
My Government is working to send a clear message
to our neighbouring countries that Iraq’s stability
and prosperity is in our common interests. The time
has come for the region to have a unified vision for
achieving economic prosperity. Iraq’s chances of
success are real but are in jeopardy. As a result, Iraq
cannot tolerate more tension or escalation in the region.
The Government of my country is keen to fully develop
relations with its Arab neighbours.
We also attach importance to our relationship with
Iran, with which we share a border of 1,400 kilometres.
We enjoy many economic and social ties to Iran, and
it is in our national interest to enhance our ties with it.
20/21

28/08/2019

The same is true of our neighbour Turkey, to
the north. Undoubtedly, Turkey is important from
a geopolitical and economic perspective, despite
its continuous violations of Iraqi territories. My
Government has issued approximately 54 protest
memorandums demanding the immediate halt of Turkish
shelling of Iraqi territories and calling for respect for
the sovereignty of Iraq. In that regard, I would like
to confirm that my country is keen on defending the
independence and sovereignty of Iraq. In return, Iraq’s
territories will not be used to launch any threat to the
safety and security of neighbouring countries.
I would like to thank the States members of the
Tripartite Commission for providing us with satellite
imagery, which has acquired vital importance. In
addition, the efforts of the Iraqi Ministry of Defence,
witness testimony, analysis of the images provided by
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
and GPS coordinates all helped to determine the sites
provided by Kuwait and to uncover 46 unidentified
remains in Samawah. After conducting the necessary
DNA tests on those remains, it was proven that 32
of them belonged to missing Kuwaitis. The Iraqi
Government handed over the remains to Kuwait on
8 August. Moreover, I would like to thank the United
Nations, which provided the Committee with modern
technology such as underground radar to help both the
Iraqi and Kuwaiti sides uncover potential burial sites,
which we consider a positive step to resolving this
important humanitarian issue.
In addition, approximately 162,000 books were
found, which belonged to the University of Kuwait
and the National Library of the State of Kuwait. The
Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research
of Iraq, in cooperation with its Ministry for Foreign
Affairs, collected those books from various markets,
bookshops and citizens. The Ministry for Foreign
Affairs supervised the packing and transport of 42,000
of the books and dispatched them yesterday on board
an Iraqi Air Force C-130 military aircraft. They were
delivered to the Kuwaiti side today, 28 August, in the
presence of the Undersecretary of the Iraqi Ministry
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Hazzim Al-Youssifi, Head of
the Archives Committee charged with searching for
Kuwaiti property and archives, and a representative
of the United Nations. The rest of the books will be
returned in instalments in the near future so that we can
finally conclude our consideration of this issue.
19-26430

28/08/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

As for Iraqi missing persons, we are carefully
following all important related developments and are
trying to determine the burial locations of Iraqi soldiers
in Kuwait. The uncovering of their remains would help
alleviate the suffering of the families of Iraqi soldiers
missing since the 1991 Gulf War. In that connection,
we appreciate the efforts of the three members of the
Committee in analysing satellite imagery in order
to arrive at a highly accurate location of the burial
sites. We also thank the ICRC for providing us with
a complete list of coordinates pertaining to the burial
sites, which will be cross-referenced with the satellite’s
coordinates. We look forward to uncovering the fate of
the remains of those soldiers as soon as possible, while
the necessary measures taken and the outcome will be

S/PV. 8606

included in the Secretary-General’s report on the status
of the implementation of resolution 2107 (2013).
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate my country’s
commitment to building a prosperous Iraq, in
coordination and cooperation with the international
community, with a view to eliminating the ravages of
terrorism and expediting the reconstruction process so
as to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and
implement the Government programme decisions in
accordance with national laws in effect.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at noon.

19-2643021/21
