Hesolullons adopted on reports ot the Ad Hoe Political Lommauee

(c) The organization and activities of the j,udiciary, police and other administrative organs;
3. Calls upon all authorities in the Federal Republic, in Berlin, and in the Soviet Zone to enable the Commission to travel freely throughout these areas; anc to
allow the Commission freedom of access to such persons, places and relevant documents as it considers
necessary in the course of executing its task and to allow it to summon any witnesses whom it wishes to
examine;
4. (a) Directs the Commission to report at the
earliest practicable date to the Secretary-General, for
the consideration of the four Powers and for the information of the other Members of the United Nations,
on the results of its efforts to make the necessary arrangements with all the parties concerned to enable it
to undertake its work according to the terms of the
present resolution;
( b) Directs the Commission, if it is able to make
the necessary arrangements throughout the areas concerned, similarly to report on the findings resulting
from its investigation of conditions in these areas, it
being understood that such findings may include recommendations regarding further steps which might be
taken in order to bring about conditions in Germany
necessary for the holding of free elections in these
areas;
( c) Directs the Commission, if it is unable forthwith to make these arrangements, to make a further
attempt to carry out its task at such time as it is satisfied that the German authorities in the Federal Republic,
in Berlin, and in the Soviet Zone will admit the Commission, as it is desirable to leave the door open for the
Commission to carry out its task;
( d) Directs the Commission in any event to report,
not later than l September 1952, on the results of its
activities to the Secretary-General, for the consideration of the four Powers and for the information of the
other Members of the United Nations;
5. Declares that the United Nations is prepared,
after being satisfied that the conditions throughout the
areas concerned are such as to make possible the holding of genuinely free and secret elections, to offer its
assistance in order to guarantee the freedom of the
elections;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to furnish the
Commission with the neccs~ary staff and facilities.
356th plenary meeting,
20 December 1951.
511 (VI), Treatment of people of Indian origin
in the Union of South Africa

The Gt·neral Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 44 (I), 265 (III) and 395
(V) relating to the treatment of p<.'ople of Indian
origin in the Union of South Africa,
Having considered that the Government of the Union
of South Africa has been unable up to the present time
to accept General Assembly resolution 395 ( V) as a
basis for a round-table conference,
Noting that the promulgation on 30 l\Tarch 1951 of
five proclamations under the Group Areas Act renders
operative thereby the provisions of that Act in direct
contravention of paragraph 3 of resolution 395 (V),

.l .l

Having in mind its resolution 103 (I) of 19 Nov<')llber 1946 against racial persecution and discrimination,
and its resolution 217 (III) of 10 December 1948 relating to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Cunsidering that a policy of "racial segregation"
( apartheid) is nece9'iarily based on doctrines of racial
discrimination,
1. Recommends that a commission of three members be established for the purpose of assisting the
parties, namely the Governments of India, Pakistan and
the Union of South Africa, in carrying through appropriate negotiations, the said commission to be composed
of one member to be nominated by the Government of
the Union of South Africa, another to be nominated
by the Governments of India and Pakistan and the
third to be nominated by the other two members or,
in default of agreement between these two within a
reasonable time, by the Secretary-General;
2. Calls upon the Governments of the Union of
South Africa, India and Pakistan to nominate members within sixty days from the date of adoption of
the present resolution;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in the event that
the members of the Commission are not nominated in
accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 above, to lend his
assistance to the Governments of India, Pakistan and
the Union of South Africa, provided such assistance
is deemed necessary and helpful by him, with a view
to facilitating appropriate negotiations between them;
and further, in his discretion and after consulting the
Governments concerned, to appoint an individual who
would render such additional assistance for the purpose
of facilitating the conduct of the said negotiations;
4. Calls upon the Government of the Union of
South Africa to suspend the implemen.ation or enforcement of the provisions of the Group Areas Act
pending the conclusion of the negotiations;
5. Decides to include this item in the agenda of the
next regular session of the General Assembly.
360th plenary meeting,
12 January 1952.
512 (VI). Report of the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine

The General Assembly,
Recalling all the resolutions adopted at previous sessions of the General Assembly on the Palestine problem,
H a·ving examined the progress report 5 of the United
Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Conciliation
Commission for Palestine for its efforts to assist the
parties to reach agreement on their outstanding differences;
2. Notes with regret that, as stated in paragraph
87 of the report, the Commission has been unable to
fulfil its mandate under the resolutions of the General
Assembly;
3. Considers that the governments concerned have
the primary responsibility ior reaching a settlement of
their outstanding differences in conformity with the
resolutions of the General Assembly on Palestine;
'Ibid., Suf'plemrnt 1',',,. 18.

12

General Assembly-Sixth Session

4. Urges the governments concerned to seek agreement with a view to an early settlement of their outstanding differences in conformity with the resolutions
of the General Assembly on Palestine; and for this
purpose to make full use of United Nations facilities;
5. Considers that the Conciliation Commission for
Palestine should continue its efforts to secure the implementation of the resolutions of the General Assembly on Palestine and accordingly should be available
to the parties to assist them in reaching agreement on
outstanding questions;
6. Requests the Conciliation Commission for Palestine to render progress reports periodically to the Secretary-General for transmission to the Members of the
United Nations;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
necessary staff and facilities for carrying out the terms
of the present resolution.
365th plenary meeting,
26 January 1952.

513 (VI). Assistance to Palestine Refugees: re•
ports of the Director and the Advisory Com•
mission of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 302 (IV) of 8 December
1949, as amended by resolution 393 (V) of 2 December 1950,
Having examined the report 6 of the Director of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
refugees in the Near East and the special joint report7
of the Director and the Advisory Commission of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency,
Having considered the three-year programme 8 of
relief and reintegration recommended bv the Director
and the Advisory Commission of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency,
1. Commends the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for the development of a constructive programme which will contribute effectively to the welfare
of the refugees;
2. Endorses, without prejudice to the provisions of
paragraph 11 of resolution 194 (III) of 11 December
1948 or to the provisions of paragraph 4 of resolution
393 (V) of 2 December 1950 relative to reintegration
either by repatriation or resettlement, the programme
recommended by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for the relief and reintegration of Palestine
refugees, which envisages the expenditure of $US 50
million for relief and $200 million for reintegration
over and above such contributions as mav be made bv
local governments, to be carried out over a period o·f
approximately three years starting as of 1 July 1951 ;
Recognizing the concern of the United Nations in
the problem of the Palestine refugees,
"Ibid., Supplement No. 16.
'Ibid., Supplement No. 16 A.
• Ibid.

----------------

3. Urges thr governments of the countries in the
area to assist. with due regard to their constitutional
processes, in the carrying out of this programme and
to extend to the United Nations l{dief and Works
Agency, a subsidiary organ established by the General
Assembly, their co-operation in the elaboration of
specific projects and in the general performance of its
functions;
4. Invites the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency to explore with the governments concerned arrangements looking towards their assuming administration of reintegration projn-ts at the eariie,t pos,ible
date;
5. Requests the United Nations Relief and \Vorks
Agency to explore with the governments concerned
the desirability ahd practicability of transferring t!H:"
administration of relief to those governments at the
earliest possible date, and considers that the United
Nations Relief anci Works Agency should continue
to carry the cost of the supply programme, subject to
paragraphs 2 and 6, and to provide assistance for the
health, welfare and educa1io11 programme along with
the duty of making such inspection and such verification of accounts as may be necessary ;
6. Considers that relief expenditures should be reduced in suitable proportion to reintegration expenditures;
7. Decides that the amount of $20 million provided
foi:_ direct relief in resolution 393 (V) of 2 December
19:,0 should be increased to $27 million for the fiscal
year ending 30 June 1952;
8. Decides that, consequent upon paragraph 2 above,
the amount of $30 million provided in resolution 393
_(V) of 2 December 1950 for reintegration should be
111creased to not less than $50 million, and credited to
the reintegration fund provided for in that resolution
for the fiscal year ending 30 June 1952;
9. Approves the budget recommended by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for the fiscal year
1 July 1952 to 30 June 1953, of the equivalent of $118
million of which $100 million shall be available for
reintegration and $18 million for relief;
10. Authorizes the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency to transfer funds allocatt>d for relief
to reintegration ;
11. Urges the governments of Member States to
make voluntary contributions to the extent necessary to
~arry through to termination the programme set forth
111 paragraph 2 above;
. 12. Requests that negotiations regarding contributi_ons for t~e proposed three-year programme be carnecl o~t _with Mem~er and noi;-memher States by the
N egot1atmg Committee for l:.xtra-Budgetary Funds
established by resolution 571 B (VI), adopted by the
General Assembly on 7 December 1951;
13. Expresses its appreciation of the assistance
afforded tn the United Nations Relief and Works
~gency by the specialized agencies and the Cnited :K'a-t10ns Internati,mal Children's Fm0rgency Fund ancf
urges them to render all services possi!Jlt• to strengthen
the programme. of refugee relief and reintegration, anti
to c?-operate_ with the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Rel_1ef and Works, 1:'-gency in ensuring that
the total a~s1stance of the l 111kd Nation,; to Palestine-
