UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

2538”

MEETING:

11 MAY

1984

(piI

~~~~~~~

JAN 'L'L 1993

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2538). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Adoption of the agenda.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16514) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

WV.2538

NOTE
Symbols’of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of &the t document indicates the supplement in which it appears or’ in which
information about’it is given.
The .resolution’s of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in. 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2538th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 11 May 1984, at 10.30 a.m.
Democratic
Republic);
Mr.
Karr&
(Guyana),
Mr. R&z (Hunga-ry), Mr. Carr (Jamaica), Mr. Eidenechuluun (Mongolia), Mrs. Noriega (Panama), Mr. St.
Aimee (Saint Lucia), Mr. Wijewardane (Sri Lanka),
Mr. Al-Atassi (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Le Kim
Chung (Vie? Nam) and Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) took the
places reserveii for them, at the side of the Council
chamber.

President: Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet-Socialist
Republics).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet ‘Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisiontil
1. Adoption
2.

2. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives
of
Czechoslovakia and Malaysia in which they request to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In ,conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

agenda (SIAgendaI2538)

of the agenda

The situation in Cyprus:
/
Letter dated 30 April ‘1984 from the Permanent
Representative
of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16514)
The meeting

was called to order at II.30
Adoption

a.m.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Ct%ar
(Czechoslovakia)
and Mr. Zain (Malaysia) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/16514)

3. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
The Security Council will now resume its consideration
of the item on its agenda. I should like to draw the
attention of members of the Council to the following
documents: S/16547, containing a letter dated 9 May
1984 from the representative of Vanuatu to the President of the Security Council, and S/16549, containing a
letter dated 10 May from the representative of Cyprus
to the Secretary-General.

1. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
In accordance with the decisions taken at previous
meetings on this item [253Zst to 2537th meetings],
I invite the representatives
of Cyprus, Greece and
Turkey to take places at the Council table; I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and
Barbuda, Australia, Bangladesh, Bulgaria, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Ecuador, the German Democratic Republic,
Guyana, Hungary, Jamaica, Mongolia, Panama, Saint
Lucia, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, Viet Nam
and Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.

4. The first speaker is the representative of Malaysia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
5. Mr. ZAIN (Malaysia): Mr. President, I am grateful
to you and to the other members of the Security Council
for your courtesy in acceding to my request to participate in this debate on the situation in Cyprus. I am
particularly gratified to do so, Sir, when a diplomat of
your exceptional professionalism and wide experience
-and, may I add, of your graciousness and personal
charm-is
presiding over our deliberations.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Moushoutas
(Cyprus), Mr. Dountas (Greece), and Mr. Kirca
(Turkey) took places at the Council table; Mr. Zarif
(Afghanistan),
Mr. Sahnoun (Algeria), Mr. Jacobs
(Antigua and Barbuda), Mr. Woolcott (Australia),
Mr. Wasiuddin (Bangladesh), Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria),
Mr. Zumbado Jime’nez (Costa Rica), Mr. Roa Kouri
(Cuba), Mr. Albornoz (Ecuador), Mr. Ott (German

6. For reasons which are perhaps obvious and which
I need not elaborate, my Government, as a non-member of the Security Council, is normally reluctant to
1

seek leave to address the Council. However, we have
done so on this occasion for two essential reasons: first,
because we believe-as
indeed President Kyprianou
has stated before the Council [2531st meeting&-that
current developments in Cyprus are so critical that the
very existence of a sovereign, independent and united
Cyprus is at stake; and, secondly, because we want to
express our urgent conviction that unless the Council
takes a scrupulously fair and even-minded approach
which deals with the problem of Cyprus in all its aspects
-its historical context, its bi-national character, its
independence born of international
agreements and a
protracted and difficult liberation struggle, as well as
fundamental principles relating to the independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of States-it
is difficult to see how it can contribute to arresting the
dangerous and apparently inexorable developments
which are taking place in Cyprus today.

development or another, to resist selective quotation
from one document or another, or to avoid stressing the
primacy of one principle over another, whichever suits
their purposes better. All this is understandable, but in
these critical times for Cyprus-and
I echo again the
sobering warning of President Kyprianou-we
must all
make a supreme effort, for the sake of all Cypriots, to
eschew emotions and debating-points,
to avoid casting
blame or aspersions and to deal not with symptoms but
with the fundamental causes of the problem which has
bedevilled the international community and which has
caused untold tragedy to the people of Cyprus for so
long.
10. The international
community,
if it is to be successful, must now do its utmost to bridge the gap of the
mistrust and suspicion which plague the two communities in Cyprus and to adopt an even-handed and impartial approach which recognizes that fundamental
principles relating to the sovereignty of States and to
the inviolability
of national territory must be applied in
the particular context of Cyprus, which all must admit
-and indeed which all have admitted in one way or
another-is
sui generis in character. If the special
character of the leadership of Mr. Denktag and the
special position of the Turkish Cypriots have not in fact
been recognized-if,
in other words, the situation in
Cyprus is not sui generis-how
can the General Assembly, to quote only from paragraph 10 of resolution
371253 of 13 May 1983, which echoes previous resolutions, call for

7. The debate on Cyprus has engaged the Council’s
attention for at least 20 years, and I recognize that it is
difficult for a delegation to make any statement which
will not be immediately
interpreted as being for or
against one side or the other in the unfortunate tragedy
that has befallen the people of Cyprus-all
the people,
Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot alike. Perhaps a
statement equally disliked by both sides is the best we
can hope for. Be that as it may, I should like to begin
this attempt to make what my delegation hopes is a
constructive contribution
to the present debate by recalling part of a statement which my Government made
on 21 November 1983 in the light of serious developments in Cyprus at that time:

“negotiations between the representatives of the two
communities,
under the auspices of the SecretaryGeneral, to be conducted freely and on an equal
footing, on the basis of relevant United Nations resolutions and the high-level agreements, with a view to
reaching as early as possible a mutually acceptable
agreement based on the fundamental and legitimate
rights of the two communities”?

“Malaysia does not favour any move that would
lead to the dismemberment
of a sovereign nation. In
respect of Cyprus, Malaysia has supported and will
continue to support the equality of rights and the
legitimate demands of the Turkish Cypriot community as co-partners with the Greek Cypriot community within the framework of the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Cyprus.”

11. But of course, part of the art of diplomacy consists
in being able to hold two or more mutually contradictory ideas at the same time. By all means let us continue
to do so; my only plea is that we should give both equal
weight.

8. That remains our position because we see no
peaceful alternative to preventing the situation from
inching gradually but inexorably in a direction which
both parties, Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot alike,
have categorically
stated they wish to avoid. If.one
sees a glimmer of hope at all in the deepening gloom,
it is surely this one common element, this commitment to a sovereign reunited Cyprus, which has been
expressed with such sober dignity by President
Kyprianou,
a dignity which perhaps underlines his
commitment
all the more, and with such passionate
eloquence by Mr. Denktas. It is this common element
that we should all contribute to building upon.

12. For its part, Malaysia will do what it can to promote a spirit of conciliation
and to contribute to the
search for a peaceful and just solution which is acceptable to the conflicting parties. In this enterprise the role
of the Secretary-General
is crucial. That, indeed, is the
other common element which has run through all the
statements which have been made in the Council. My
delegation is particularly pleased to note that the Secretary-General,
in his latest report to the Security
Council [S/26519], has stated his readiness to discharge
his mission of good offrces and to maintain a continued
process of communication
and negotiation.
He has
added, in paragraph 23, the significant qualification that
he will do so “as long as there is unambiguous support
for it”.

9. Now I also recognize that with the events and the
debates which have taken place over the last 20 years it
is not easy for the immediate protagonists, and even for
their friends, to restrain their sense of outrage at one
2.

always held the view that the settlement of the Cyprus
problem should be reached through negotiations on an
equal footing between the representatives of the two
communities and should guarantee the unity and integrity of Cyprus. The mission of good offices of the Secretary-General
to further these aims has always enjoyed the full support of my Government.

13. We believe such support has already been manifested in the Council, which is a tribute, surely, as much
to the high regard in which he is held as to his exceptionally sensitive diplomatic skills, which have enabled him
to succeed, despite the recent setbacks, in moving forward the dialogue in Cyprus in very difftcult circumstances. But it is unfair to the Secretary-General and to
his high offtce merely to express general support for his
efforts. The Council must assist by providing the right
atmosphere and the proper conditions in which intercommunal talks under the auspices of the SecretaryGeneral-the
only way to bring about peace and harmony in Cyprus-can
go forward. To do otherwise, to
do more of the same, to look at or, worse, to condemn
specific events in isolation outside the context of the
complex situation of Cyprus is to court disaster: no one
party should feel itself vanquished or victor after this
debate.

18. The recent developments are even more regrettable in that they have come at a time when the SecretaryGeneral has presented to both communities important
new suggestions for the resumption of the intercommunal dialogue on the basis of a five-point scenario,
which has been outlined in paragraph 14 of his latest
report-to the Council [ibid.]. In our opinion, the Secretary-General
is to be commended for having proposed a scenario that should have been accepted by the
leaders of both communities as the principal framework
for the resumption of their intercommunal
talks.

14. That is why my delegation urges the Security
Council to adopt a truly impartial, constructive and
helpful resolution acceptable to both parties, which is
denuded of rancour and partiality and which recognizes
the realities and complexities of the specific situation of
Cyprus, as well as the general principles at stake. That
is why my Government, which has grave forebodings
about developments in Cyprus, has taken the liberty of
seeking to appear before the Council, for which opportunity I again thank you, Sir, and the other members of
the Council.

19. The scenario would have committed both communities to refrain from activities that could only further undermine the necessary bases of trust and confidence, without which a peaceful dialogue will remain
elusive. The Cypriot Government
would have been
committed not to take steps further to internationalize
the Cyprus problem, in exchange for a commitment by
the Turkish Cypriot authorities that there would be no
follow-up to the 15 November declaration of independence. These mutual commitments,
which the Secretary-General has been seeking from the parties, would
have been fully in accordance with the previous highlevel agreements of 1977, between President Makarios
and the leader of the Turkish community, Mr. Denktaa
[see S/12323, para. 51, and 1979, between President
Kyprianou and Mr. Denktatj [see S/13369, para. 511.

15. Mr. van der STOEL (Netherlands):
May I first
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Council for the month of May. Your great diplomatic skills and wide experience are well known to all of
us. I also want to express our appreciation of the impeccable way Mr. Kravets of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic performed his duties as President of the
Council last month.

20. One element of the so-called lo-point agreement
of May 1979 [ibid.] deserves quoting in full:
“6. It was agreed to abstain from any action
which might jeopardize the outcome of the talks, and
special importance will be given to initial practical
measures by both sides to promote goodwill, mutual
confidence and the return to normal conditions.”

16. We have listened with great attention to the previous speakers in this debate. We share the serious
concern expressed by almost all about recent developments, which have led to a new deadlock in the search
for a just and lasting peace in Cyprus and which have
made it necessary for the Council once again to consider the situation in that troubled island. We deeply
regret the recent exchange of ambassadors between
Turkey and the so-called Turkish Republic of Northern
Cyprus, as well as other recent actions by the Turkish
Cypriot authorities in defiance of Security Council
resolution 541 (1983), which, inter aliu, considers the
declaration of independence by the Turkish Cypriot
authorities issued on 15 November last year as legally
invalid and calls for its withdrawal. At the same time,
this resolution calls on all States and the two communities in Cyprus to refrain from any action which might
exacerbate the situation.

As an initial practical measure to promote good will,
mutual confidence and the return to normal conditions,
the Secretary-General has also proposed in his scenario
the phased transfer of the Varosha area to the United
Nations. It should be noted again that he did not suggest
anything new but only tried to put forward a concrete
proposal finally to implement point 5 of the high-level
agreement of May 1979, in which Mr. Kyprianou and
Mr. Denktas agreed to give priority to
“reaching agreement on the resettlement of Varosha
under United Nations auspices simultaneously
with
the beginning of the consideration
by the interlocutors of the constitutional and the territorial aspects
of a comprehensive settlement. After agreement on
Varosha has been reached, it will be implemented

17. The Council should not forget, however, that
these immediate events are not the only violation of the
Constitution of Cyprus of 1960. The Netherlands has
3

without awaiting the outcome of the discussion on
other aspects”.
I therefore conclude that the Secretary-General has
tried to revitalize the intercommunal talks between the
Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities within
the framework of the good offices mission entrusted to
him by the Security Council and on the basis of the highlevel agreements of 1977 and 1979.
21. The Secretary-General’s scenario has so far failed
to materialize. In paragraph 23 of his .report he remarked, “The developments outlined in this report
speak for themselves.” They ,do indeed. We regret that
the Turkish Cypriot authorities have deemed it necessary to pursue their declaration of independence even
further at a time when the Secretary-General had requested them not to continue their activities, as part of
his comprehensive proposal to revitalize the intercommunal dialogue. These activities not only contravene
Security Council resolution 541 (1983), but are also
difficult to reconcile with the provisions of the lo-point
agreement quoted above, on which the Secretary-General has based his patient and dedicated efforts to revitalize the intercommunal talks.
22. We note that Mr., DenktaS has reaffirmed during
this debate that he is still ready to resume the intercommunal talks. His statements seem to indicate that the
Turkish Cypriot community continues to adhere to the
concept of a united Cyprus within a bi-communal, bizonal and federal framework, as provided for by the
1977 and 1979 high-level agreements. We sincerely
hope these words will be translated into facts.
23. Many speakers have already pointed out that the
Secretary-General’s mission of good offices remains
indispensable and deserves the unambiguous and unanimous support of the Security Council and of the parties
directly concerned.- We wholeheartedly agree and are
grateful to the Secretary-General for his readiness to
continue his mission, in spite of the present setback, as
long as there is unambiguous support for it. The Secretary-General has also rightly drawn .our attention to
another essential requirement-the continued deployment of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus (UNFICYP) whose presence is more than ever
indispensable in the present situation,
24. The Netherlands, for its part, will extend its full
co-operation to any constructive effort by the Council
that would strengthen the Secretary-General’s mission
of good offices and provide it with the necessary political support. After the recent events, the Council is in
our opinion duty-bound to reaffirm forcefully its principled rejection of the unilateral declaration of independence by the Turkish Cypriot authorities. Given the
history of Cyprus, which has been bedevilled by lack of
trust on both sides, which has been manifested again in
the current debate, it will not be easy for the Council to
agree on a constructive course of action that will enhance the prospects of peace instead of stirring up again

the flames of animosity and distrust. We should, however, be shirking a major responsibility under the Charter, if we did not at least try again to promote conciliation, understanding, confidence and trust between the
two Cypriot communities, thereby reviving hopes for a
peaceful and just solution to the Cyprus problem.
25. Mr.. de ,La BARRE de NANTEUIL (France)
[interpretation
from French]: As this is my first
statement to the Council this month, I pay tribute, on
your assumption of the presidency, Sir, to your distinguished qualities as a diplomat, based on long experience in international life. ,We are sure that under your
leadership our debate wiil ,be conducted with competence and courtesy. We all admire the remarkable ease
with which you assume your tasks, and we appreciate
your charm and humour, which ‘you often use to calm
down our debates when they are in danger of straying
from the point. I also pay tribute, Sir, to your predecessor, Mr. Kravets, who presided so diligently overour
work last month.
., :
26. When I spoke in the Council on 18November 1983
[25OOth meeting], I unreservedly condemned on behalf
of my country the serious violation of the territorial
integrity, sovereignty, unity and independence of Cyprus represented by the declaration of independence of
the so-called Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus.
France naturally voted in favour of resolution 541
(1983).
27. Today France deplores the fact that despite the
provisions of that resolution the Turkish Government
has decided to establish diplomatic relations with that
so-called Republic.
28. My country cannot accept thesefaits accomplis.
We would equally condemn the carrying out of the
recent threats to take i other comparable initiatives.
Such measures would be contrary to Security Council
resolutions and would further hinder the search for a
peaceful solution.
29. France has always regarded the Government of
President Kyprianou as the sole legitimate Government
of the Republic of Cyprus and has always believed that
any solution to the present crisis must of necessity
include respect for the unity, integrity, sovereignty and
independence of the Republic and imply the withdrawal
of foreign occupation forces. That is why on 13 May
1983my delegation voted for General Assembly resolution 37/253, whose principles are still valid.
30. France agrees with the conclusion of the Secretary-General’s report in document S/16519. We desire
more strongly than ever that his mission of good offices
should continue, for we believe that this is the only way
for the parties to resume the necessary dialogue, without which no solution is possible. 1 3
:
.LJI
31. .The Secretary-General’s efforts have resulted in a
series of constructive proposals which have been put to

the parties. At one point the proposals aroused hopes.
It is to be regretted that certain subsequent actions have
jeopardized this promising process. We therefore feel
that the Secretary-General’s efforts must be resumed.
In this connection, France would particularly favour
the idea of transferring the*Famagusta area to interim
administration by the United Nations, which was one of
the central points in the recent negotiations. Such a
transfer would be a concrete manifestation of the good
will which is.required in any negotiations.
32. Furthermore, my country thinks it particularly
necessary, in order to‘prevent a further deteriorationof
the situation, to continue the presence of UNFICYP,
whose mandate will soon expire.
33: The international community would be unable to
comprehend the increasingly clear separation of two
communities obliged by geography and by history to get
on together. For its part, France must express its hope
for a just and lasting settlement strictly respecting Security Council resolutions and the principles of the
,.
Charter.
34. The PRESIDENT [interpretationfrom Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Czechoslovakia. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
35. Mr. CI?SAR (Czechoslovakia): First of all, Sir,
I should like to congratulate you warmly on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. My delegation is convinced that, under
the guidance of a seasoned diplomat whose wisdom is
well known and who represents a country and a people
with which my own country and people maintain traditional relations of friendship and co-operation, the
Council’s work will come to a successful conclusion.
Also, we wish to thank you and, throughyou, the other
members of the Council for having granted our request
to participate in the current discussion of the item on
the agenda. I should like also to express our gratitude to
your predecessor, the representative of the Ukrainian
Soviet .Socialist Republic, Mr. Kravets, who. so effectively and clearly organized the work of the Council in
April,
1 :
;. ’
36. The development of the problem of Cyprus in the
last six months is generating serious ‘concern in
Czechoslovakia. During this time the apprehensions
that were voiced in the Security Council last November
in connection with the proclamation of the so-called
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus proved to be
justified. Council resolution 541 (1983), adopted at the
conclusion of those meetings, showed the way to resolving the difficult problem justly and in accordance
with international law.
37. The international community has, however been
dismayed by the course of events. This is apparem also
at the present Council meetings. This disappointment is
caused by the fact that, instead of meeting the provi-

sions of resolution 541 (1983), the Turkish side is deliberately acting against the spirit and the letter of that
resolution. We have in mind, for example, the exchange
of ambassadors between Turkey and the Turkish Cypriot administration, the drafting of a constitution for
the so-called Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus and
the preparations for a referendum on that issue. This
approach creates further and even more insurmountable obstacles, blocking the way to achieving ajust and
lasting settlement of the problem.
,’
I
38. The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic does not
judge the development of events in Cyprus in isolation
from the overall heightening of international tension
caused by the forces of aggression, which pursue a
policy of force, of diktat and of interfering in the internal affairs and violating the independence and sover.eignty of other States. These aggressive forces are
trying to turn to their advantage any complications
arising in relations between States or peoples.
39. Czechoslovakia has ‘repeatedly expressed in the
United Nations its principled and immutable position
on the question of Cyprus. On 18 November 1983the
Czechoslovak Government issued a statement in connection with the proclamation of the so-called separate
State of Cypriot Turks, to the effect that, among other
things, this proclamation undermines the efforts for a
just settlement of the problem, is in contravention of
United Nations resolutions on the question of Cyprus
and, in consequence, places in jeopardy the existence
of the Republic of Cyprus as an independent State.
40. Czechoslovakia continues to support unequivocally an independent, sovereign, united, territorially
integral and non-aligned Cyprus. At the same time it ,
rejects any violation of the aforementioned principles
and encourages the elimination of all possible factors
having a negative impact on the development of the
problem. Of principal importance, in our view, is the
withdrawal of foreign troops from Cyprus and the
liquidation of the military .bases in the island.
..
41. As the 20 April 1984 com~urziqub of the meeting
of the Committee of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
the States Parties to the Warsaw Treaty declares,
“there are no issues that could not be resolved
through talks, if they are conducted on the basis of a
constructive approach and political -will to attain
positive results, with due regard for the vital interests
.’ of the peoples, .the interests. of peace and intemational security”.[see S/16504, annex].
In Czechoslovakia’s view, precisely this kind of
approach is the key to a just settlement of the problem
of Cyprus that ‘would be in the interest of the Cypriot
people and .in the interest of strengthening peace and
security in that region. ‘It is, therefore, necessary to
create, as soon as possible,‘conditions for the resumption .of a constructive dialogue between the representatives of both Cypriot communities in accordance with

adopted United Nations resolutions. We are of the
opinion that the Secretary-General
should continue in
the future to play, an important role in these negotiations.
42. It may be said that this year will complete a decade
in the present problem of Cyprus. We appeal to all
interested parties to do their utmost to achieve a just
settlement of the question of Cyprus before that decade
reaches its end.
43. Sir John THOMSON
(United
Kingdom):
Mr. President, not long ago I had occasion to remark in
relation to two of your predecessors, that the letter “P”
obviously stood for “presidency”,
and that they had
carried out their tasks very well. But you, Sir, are in a
special position. I think that in your case-though
not, I may say, in mine-the
letter “U” stands for
“uniquely
well qualified”.
You are the dean of the
Council. You have had more experience in the presidency than any of the rest of us and, if I may say so, it
shows. Your Government’s
confidence in you is well
deserved. Our thanks also go to your predecessor, the
representative of the Ukraine, for his careful and diligent conduct of the presidency.
44. My delegation has listened to this debate with
attention. We have done so in pursuance of our responsibilities as a member of the Security Council but also
with a special knowledge and experience of the Cyprus
problem. If I may say so, some of the contributions to
this debate have not been altogether well focused. The
situation is very complicated and has a long and convoluted history. This no doubt accounts for the fact that
some statements, often with the best of intentions, have
contained phrases which may actually be counterproductive to their authors’ intentions.
45. In this statement I would like to put the problem
before us into sharper focus. There is first the immediate problem raised in the letter dated 30 April 1984
from the representative of Cyprus to the President of
the Security Council [S/165143. That deals with the
recent purported exchange of ambassadors, which is a
subject in its own right. It has implications for the wider
and more fundamental
problems concerning the relationship of the two communities in Cyprus, the preservation of the Republic of Cyprus and a range of international relations connected with these questions. But
it is necessary to make a distinction between the immediate problem of the purported exchange of ambassadors and the more fundamental long-term problems
of the situation in Cyprus.
46. As regards the immediate problem, the substance
seems to my delegation to be clear beyond dispute.
Indeed, it is so clear that we had hoped that the Council
would have passed a resolution on the question many
meetings ago. Had that happened we would not have
thought it necessary to make more than a very short
speech or, indeed, perhaps any speech at all. We think
there would have been a clear and overwhelming vote

on the facts of the situation. My delegation was the
author and sponsor of resolution 541(1983). That resolution stated in unambiguous terms that the declaration
by the Turkish Cypriot authorities issued on 19 November 1983 purporting to create an independent State in
northern Cyprus was incompatible with the 1960 Treaty
concerning the Establishment
of the Republic of Cyprus’ and the 1960 Treaty of Guarantee? The resolution
considered that the declaration was legally invalid and
would contribute to a worsening of the situation in
Cyprus. I think perhaps we could all agree that we were
right in coming to that judgement. The resolution also
called upon all States and the two communities in Cyprus to refrain from any action which might exacerbate
the situation.
47. It is beyond doubt that the action which is the
subject of the 30 April letter from the representative of
Cyprus is in contravention of resolution 541(1983). It is
also beyond doubt that it has exacerbated the situation.
48. As I have already said, this is a very simple factual
situation on which the Council might well have passed a
resolution several days ago. The debate, however, has
strayed over a whole range of other questions. I accept
that the flouting of resolution 541 (1983) has had a
harmful effect on the wider, questions, but in this Council we must be careful not to compound the damage by
blundering around in a very delicate situation.
49. It has been common ground for a long time that
there will be an improvement
in the fundamental and
long-term situation in Cyprus only if there are serious
and timely negotiations directed at removing, perhaps
step by step, all the points of disagreement so that the
Republic of Cyprus may enjoy sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and non-alignment.
The fundamental document is of course the 1960 Treaty concerning the Establishment
of the Republic of Cyprus.
50. It is also common ground that the best--and, in
the circumstances, perhaps the only-way of achieving
this object is through the exercise of the good offices of
the Secretary-General.
Successive Secretaries-General
have striven in this field. Agreements have been
reached. I recall, for example, the high-level agreements of 1977 and 1979. My Government considers that
these principles remain fundamental. Our present Secretary-General, with his unique experience and knowledge of the problem, is ideally suited to bring about
a comprehensive
settlement. Council resolution 541
(1983) calls upon the authorities to co-operate fully with
the Secretary-General
in his. mission of good offices.
51. We all subscribe to that. The problem is that some
people take steps, some of them inadvertent, some of
them intentional, which make the Secretary-General’s
task much harder. His report of 1 May 1984 [5/16519) is
clear and convincing testimony to this. The risk is that
we are now close to a situation in which such actions
will make his task impossible. That is of great concern
to my Government.

52. We well understand how, in the heat of the debate
or as part of an unfortunate propaganda war, public
statements are made which may later be regretted. But,
although it is easy to understand, it is hard to condone.
Still less can we condone the issuance of threats. It is
essential that the parties to this dispute should talk to
each other and that all of them should talk to the Secretary-General. We have heard some statements recently
which suggest that one or other party is unwilling to do
this. If these statements are maintained or if new obstacles are created, we all face the prospect of a deteriorating spiral of events with ever more serious consequences.

Secretary-General and warmly welcome his willingness
to continue with his mission. We call on the parties to
co-operate with him and respond constructively to his
efforts. Only if they do so will a peaceful, just and
lasting solution become possible.
57. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
Mr. Rauf Denktas, to whom the Council extended an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure at the 253 1st meeting, wishes to make a further
statement. With the consent of the Council, I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make that
statement.

53. No party to this dispute has a monopoly of virtue.
All parties have made mistakes. All parties have acted
in contravention of agreements.

58. Mr. DENKTAS:
Members need not be concerned by the many documents I have brought with me.
I shall not be reading them all out; they are merely for
moral support in this lonely atmosphere.

54. In short, while the immediate problem of the purported exchange of ambassadors is clear and simple,
the longer-term and more fundamental problem of the
situation in Cyprus is very complicated and is getting
increasingly dangerous. The simplicities of one question are not to be applied to the complexities of the
other. The long-term fundamental problem requires
that all parties co-operate with the Secretary-General in
the exercise of his good offrces while in the meantime
refraining from any action which might exacerbate the
situation. That is the message which it is essential for
the Council to issue in discharging its responsibilities
for peace and security.

59. I have listened to the arguments of the Greek
Cypriot side, and now I understand very well why,
when they are heard in our absence, they obtain the
votes. They have said quite openly that the Turkish
Cypriot side is guilty of segregation, of dividing the
sovereignty of Cyprus-and
I think I was referred to as
the Ian Smith of Cyprus. I can understand how such a
presentation affects the African nations. They have
also stated quite openly-in
writing and verbally-that
if what we did in Cyprus is condoned all nations with
multiple populations will have a precedent for splitting
up, and the Charter will have been defied and defiled.
60. Such a presentation in the absence of one of the
component parts of a sovereign country, of a suigeneris
independent country, is naturally very effective. That is
why in all my statements here I have tried-by
the
Council’s leave and as a person under its rules-to tell
members the story, the plight and the cause of my
community.

55. The Council should state its position firmly and
persuasively while avoiding actions which would make
a settlement more difficult. In our view it can best do
this on the basis of certain fundamental
principles
which are not disputed by either of the parties and have
the backing of the international community as a whole.
These are: support for the independence, sovereignty,
territorial integrity and non-alignment
of the Republic
of Cyprus; opposition to and non-recognition
of the
union of the Republic of Cyprus in whole or in part with
any other country and/or any form of partition or secession, including the unilateral declaration of independence, by any part of the Republic; support for an
independent,
non-aligned, bicommunal,
federal Republic of Cyprus in accordance with the provisions of
the 1977 and 1979 high-level agreements; support for
the continuation of the Secretary-General’s
mission of
good offices, as authorized in paragraph 6 of Security
Council resolution 367 (1975), with the objective of
promoting, through the resumption of negotiations and
in accordance with the above principles, a peaceful,
just and lasting solution to the Cyprus problem; belief
that the main impetus must come from the parties,
which should be in no doubt of the urgency of the task;
and opposition to any action by anyone which might
jeopardize the outcome of negotiations or increase tension in Cyprus.

61. In response to those who try to equate me with the
Ian Smith of the African continent, I ask my African
brothers to consider whether, had Ian Smith represented the majority in the land and it had had a constitution stating that the whites and the blacks would form a
partnership State, that one side would not override the
other and the constitution
would be respected, he
would have been quite right and entitled under the
Charter and in accordance with human rights to proceed, because he had a numerical majority, secretly to
arm his police and his young people. Would he have
been right one night to attack the blacks and throw them
out and keep them outside the constitution and all the
organs of the State, to decide that they were all rebels
and to keep them in that position fighting for their lives,
their territory and their homes for 20 years without
being entitled to put the currency of the country in their
pocket, without being entitled to cry for justice when
they were hurt and murdered, without being entitled to
say we are part of this land?

56. Britain is ready, now as always, to play its full part
in such an approach. We shall give every support to the

62. Was Ian Smith guilty of sinning against this or
that part of the Charter and against humanity just be7

cause he represented the minority and did those things,
or would he have been guilty had he represented the
majority and had done the same things to the cofounding partners of a joint State? If our dear African
brothers and representatives are seeking Ian Smith in
Cyprus, let them look to the Greek Cypriot side. .Because the Greek Cypriots were numerically many they
decided that they could destroy a partnership Republic,
a partnership State; it was not a Greek Cypriot State,
I repeat. They secretly armed themselves, they invited
the Greek army to the island, at first se.cretly and then
openly, and they maintained their attacks on us for
11 years, until 1974. And in self-defence we took preventive, protective measures.

about Varosha. When I make a statement, I make a
statement; I do not deny having made it and 1 explain
why I made it. I said that Hurriyet version only after it
was pointed out to me by the speaker on the other side.
I did,not make any such statement. I made another
statement, but that is irrelevant.
68. My offer of 2 January 1984 on Varosha stands. It is
there on the table. In that offer Varosha is a matter to be
discussed between my side and the Secretary-General.
We are ready to do that, but if the Council puts the
question of Varosha in the context in which the Greek
Cypriots see it into a resolution, that will destroy that
effort. Varosha is a municipal matter. It concerns a part
of a little town, in return for which other properties,
have been left in the south. It is far below the interests
of the Security Council. The Council should not be
alarmed because it is told something and try to put
everything into a resolution, ~which will.not help the
Secretary-General
but ,which will destroy his efforts.,
.,
69. .An,other matter on which they challenged us and
challenged .the Security Council was, the question-~of
UNFICYP.
UNFICYP
is very important, of course. It
is so important that when the other side were strong
enough, in 1967, to attack the Turkish Cypriots, they
first disarmed UNFICYP.
It is in the reports of the
Secretary-General.
They imprisoned them, ridiculed
them and attacked and killed unarmed Turkish Cypriot
people, in two villages. And, not wanting to spend
valuable bullets on the wounded, they poured kerosene
on them and burned them.

63. I am not saying that we are angels; but we are not
the devils they want members to think we are.
64. Now that I have seen the draft resolution that has
been distributed and the countries that have sponsored
it, I understand that my message has not been heard;
I understand that something is lacking. What is lacking
is the right to be heard on a basis of equality by those
who decide the fate and the lives of others. We have not
asked anything more of the Council. We have asked to
be heard, but we have not been heard. Had we been
asked what this draft resolution would do to us, we
would have told you that it would kill the good offices
mission of the Secretary-General,
which members of
the Council want to be continued, which the Greek
Cypriots say they need and which we believe to be
really necessary. So let us put our heads together and
come up with a draft resolution that will be helpful for
Cyprus as a whole.

70. Of course, UNFICYP
is important. All the major
crimes against us were committed when UNFICYP
was told, “We, the Government, are going to attack.
Withdraw.‘* Our only hope was that UNFICYP
reported to New York. Our only hope was that the Security
Council would say “Stop” to Makarios. That is how we
were saved, so we know the value of UNFICYP.

65. Segregation we deny. Apartheid we reject. It is
not segregation in the circumstances
I have just
explained, when, after being treated like that, after
waiting 20 years for rehabilitation
in a partnership State
with our.full,rights,
we are told that unless we accept
that the Greek Cypriot word is the,constitution
of the
country, unless’ we accept that we are not a co-founder
partner but a minority ,in a Greek Cyprus, we are not
going to come back into any of the organs of the State.

71. Why, then, did we not concur with the last resolution on the extension of its mandate? We explained
then, but let me explain again now: When a Govemment which has thrown us out of our part of the constitution, which has taken over the seat of Government
by armed force, which for years and years has recognized no law, no constitution,
no international
treaty,
no human rights, for my community,
is referred to as
“the Government”,
we object.

66. Would any member that had been confronted with
that situation for 20 years be guilty of segregation if it
said,, “The land in which we can be happy, live in
human dignity and be free should be ours until the other
side comes to its senses and decides to re-establish the
partnership”?
Would it be guilty of segregation or
should it be proud of taking this step in order to save its
people from harassment,, from a policy of destruction,
from apartheid? That is what I ask the Council to consider. If members have any doubt in’their minds I invite
them‘to come to Cyprus to see for themselves and then
decide.

72, So, if the other side are really sincere about
UNFICYP,
can we not find a mutually agreed wording
of a resolution which will extend UNFICYP’s
term of
office, and, mutually agreed terms of reference for the
parties to the Cyprus conflict? Would that not suffice in
order to carry on this very important peace-keeping
task in Cyprus? Why use UNFICYP
in order to rub into
our wounded skins the word “Government”
in each
resolution? Could we not have some resolutions in
which, because of the.mutual interests of the parties,
we could manoeuvre a little in order ‘to accommodate

67. Another matter on which the other side dwelt very
strongly, and with which I understand they have influenced. those who contributed to the draft resolution,
was an alleged statement in Hurriyet, attributed to me,
8

each other, the United Nations, the Security Council
and UNFICYP? Of course we could, but that is not the
purpose. The purpose is always to drive us into a corner
so that we retaliate, and then to bring us back here and
tell the Council what we have done. This game will
continue until the Turkish community is properly exe-’
cuted by the decisions of the international body.

thrown out and could not go back. The representative
of the ,Greek Cypriot side, in order to refute those
charges, mentioned that about 35 people, years later,
under a special agreement with certain United Nations
agencies and with the consent of their side and of ours,
had taken up work on their side: So the exception he has
cited proves the rule. We were thrown out; we were not
allowed back.
.:
78. And, while that was the situation of the civil servants and the parliamentarians, the Council was told
that the three Turkish Ministers had withdrawn in order
to show that the Republic was dead.’ If the Council
accepts that, I have nothing to say.
~’

73. This is the aim. What they have not been able to
achieve by guns they want to achieve through the resolutions of the Council, because they know that the
Council does not have the time to stand, to look, to
listen and to decide whether those who are talking to it
as “the Government” of Cyprus are truly the representatives of the peoples of Cyprus. That is what they base
their strategy on.

79. I look to the Greek side, sitting herein the Council, for some signs of appreciation of the fact that reconciliation can come only if they accept that they did
wrong in the past, that they tried to destroy the .bicommunal Republic of Cyprus in the name of enosis; If
they should say, “In that exercise we hurt the.Turks
immensely; we ejected them. There is no shame in it; it
was a national cause.” If it is not still a national cause,
they should say, “We were misled by our leader Makarios, by Greece. We took a wrong decision. It was
wrong to destroy this partnership. Let us go back to the
partnership.”

74. So on UNFICYP, which we will come to within a
few weeks, I suggestthat we find brief, neutral phraseology, a few paragraphs, to extend its mandate. Then it
will be legally located on both parts of the country. We
have been accused of not concurring with the extension
of UNFICYP’s mandate last time because we had other
aims in mind and wanted to create a crisis. I think we
have proved that not to be correct by agreeing that
UNFICYP continue its functions in the north more
liberally than ever. There are no complaints whatsoever about our relations with UNFICYP.

80. There is an agreement, as has been pointed out by
a number of representatives, to re-establish that partnership in a bi-zonal, federal way. Are we still in favour
of it? I ask this question of the representatives who have
sponsored the draft resolution. If there is acceptance of
the 1977and 1979summit agreements, if the aim is still a
bi-zonal, federal republic with the Turkish Cypriots,
why is it, and how is it, that this is not mentioned in the
draft resolution? Why did the Greek Cypriots not, include it in their draft resolution, on which the Council’s
draft is founded? Why is it that in the General Assembly
they mentioned everything except these agreements?
Is it because they.think they have ‘convinced enough
Members and they can now get away with Cyprus as a
Greek Cypriot land? How would any member like an
Ian Smith to get his country as his own because of the
mistaken decisions of the Security Council or the General Assembly? Would that metiber bow to such decisions, or would he feel it to be an honour to stand up
and continue campaign of enlightenment in order to
prove to the well-intentioned people who have been
misinformed that what they are doing is wrong-wrong
in the light of the Charter; wrong in the light of the law?
That is what we are doing. We are not defying Sec,urity
Council decisions; we are; I repeat, too’ small to defy
the Security Council or any other body. But, like all
men of dignity, we are strong enough to fight for our
rights, for our liberty and for.the re-establishment of a
partnership republic in Cyprus.

75. So we have given the Security Council the chance
to decide whether it is important, when extending the
mandate of UNFICYP, to include the words “the Government of Cyprus”, and thus put us into the comer, or
whether it is important to extend the mandate with the
agreement of both sides. If the words “the Govemment” are not included in that resolution, is it going to
become less a Government than it is? If our name is not
included in that resolution, are we going to be anything
less than we are? We must accommodate each other if
we are mutually interested in one and the sanie result.
76. I tell the Council with all deference that we are
interested in UNFICYP’s continuing its functions in
Cyprus. We think it is necessary, we think it is doing a
good job, and we think it should be in both par&of the
island-legally, and therefore with our consent. The
Council should not put its own force at a disadvantage
just because one side insists on repeating words which
it knows are unacceptable to the other side. They will
lose nothing, we will gain nothing, but UNFICYP will
be a legal institution in both parts. Those are my views
on this matter.
77. Yesterday [2.537thmeeting] I sat here listening to
the representative of the Greek Cypriot side and it
occurred to me that the saying “exceptions prove the
rule” is of great value and practical application. I told
the Council in my previous statement 12534thmeeting],
quoting the Secretary-General’s reports, that the Turkish members of the civil service were thrown out by
force of arms and because of the military situation they
could not go back; that members of Parliament were

81. This republic must be,closed to’ enosis, to partition. That is our offer. That thisrepublic must not be a
Greek Cypriot republic is the case history of thewhole i
problem. The problem was put on the Council’s agenda
9

when a partnership republic was destroyed. That is why
it is there. The Cyprus problem was not put on the
Council’s agenda because Turkey came to Cyprus.
Turkey came to Cyprus in order to save the partnership
republic. As for the non-aligned world, which thinks
that we are against it or do not accept its principles,
I ask it to understand-and
I do so in honour, proudlythat had we not fought there would not today be a nonaligned Cyprus. That is so simple, and so true. Had
we not fought, Cyprus as an independent, non-aligned
State would have disappeared long ago.

brought to trial. Turkish citizens were sentenced to
pay fines of 50 to 200 for carrying a genuinely innocent letter from one village to another.”
That was because postal services had been disrupted;
we could give many such examples.
“All these cases were taken before Greek judges,
in violation of the Constitution,
although Turkish
judges were available; on the other hand, the Greeks
who attacked or even murdered Turks were not even
brought before the courts. Those who were brought
for minor charges were later set Scot-free or treated
very leniently on the pretext of being members of the
legal forces of the State.”

82. Another matter I want to touch upon very briefly
is the statement made yesterday by the representative
of southern Cyprus to the effect that judges continued
to function until 1966 and that they withdrew as a result
of, again, .of course, Turkey’s intervention.
If Greek
Cypriots would stop seeing Turkey under every stone
in the Turkish sector, they would start seeing Turkish
Cypriots for what they are: Turkish Cypriots, born in
Cyprus, who have lived for centuries in Cyprus, who
have never submitted to Greek Cypriot rule, who were
always equal as one of two different communities, who
established with them the Republic of Cyprus and who
have been fighting for 20 years now to prevent Greek
Cypriots from taking the Republic of Cyprus, the State
of Cyprus, into the fold of Greece, which they claim to
be their national cause.

And legal forces of the State meant an illegal establishment called the National Guard.
“As judges, we shall never forget the day when, on
2 June 1966, we were stopped at the check-point near
the law courts. Some of us were prevented from
attending the courts, and one of us, who had managed
to get through, was removed from his chambers at
gun-point and taken back to the check-point.”
This is reality, but the fiction, it appears, is more
acceptable when it comes from people who have the
label of the Government on them.

83. I will now read out to the Council a statement by
the Turkish judges published on 28 February 1980, in
News Bulletin No. 3716, in reply to Mr. Justice Triandafilides, who had alleged more or less the same thing
as a propaganda gesture: “The Turkish Cypriot judges
attended the courts till 2 June 1966”-after
the 1963
events there was a lull; then they attended the courts
because there was a Canadian chief justice who came
and implored us to help retain some contact; otherwise
justice would not be done, because in all courts, in
mixed cases, there had to be mixed judges, and in order
to show that what we wanted was to go back to our
constitutional rights, in a revised form of course, and to
protect our own people, we went back and the judges
said that they left because they had to-

84. I have listened with due care, attention and respect to what has been said by the speakers. Everybody
says that the territorial
integrity,
sovereignty and
independence of Cyprus are very important. Of course
they are. We have said it is because that territorial
integrity was not protected by the Greek Cypriots, who
attacked us in order to destroy it and hand it over to
Greece, that what has happened has happened. We are
ready to go back to territorial integrity in a federal form.
We are at the table; we never left the table. They left the
table, contrary to advice from the Secretary-General.
They resorted to the General Assembly.
85. It was the General Assembly’s latest resolution,
resolution 371253 of May 1983-which certain Members
have proudly said they voted for-which
disregarded
our rights, which disregarded history, which disregarded what the Greek Cypriot administration had done
to the Turkish Cypriots over the years and which gave
them the title deed to Cyprus free of charge, contrary to
our existence and contrary to our wishes. It is that
achievement which made the Greek party leaders who
had attended that meeting go back shouting victory; it
pointed out to us that the world organization was on
the wrong path and that we would not be heard unless
and until we made some movement; that we would be
eroded from Cyprus unless we showed the world that
‘we meant business in defending our rights and our
liberties-in
defending Cyprus.

“through the efforts of the then neutral President of
the High Court, Mr. Wilson, on the understanding
that the provisions of the Constitution would be restored and hoping that discrimination
against the
Turkish community would be prevented. But, to our
regret, during the two-year period when Turkish judges attended the courts’*-most
of them had to be
escorted to the courts and back to the Turkish area
because they were in fear for their lives-“not
only
were the provisions of the Constitution not restored,
but the unconstitutional
law mentioned above was
used as an instrument to persecute the members of
the Turkish community. The courts were turned into
a star chamber. Turkish citizens were arrested,
brought before the courts on fictitious charges such
as preparing warlike operations, refused bail and
kept in custody for long periods without being

86. That is how we came to the establishment of the
State, in self-defence, but I still see that the same
10

approach is being made by some members who refuse
to look back, who refuse to say, all right, we are treating
the people who keep the seat of Cyprus as the Govemment of Cyprus, but we know there is something wrong,
therefore all we shall do is to tell them to go and talk at
the negotiating table if they are sincere and want to reestablish a partnership republic with these people.

“Let us work with determination
towards a final
compromise and reconciliation.
Let us direct our
efforts towards positive ends and steadily proceed on
that course. Let us abandon negative attitudes geared
toward destroying each other. Let us not forget that
others cannot take decisions on behalf of the two
peoples of Cyprus, and that only through our own
efforts, treading the same path together and helping
each other, shall we be able to proceed towards a
federal solution.”

87. This is not said. The Government is important; the
territorial integrity of Cyprus is important; the sovereignty of Cyprus is important; the independence of
Cyprus is important. With due respect, we think we
also are important, because without us there is no territorial integrity-it
becomes Greek territory. Without
our participation in all organs of the State and in the new
form, in all organs of the federal Government, there is
no Government, there is no independence.

92. I therefore invite the Greek Cypriots once again to
tread with us the same constructive and peaceful path
by passing through the door we are still holding open for
them. If they walk through that door, we shall end in a
bi-zonal partnership State. Do they want it? Do they
look at us as partners, as equals, or do they not? If they
do not, let us not waste the Council’s time and the
Secretary-General’s
time. If they do, the Council will
find us more than ever eager to help establish this bizonal federal republic.

88. If we refuse to allow Cyprus to become a Greek
colony and if over the years our struggle has given no
result because of misconceptions in the world, we had
to do something to save ourselves from erosion. If the
Council understands this, it will be helping us; it will be
helping Cyprus. But as long as it does not understand
this it will maintain the position that the Greek Cypriots
are the Government of Cyprus and it does not matter
whether for 20 years they had nothing to do with Turkish Cypriots except attack them, ill-treat them, deny
them their rights, change the Constitution by word of
mouth, expect Turks to become a minority in a Greek
Cyprus; it does not matter how many people were killed
in order to reduce the Turks to the position of a minority; it does not matter that the Turks had to invite
Turkey as a guaranteeing Power in order to prevent a
take-over of the island by Greece; all of that is irrelevant; they can keep the seat of Government; they are
the Government
and therefore whatever these little
Turks do, we must condemn them; we must punish
them.

93. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
The representative of Cyprus has asked to speak, and
I call upon him to do so.
94. Mr. MOUSHOUTAS
(Cyprus): I had hoped that
the representative of Turkey would make at least a
credible attempt to reply to the fully documented
statement by my Foreign Minister yesterday. Instead,
he again chose, in the usual fashion, to place Mr. Denktag at the forefront, to rehash unsubstantiated
statements and repeated allegations which can no longer
stand scrutiny by the Council.
95. In a previous statement by my delegation I said,
among other’ things, that should the Turkish Cypriot
community be set free the world would witness one of
the most moving scenes of reunion among countrymen
with a common destiny and country. This is my Government’s policy. However, this reference to unity and
the bonds of common destiny of our people, Greek
Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots, caused Mr. Denktas
high blood pressure and almost an outburst, so that,
as he admits, he had to leave the Council chamber.
Beyond the candidness of his statement, no words
of his could have demonstrated more effectively his
hatred of, and aversion to, the unity and peaceful cooperation of our communities.

89. We wish to see some condemnation of what has
been done ‘and what is still being done to us for
20 years-no rights, no position, no status, no State,
and the Council is asking me to continue for perhaps
another 20 years in that position. Why? Because if1 do
not I will be defying the Security Council.
90. I have no intention whatsoever of defying the
Security Council resolutions, none whatsoever; but
I have no intention of leaving my community in the cold
just .because the Greek Cypriots will not abandon that
seat where my share is still visible to me and I see it as
stolen. I say I am as much a Cypriot as he is. I want my
right there, and I want my security provided for, too.
That is only natural after what has happened to me.
That is our case.

96. When I spoke of the common bonds and destiny of
our Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot communities,
I did not, of course, wish Mr. DenktaS harm. On the
contrary, I hope that he is alive to see the proof of the
wise saying that water runs to water and man to man.
He will see his policies of separation and partition tumble and his policies of hatred discarded in the waste
basket. For no man and no power in the world can stop
the natural course of unity against which he has fought
consistently, all his life, in spite of some parts of his
statement today.

91. As I believe the draft resolution will be introduced
off&lly
later-and
I hope I shall be given the right to
say what I think about it and how we shall act with
regard to it-1 shall not prolong this statement. I repeat
with all good will my call for co-operation, which was
made in these words:
11

97. Many statements of the Turkish representative
and Mr. DenktaS have again revolved around the question of enosis. For every quotation on enosis which
they can produce, I can quote an equal number of
Turkish statements on tuqsim-that is, the partition of
Cyprus. Let me simply quote Mr. Denktas himself,
who said on 11 August 1977, according to the weekly
.magazine Soz: “We said Cyprus is Turkish and shall
remain Turkish.” On 24 March 1978 he was again
quoted in Sozas saying: “Let them brand me a chauvinist; I spoke openly. Unless this Turkish community
integrates and unites with its motherland, the Cyprus
problem will not reach a solution.”

102. Mr. DenktaS spoke about an imaginary coup,
and about the Turkish Cypriot community being deprived of its rights. Where is the coup? The then President of the Republic, Archbishop Makarios, in order to
ensure the smooth functioning of the State and remove
certain causes of international friction in a democratic
way, transmitted a 13-point memorandum to the then
Vice-President Kticiik, a Turkish Cypriot, for his consideration. The latter promised to consider it. These
points suggested the revision of certain articles of the
Constitution which, owing to their separatist nature,
impeded the smooth functioning of the Government
and tended to keep the two communities apart instead
of drawing them together in a spirit of co-operation and
understanding. The proposals aimed at the well-being
of the people of Cyprus as a whole.

98. As to Mr. DenktaS’s credibility-I
would say
“credibility gap?--Soz also wrote, on 15 November
1978:

..

103. Because of this l3-point proposal, Turkey found
a pretext, however, to setits sinister plans once again in
motion. Turkey organized and carried out Ankara’s
plan for undermining the newly established Republic of
Cyprus through acts of insurrection against the Govemment and outright terrorism against members of the
Turkish community. who believed in the coexistence
and co-operation of the Greek Cypriots and the Turkish
Cypriots. The cold-blooded murder on 11April 1965of
the Turkish Cypriot Kavazoglou and the Greek Cypriot
Mishaoulis-two people dedicated to the common destiny of and co-operation between our communities-is
a striking example of the inhuman means employed for
the purpose of suppressing any contacts or friendship
between Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots.

“Rauf Denktas’s past and his present .domestic policy nullify the credibility of his statements. The world
and particularly the non-aligned countries”-to
which Mr. Denktag referred today-“do not intend
to forget Denktas’s past policy for partition and
unification with Turkey. Nobody will seriously believe those who take bills providing for integration
with the motherland to the Assembly at home and
who talk about independence abroad.”
How right that is. They did not believe him then, and
they will not believe him today..
99. It is no secret that the self-determination claimed
by the Cypriots during the colonial years aimed at
enosis. It was neither sinister nor. secret. Cypriots
placed this item before the General Assembly, and the
records of the General Assembly are there to prove
both that demand for enosis and, equally important, the
candidness of the claim.

104. Mr. Denktas accused the Government of not
having shown flexibility on the solution of the problem.
That is an outrageous allegation. The sad truth is that
we made painful concessions. We accepted negotiations while the occupation troops were in Cyprus even
though the resolutions provided for prior withdrawal of
those Turkish troops. We accepted a federal solution of
the problem even though our position had all along been
in favour of a unitary State. No sooner had we accepted
the federation than the Turkish side came up with
another demand: for a bi-regional federation. Painfully
but sincerely we accepted it in order to bring to an end
the agonizing suffering of our people. But, alas, we
have recently heard the voice of Turkey speaking
about a “bi-national, bi-zonal federation”, meaning
that there are two peoples, two nations, in Cyprus, and
that, according to an interpretation given by Mr. Denkta8 himself, “The two partner peoples who will form
the federation will live in their respective areas and
under the administration of their own federated
States.”

100. But what about today? It is the epitome of misinformation when statements on enosis made by the
Turkish side avoid reference to the present, and specifically to two solemn resolutions of the Cyprus House
of Representatives, of 20 September 1979and 2 October 1981, which absolutely reject any solution which
would abolish the independent Republic of Cyprus or
annex the whole or part of its territory to any other
State. The Government of Cyprus stands by those resolutions:Furthermore, the high-level agreement of 1979
between President Kyprianou and Mr. DenktaS rules
out enosis, secession and partition.
101: As-to his questions about the high-level agreements, my answer is that, yes, we stand by the 1977and
1979agreements. Has the Turkish side honoured them?
Of course it has not. They proceeded with the unilateral
declaration of independence, they exchanged ambassadors, and they are contemplating other illegal actions
for the complete partition and eventual annexation by
Turkey of the occupied part. They have undermined
these agreements at their roots.

105. This interpretation distorts both the letter and
the spirit of the Makarios-Denkta$ agreement of 1977.
That agreement referred to areas which would be under
the administration of each community, but at no point
did it say that the area under Greek Cypriot administration would be inhabited solely by Greek Cypriots and
the area under Turkish Cypriot administration would be
12

107. I believe that on this subject an article published
on 3 September 1979in the Turkish daily Aidinlyk hits
the nail on the head. It states the following:

inhabited solely by Turkish Cypriots. That the interpretation given by Mr. Denktas is arbitrary is evident
also from references in the agreement to principles such
as those of freedom of movement, freedom of settlement and the right to property. The creation in a State
of two areas that would be inhabited by citizens solely
on the basis of their racial origin is contrary to every
human rights convention. It is a form of apartheid, and
the Government of Cyprus cannot accept it. Will the
exponents of segregation, division and apartheid sell it
to the international community? I strongly believe they
will not.

“The Cyprus resolutions taken by the non-aligned
countries are in complete harmony with the basic
principles of the Non-Aligned Movement. National
independence and respect for a country’s sovereignty top these principles. By Turkey’s military
intervention in Cyprus in 1974the independence and
sovereignty of Cyprus have been destroyed. Could it
be expected that the non-aligned would support the
intervention by accepting this situation?‘*

106. Mr. Denktag complained about the United Nations resolutions and, especially, about positions taken
by the non-aligned countries on the question of Cyprus.
In other words, he told us that the whole international
community and especially the non-aligned countries
are out of their minds for supporting the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity, unity and nonaligned status of Cyprus and for branding his puppet
regime as legally invalid. The whole world is at fault,
according to him, because it does not agree with him
and because no self-respecting country recognizes the
offspring of the genocidal expulsion of indigenous peoples. Self-respect, apparently, is not a virtue which he
appreciates.

108. Mr. De&as spoke about the 1960Constitution.
I put a question to him. Does he accept the 1960Constitution? My President made the position of the Government very clear in last year’s General Assembly.
The meeting

rose at 1.20 p.m.

NOTES
’ United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 382, No. 5476.
2 Ibid..

No.

5475.

.

:

13

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences dCpositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous auprts de Gotre libraire ou adresse$vous a : Nations U&s. Section
des ventes. New York ou Get&e.
KAK

IIOXYWiTh

lf3AAHEUi

OPrAHH3AI[ZiZI

OIYhEAHIfEHHhIX

HAIXHH

Uxtanns? Opranu~aurrH 06%ennnennbrs Hauwn IOXKHO ~yn~rb a KHHXKHLIX MaraJxinax H areri~c=aax ao acex paftonax srapa. Hanonmre cnpaexm 06 H=nariHax a
aaurey KIOIXCKHOW
raara3uHe HIIH ~HIUHI~ no anpeq : Oprannzaunn
O~%~AHH~HH~ZX
HaunB. CeKuHR no nponame x~nanxifi. Hbro-Flopa HJIHXCenesa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES UMDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estin en venta en librerlas y casas distribuidotas en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

06300

96-6131~JaluWy 19934.050
