TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

nd
MEETING: 30 JULY 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 492) . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda

. ..... ...... ........,........,....,...

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 24 July 1969 from the representatives of Chile, Colombia, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Pakistan, the United Arab Republic, Turkey,
Yugoslavia and Zambia addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9359)
. . .... .. ..... ...... .....,................. ...

1

S/PV. 1492

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND NINETY-SECOND MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 30 July 1969, at 3 p.m.
President: M. Ibrahima BOYE (Senegal).

dated 23 July 1969 from the President of the United
Nations Council for Namibia addressed to the President of
the Security Council and to document S/9204,1 containing
the report by the Secretary-General in pursuance of
resolution 264 (1969) adopted by the Security Council at
its 1465th meeting on 20 March 1969 concerning the
situation in Namibia.

Rwsent: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 492)

4. Mr. TURBAY AYALA (Colombia) (translated from
Spanish): Mr. President, before taking up the item on our
agenda today, my delegation wishes to express to you its
gratitude and appreciation for the able way in which you
have presided over the meetings of the Security Council.

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 24 July 1969 from the representatives of
Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria,
Pakistan, the United Arab Republic, Turkey, Yugoslavia
and Zambia addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9359).

5. The repeated refusal of the Government of South
Africa to comply with the recommendations of the United
Nations, particularly with those contained in Security
Council resolution 264 (1969), has led a group of States,
Colombia among them, to request this meeting in order to
consider the situation created by this defiant attitude
towards the lofty interests of international peace and the
authority of the international Organization.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia

6. On 23 July 1969, I had the pleasure, in my capacity as
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia, of
addressing to you, Mr. President, the letter contained in
document S/9352, in which I expressed the grave concern
felt by all the members of that Council about the reaction
of the Government of South Africa to Security Council
resolution 264 (1969). I further stated:

Letter dated 24 July 1969 from the representatives of
Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria,
Pakistan, the United Arab Republic, Turkey, Yugoslavia
and Zambia addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9359)
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In a letter
dated 30 July 1969, the representative of Chile asked to be
invited to participate in the Council’s debate on the
question before it. If I hear no objection, I shall consider
that the Council agrees to invite the representative of Chile
to participate in the Council’s debate, without the right to
vote in accordance with the rules of procedure and the
practice of the Council.

“The United Nations Council for .Namibia, which bears
responsibility for administering the Territory until independence, finds itself unable to discharge its tasks
effectively and to carry out its basic functions under the
terms of General Assembly resolutions 214.5 (XXI) and
2248 (S-v) owing to the South African Government’s
open defiance of these resolutions and of the United
Nations authority in continuing the illegal occupation of
the Territory.“2

At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. PEera (Chile)
took a place at the Council table.

7. I also conveyed to you our concern about the fact that
the Government of South Africa is continuing to adopt
measures designed to dismember the Territory of Namibia
and illegally prosecute those Namibians who do not meekly
submit to the terrorism instituted by the measures of the
Pretoria regime. As stated in that letter, since the Security
Council’s adoption of resolution 264 (1969), the Government of South Africa has taken fresh measures with a view
to establishing “homelands” to facilitate its undisguisable

2. The PRESIDENT
(translated from French): The
Council will now proceed to consider the question of the
situation in Namibia, submitted by the representatives of
eleven States in their letter of 24 July 1969 [s/9359/ _1
3. In this connexion, I draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document S/9352,1 containing a letter
1 See Official
year, Supplement

Records
of the Security
Council, Twenty-fourth
for July, August and September 1969.

2 Ibid,,
1

page136.

annexation intentions. The Council for Namibia also noted
with deep concern the arbitrary trial now in progress
against eight Namibians, conducted under the “Terrorism
Act”.

a limit on its greed for territory. The laws on the
fragmentation of the Territory of Namibia constitute a
flagrant violation by the Government of South Africa of its
international obligations, involving not only the resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council but also
the international status of a Territory which has never
belonged to South Africa but was’entrusted to it under a
Mandate. The Mandate was terminated because South
Africa failed to fulfil its obligations in respect of the
administration of the Territory and was unable to ensure
the moral and material well-being and security of the
indigenous inhabitants of South West Africa.

8. The delegations of the eleven States which constitute
the United Nations Council for Namibia also requested you,
Mr. President, to convene an urgent meeting of the Security
Council, in the firm conviction that some effective step
must be taken to prevent South Africa from unjustifiably
refusing to comply with the resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly
9. The item now before us has been extensively discussed
in the General Assembly and the Security Council. This
case has covered a great deal of ground over the last 20
years and is certainly a good example of the frustrations
which still occur where anti-colonialist policy is concerned.

16. The General Assembly, in terminating the Mandate
conferred by the former League of Nations upon His
Britannic Majesty to be exercised on his behalf by the
Government of the Union of South Africa, decided that
South Africa had no other right to administer the Territory
of South West Africa (now Namibia), and that henceforth
the Territory came under the direct responsibility of the
United Nations.

10. The South African Government’s systematic confrontation of the world Organization makes that country a
defective Member of this United Nations club dedicated to
peaceful settlements, harmony and cordiality.

17. For this purpose, the General Assembly, in order to
assume this responsibility until such time as the population
of South West Africa acquired total independence, estabIished the United Nations Council for Namibia, composed
of representatives of eleven States which have repeatedly
encountered the hostility of the Government of South
Africa in their attempts to carry out their duties satisfactorily. That Council, in view of its inability to act, has on
various occasions turned to the Security Council-an organ
which certainly has appropriate means to enforce its
decisions, if it so wishes.

11. The Government of South Africa does not mereiy
confine itself to ignoring the resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council but also assumes the
right to pass judgement on the United Nations and hold the
Organization up to world opinion as being unequal to its
responsibilities and the performance of its obligations and
duties.
12. Document S/9204 of 14 May 1969 contains the text
of the statement made on 20 March 1969 by the South
African Minister for Foreign Affairs in that country’s
Senate, in which anyone can easily read the grave charges
made by that official against the world Organization. He
says that, instead of furthering peace, the United Nations
sometimes does exactIy the opposite, namely tries to create
feelings of enmity and to increase international tension.

18. Unfortunately,
the resolutions of the Council have
met with no better reception from the Government of
South Africa than those of the General Assembly, Its
recommendations have fallen into the pit of South African
incomprehension and in a way have served only to intensify
the bloody methods used by the Pretoria regime against the
defenceless, long-suffering and victimized population of
Namibia.

13. After reading these views of the South African
Minister for Foreign Affairs, we can easily understand the
contempt shown in that country for each and every
decision of the United Nations. How can there be obedience to the authority of an Organization if, in the opinion
of the officials of the Pretoria Government, it does nothing
but increase enmity and international tension? It is
deplorable that a State Member of the United Nations, such
as South Africa, should constantly oppose the principles
and provisions of the San Francisco Charter and the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council.

19. Heeding the sound suggestions of distinguished members of this principal organ of the United Nations, we have
never in the resohrtions adopted by the Council gone
beyond intellectual persuasion. Several representatives had
maintained that we should not resort to enforcement action
because the way still remained open for indirect measures
and diplomatic solutions. Nevertheless, the fact is that
resolution 264 (1969) has been disobeyed, despite its
cordial tone and very lofty objectives. We have therefore
reached a point where it becomes necessary to prevent the
deterioration reflected in the challenge to the authority of
the Security Council and to the United Nations in general.

14. It opposes those principles because it is pursuing a
policy which does not respect the self-determination of
peoples, because it employs racial discrimination as a means
of political domination and because in these final decades
of the twentieth century it is prolonging the worst forms of
colonialism.

20. No procedure is more likely to embarrass the Organization and weaken its prestige than the adoption of
resolutions which can be violated by any States with
impunity. The fact that for 20 years in succession a State
can violate the recommendations of the world Organization
without incurring the slightest liability is a source of
constant concern to those Member States which abide by
the principles of the San Francisco Charter in good faith.

15. It also chahenges the authority of the United Nations
because, impelled by its expansionist aims, it describes as
illegal all the acts of the world Organization which may set
2

defiant attitude of the Pretoria rkgime, we must concede
that the prospects for the future of that country are more
sombre than they have ever been.

21, If the rebelliousness and the arrogant and defiant
attitude of the South African Government were to spread,
the United Nations would very soon find itself heading
towards a serious crisis of authority which would destroy
al] the hopes placed in the system of collective security
erected on the basis of discipline and obedience to common
principles of harmohious international coexistence.

29, Prior to the adoption of its resolution 2145 (XXI) of
1966, which revoked the mandatory power of South Africa
over Namibia, the General Assembly alone had adopted
well over forty-five resolutions on the inhuman conduct of
the Government of South Africa towards Namibia.

22, The Security Council should not allow the armed
forces of South Africa to continue their illegal occupation
0f the Territory of Namibia or let the Pretoria authorities
violate human rights and irresponsibly foment racial strife,
These explosive ingredients heighten international tension
and create deep rifts between the members of the human
family.

30. My delegation is perturbed by the fact that, although
the South African Government is no longer the de jure
Government with authority to administer Namibia, it still
continues to make the work of the United Nations
impossible by refusing to let the United Nations Council for
Namibia discharge its duties with the speed and urgency
that was expected of it.

23. As the representative of Colombia-a country with a
long tradition of canti-coloni&m,
which has built its
democratic system upon the irreplaceable foundation of
equality of, opportunity and, consequently, rejecting of
discriminatory practices-I would not feel at ease if I failed
to express my most forceful protest against the reactionary
policy of the Government of South Africa or to voice the
solidarity of my peopIe with all those who, like the
indigenous people of Namibia, are struggling for their
independence and for respect for human dignity.

31. This meeting of the Security Council has been called
because of South Africa’s defiance of Security Council
resolution 264 (1969) of 20 March 1969 and many other
decisions of the United Nations.
32. The importance 6f resolution 264(1969) was that,
unlike many others preceding it, it represented a step
forward in international action against South Africa. It
clearly stated that in the event of Failure on the part of the
Government of South Africa to comply with its demands
the Security Council would meet-which is what we are
doing today-to adopt measures that would end further
defiance by the Pretoria r&ime. Resolution 264 (1969) in
its most generous terms warned the Government of South
Africa against certain specific acts of defiance and stated
unambiguously that South Africa no longer had authority
over Namibia.

24. The meeting we are now holding is the natural
consequence of Security Council resolution 264 (1969),
which in operative paragraph 8:
“Decides that in the event of failure on the part of the
Government of South Africa to comply with the provisions of the present resolution, the Security Council will
meet immediately to detcrrnine upon necessary steps or
measures in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations c’,

33. However, on the very day that resolution was adopted,
the South African Foreign Minister, in an address to the
Senate, claimed that the United Nations act of terminating
South Africa’s mandatory power over Namibia was illegal
and therefore without effect. The Minister also stated that
the Government of South Africa would continue to
exercise its authority in Namibia as before.

25. The Government of South Africa has already given its
repIy to resoIution 264 (1969) and has reiterated its
well-known and threadbare arguments on the illegality of
United Nations actions, Thus, the Security Council is now
confronted with its own promise to determine upon
necessary steps and measures that should be adopted in
accord&nce with the Charter of the Organization.

34. On the followina day, 21 March 1969, the South
African Prime Minister, Mr: ‘jrorster, supported his Foreign
Minister’s statement, in the following words:

26. My delegation, in its dual capacity as a member of the
Security Council and of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, is determined to move forward in defence of the
authority of the world Organization, as far as the Security
Council itself now decides.

“South Africa has a duty towards the inhabitants of
South West Africa. We do not plan to leave them in the
lurch, nor do we have any intention of allowing ourselves
to be prescribed to from without as to where our duty
lies and how we should acquit ourselves of it .”

27. Mr. MWAANGA (Zambia): This is the second time in
a little over four months that this Council has had to take
up the question of Namibia.3 The problem remains
unresolved. The world power complex and its economic
and military organization still form a hard crust, under
which lie the dominated black populations, with all their
misery and discontent but obviously determined to dislodge
their oppressors.

Since then the Government of South Africa has continued
its acts of aggression by creating African concentration
camps called ‘Dantustans”, thereby destroying the unity
and territorial integrity of Namibia.
35, The President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, in a letter to the President of the Security
Council, circulated as document A/AC.131/13 of 23 July
1969, again drew the attention of the Security Council to
the fact that the Government of South Africa: ‘has taken

28. This Council has made relentless efforts to solve the
question 0f Namibia; but confronted with the hardened and
3 1464th

and 1465th

meetingsof 20 March

1969.

3

fresh measures with a view to establishing ‘homelands’ in
accordance with the notorious Odendaal report which aims
at dividing the international Territory and reserving the best
lands for the exclusive use of non-Africans.” [S/9357.] Yet
operative paragraph 4 of resolution 264 (1969) was precisely intended to stop acts of this very nature. We have
now been informed that another group of eight Namibians
has been charged with offences under the brutal legislation
known as the Terrorism Act and the Suppression of
Communism Act.

my humble submission that to be poor without peace for
one’s family, to suffer the pangs of poverty in conditions of
oppression, is to be poor indeed. That is the fate of well
over 30 million people in southern Africa still under
colonial and minority domination. Political oppression is a
negation of human rights. It is a negation of the cause of
social justice and equal economic opportunity for all, To
agree to manufacture arms destined for South Africa is to
assist in the violation of human rights for the majority. To
agree to manufacture arms destined for Angola, Mozam.
bique and Guinea (Bissau) or to assist in any way in
facilitating the flow of weapons is to assist the minority
regimes in their oppressive policies. To continue to pour
out money to assist the minority regimes to strengthen
their economies without due regard to the economic and
social welfare of the majority in Namibia is also a negation
of the very principles on which the United Nations was
founded.

36. The developments I have just outlined have made it
imperative that we abandon our last illusions and truthfully
admit that more effective measures are needed to ‘solve
once and for all the problem of Namibia. It is obvious that
South Africa has tightened its ugly noose of oppression on
Namibia. It has chosen a path of defiance. The problem
before us is one of implementation of the many decisions
we have made over the past twenty years. We have tried
unsuccessfully to induce South Africa to be reasonable;
history has taught us it was impossible to do so,

40. It must be clear by now that South Africa has not
complied with our decisions and will not comply with them
unless Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter is applied.
The Wzdkoek Advertiser of 21 March 1969, published
after the adoption of Security Council resolution
264 (1969), cynically stated:

37. The stage has been set before our very eyes. Are we
going to let this racist regime, with its policy of apartheid,
continue its criminal and plunderous designs? In view of
South Africa’s callous disregard for the established norms
of justice, our problem, as I said before, is definitely one of
implementation. Continued failure to solve this problem in
favour of the oppressed people of Namibia will soon-very
soon-destroy the United Nations as an effective instrument
for the cause of peace and justice for all mankind. Already
the inaction we have displayed is dangerously undermining
the confidence of many nations, large and small, in the
principles of international morality and commitment. Op
erative paragraph 7 of resolution 264 (1969) invited all
States: “to exert their influence in order to obtain
compliance by the Government of South Africa with the
provisions of the present resolution”. That paragraph in
effect envisaged both economic and diplomatic pressure. It
was also an analysis of the apartheid policies, which derive
strength from the economic power of South Africa. It is
true that some members of the international community
have done their best to draw to the attention of the West
that the best guarantee for Western interests in southern
Africa lies not in the preservation of the status quo but in
paving the way to self-determination for all. It is our hope
that all Members of the United Nations will assist in efforts
of the international community to create a more favourable
environment for change without violence in Namibia.

“So the United Nations Security Council has once again
urged South Africa to vacate South West Africa at
once. . . . Of course its members know full well that this
will never happen; so the fact that the United States and
the Soviet Union voted together is merely of academic
interest. The United States and the Soviet Union knew
that by supporting the motion they would be making the
right noises as far as the rest of Africa and Asia are
concerned without having to make any physical effort or
get involved in yet another confusing situation in a dry
corner of this continent .”
It continued:
“Britain and France also have markets in Africa, and,
although these markets are valuable, their South African
market is larger. . , . So everybody is seen to be making
the best of an awkward situation thrust upon them by the
group of Afro-Asian countries which made the proposal.”
41. There are three points which a careful reading of that
editorial brings forth. Firstly, and perhaps most important,
it spells out clearly that South Africa will not comply with
any Security Council or General Assembly decisions now or
in the future unless the relevant articles of Chapter WI of
the Charter of the United Nations are invoked. Secondly, it
clearly shows the hypocrisy and lip service some of the
Western Powers pay to the cause of Namibian freedom.
Thirdly, it also shows that the Afro-Asian and LatinAmerican nations, genuine in their desire to see Namibia
free, have become unfortunate and unwilling victims of
imperialist intrigue and sabotage in the United Nations. For
while we preach the values of freedom and justice, the
importance of stability and peace to economic develop
merit, there appear to have developed different standards of
judgement as to the right of people to be free. These
standards of judgement are based on the colour of the
individual. In Namibia, as in the rest of southern Africa, the

38. The increasing supply of military hardware to South
Africa has only assisted in increasing its confidence in being
able to continue its suppression of the majority with
impunity. The assistance it is receiving from Western
European Powers, in both military hardware and technical
know-how, has also enabled it to increase its assistance to
rebel Rhodesia, in which it has increasingly committed
itself in military terms. It is obvious to any impartial
observer that, should the conflict between the African
majority and the rebel regime grow wider, South Africa
would take over the war in Rhodesia.
39. Rousseau once declared: “To be poor without being
free is the direst condition into which a man can fall.” It is
4

white people have clearly refused to accept the change in
world history. For them colour is the basis of power.
Colour gives expression to the rights of the white people to
enjoy the benefits of freedom, while the black m$orities
remain restricted by all forms of institutional impediments
to their development.
42. The reaction of the world has been a gloomy catalogue
of duplicity and connivance. The objectives of the white
minority r&imes are quite clear and the dangers inherent in
their approach to life do not need any search. We in
independent Africa have clearly indicated our acceptance of
a non-racial world as the best approach to the establishment
of a decent world order, decency being based on respect for
the human individual and his dignity. The responsibility
now is for the white people in Africa and indeed in the
Western hemisphere to accept the challenge: whether the
international community will be colour-blind in its approach to international problems. We regard this as the
greatest challenge of the remainder of this century,
43. My delegation regards this meeting of the Security
Council as crucial, and it is our hope that it will mark a
turning point in the history of the peoples of Namibia and
all of southern Africa. We also hope that this meeting will
permit us to rededicate ourselves to the principles by which
man can be enabled to live a fuller and more human life.
Let us build this peace, this freedom, this justice, on firm
foundations which will bear the pressure for a change in an

increasingly complex world. We are convinced that there is
no other way of dealing with this problem but to apply
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
44. May I, in conclusion, express the hope that those who
oppose our call for the application of Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations against South Africa will, in
the course of this debate, offer us a more attractive
alternative which should inescapably and effectively be
aimed at compelling South Africa to comply with the
General Assembly and Security Council decisions relative to
Namibia.
4.5. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I have no
more speakers on my list,
46. The month of July, during which I have had the
honour to preside over the Security Council, is now coming
to an end. I should like on this occasion to express my
profound gratitude to all the members of the Council and
the Secretariat for the invaluable assistance they have given
me in my task.
47. Following consultations with the members of the
Council and with the President for the month of August, it
has been agreed that the next meeting of the Council will
take place on Monday, 4 August, at 3 p.m.
The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.
