United Nations

S/PV.5185

Security Council

Provisional

Sixtieth year

5185

th meeting
Tuesday, 24 May 2005, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Løj . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

Members:

Algeria. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Zinsou
Mr. Valle
Mr. Guan Jian
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Kitaoka
Mr. Mercado
Mr. Dumitru
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Thomson
Mr. Manongi
Mr. Holliday

Agenda
The situation in Sierra Leone

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

05-35584 (E)

*0535584*

S/PV.5185

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Sierra Leone
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Sierra Leone in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Pemagbi
(Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Judge Emmanuel
Ayoola, President of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone.
It is so decided.
I invite Judge Ayoola to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Judge Emanuel Ayoola, President of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone, to whom I give the
floor.
Judge Ayoola: It is a great honour for me to
represent the Special Court for Sierra Leone today and
to have the unique opportunity to brief the Council on
the Court’s efforts to implement its mandate in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1315
(2000) of 14 August 2000 and the Agreement between

2

the United Nations and the Government of Sierra
Leone, signed on 16 January 2002.
I would like to start by thanking the SecretaryGeneral for supporting my initial request that a briefing
on the Court be held in the Council, and all Council
members for accepting the suggestion of the SecretaryGeneral.
In the course of my presentation, I will describe
the progress of the Court to date and, as requested by
the General Assembly in its resolution 58/284, I will
introduce the updated version of the Special Court’s
completion strategy, adopted on 19 May 2005 by the
Management Committee of the Special Court. I will
also outline the challenges ahead, referring in
particular to issues of funding, security and
cooperation of States.
I will briefly outline those characteristics which
make the Special Court different from the other
international tribunals.
First, the Special Court is the first international
tribunal to use “greatest responsibility” as its standard
for prosecuting alleged perpetrators. Secondly, the
Court is located in the country where the alleged
crimes took place. Thirdly, the Special Court was
established as an independent hybrid organization.
Finally, the Special Court is the first international
criminal court to be funded from the outset by
voluntary contributions.
The Special Court began its operations in July
2002. I am happy to report that, since then, the Court
has seen significant progress in many areas, in
particular in the areas of personnel, infrastructure,
prosecutorial activities and judicial activities.
The founders of the Court, the Government of
Sierra Leone and the United Nations, deliberately
sharpened the focus of the Court by limiting its
mandate to those persons who bear the greatest
responsibility for serious violations of international
humanitarian law and Sierra Leonean law committed in
the territory of Sierra Leone in the relevant period.
Of the 13 indictments issued by the Prosecutor,
11 are currently active. In December 2003, the
indictments against Foday Sankoh and Sam Bockarie
were withdrawn as a result of their deaths. Of the 11
remaining accused, nine are currently in the custody of
the Special Court in Freetown. Of the two remaining
accused, Charles Taylor, the former President of the

S/PV.5185

Republic of Liberia, has been granted refuge in
Nigeria; the leader of the Armed Forces Revolutionary
Council, Johnny Paul Koroma, also remains at large.
Although the Prosecutor has indicated the possibility of
additional indictments, their number would be
extremely limited and possibly linked to existing
indictees.
In January 2004, the Trial Chamber issued
decisions ordering three joint trials. As a result, three
joint trials, instead of nine separate trials, are currently
under way in the two chambers of the Special Court.
Two trials began in June and July 2004, respectively,
before the first Trial Chamber, which is alternating
them on a six-week basis. In February 2004, the
President of the Special Court requested a second Trial
Chamber. Judges of the second Trial Chamber were
appointed by the Secretary-General and the
Government of Sierra Leone in January 2005, and the
third trial began in March 2005.
At the time of its creation, the Special Court was
envisaged as a cost-effective and time-efficient
accountability model. It is to be remembered that, in
paragraph 12 of a letter dated 12 January 2001
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2001/40), the Secretary-General indicated that three
years would be the “minimum time required for the
investigation, prosecution and trial of a very limited
number of accused”.
As the Court enters its fourth year of operations,
the identification of a completion date for its
operations becomes essential.
As outlined in the completion strategy which was
submitted to the members of the Council, the Registry
consulted with the Office of the Prosecutor and the
Principal Defender in order to forecast a date for the
completion of the ongoing trials.
Based on the current usage of court time, as well
as actual witness hearing time, it is estimated that two
of the three ongoing trials — namely those of the Civil
Defence Forces (CDF) and the Armed Forces
Revolutionary Council (AFRC) — will be completed at
the trial chamber stage around the end of 2005 or in
early 2006. Taking into account an estimated time for
appeals of between four and six months, the appeals
could finish by mid-2006.
The completion of the Revolutionary United
Front (RUF) trial at the trial chamber stage is estimated

to take place by the end of 2006, and at the appeals
stage by early to mid-2007. The Registry, in
consultation with the other organs, is actively working
to ensure that this provisional estimate is further
improved upon and that the appeals stage is completed
by the end of 2006. It should be noted, however, that
the appeals stage will require a smaller establishment
compared to the trial stage.
In that context, I would like to underline that
events before the Trial Chambers are, in our
adversarial procedure, to a large extent, party-driven
until decisions are made by the Trial Chambers. Apart
from this, there are several factors that can influence
the progress of the trial process, ranging from the
number of witnesses to the illness or sudden
unavailability of key individuals participating in the
proceedings.
Nevertheless, the Court remains determined to
complete the trials expeditiously, without sacrificing
the integrity of the judicial process or the need for a
fair trial to the need for expedition.
Let me turn now to some key issues, all of which
have an impact on the completion strategy, namely
those of funding, security and the cooperation of States
in transferring to the Special Court those indictees who
are still at large. Funding has been one of the main
concerns of the Court since the early stages of its life.
The funding issue is being raised against the
background of the reluctance on the part of the United
Nations at the inception of the Court to embark on
another tribunal funded through assessed contributions,
in addition to the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). Resolution
1315 (2000) determined that the operations of the
Special Court would be financed through voluntary
contributions of funds, equipment and services from
States and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations. That financial arrangement was adopted
in spite of the Secretary-General’s concern that
voluntary contributions would not provide an assured
and continuous source of funding for the operations of
the Court, and that a Special Court based on voluntary
contributions would be neither viable nor sustainable.
As a compromise, however, the SecretaryGeneral asserted, in article 6 of the Agreement between
the United Nations and the Government of Sierra
Leone on the establishment of a Special Court for

3

S/PV.5185

Sierra Leone (S/2000/915, annex), his right to revert to
the Security Council should “voluntary contributions
be insufficient for the Court to implement its mandate”.
To date, the Special Court has received a total of
approximately $54 million in voluntary contributions
from 33 States, against a four-year budget of $104
million. As a result of that shortfall in voluntary
contributions, the Secretary-General reverted to the
Security Council and sought a subvention under the
United Nations programme budget for special political
missions to supplement voluntary contributions. With
the Security Council’s endorsement, the SecretaryGeneral requested the General Assembly to appropriate
up to $40 million for the Special Court. The General
Assembly, at its fifty-ninth session, authorized a
commitment authority of $20 million for the period
31 July 2004 to 30 June 2005.
The Fifth Committee is currently considering a
further commitment authority of $13 million for the
period 31 July to 31 December 2005.
I wish to emphasize that there is currently no
assurance of funds for the Special Court beyond the
end of 2005, even though the Registrar is pursuing
additional voluntary contributions from Member States
and other organizations, including the European Union.
The Special Court has recently employed a consultant
to develop a fund-raising strategy, which the Registrar
will discuss this week with the Management
Committee.
The Special Court will need funds not only to
carry it through the end of the trials, but also, after
rendering final judgements in the trials of all accused
in custody, for the purposes of transferring any
convicted persons to prisons outside of Sierra Leone
and discharging a number of residual activities that
will need to be carried out. These include the
supervision of the enforcement of sentences, if any; the
provision of support and protection to witnesses,
particularly those who are relocated from Sierra Leone
to other States; the maintenance of judicial records and
archives; and, importantly, the retained capacity to
prosecute any accused who have been indicted but who
are brought into the custody of the Special Court after
or shortly before the winding down process.
In addressing the issue of security, I take the
opportunity to reiterate that a crucial feature which
differentiates the Special Court from the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)

4

and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR), is the location of the Special Court in the
country in which the conflict took place. There are, no
doubt, crucial advantages in locating the Court in the
country where the conflict took place. However, the
location in Sierra Leone has also resulted in
considerable pressure on the operations of the Special
Court as a result of the security situation. A very large
part of the budget is devoted to security, namely 20 per
cent, of which substantial resources have to be
allocated to the protection of witnesses during the trial
and post-trial phases.
The presence of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) has been crucial in
supporting the Special Court’s mandate. I would like to
commend UNAMSIL for the efficient security
provided to the site of the Special Court. In particular,
a company of Nigerian soldiers has been providing
security since the early stages of the Special Court.
That arrangement has been of the greatest assistance.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) briefed the Council last week on UNAMSIL’s
withdrawal plan, and the Secretary-General has
highlighted, in his latest report on UNAMSIL
(S/2005/273), the fact that serious challenges continue
to be faced in building durable peace in Sierra Leone,
also in the light of the regional security situation. The
report also notes that new security arrangements for the
Special Court will need to be in place by early
November 2005.
The Registrar has informed both DPKO in New
York and UNAMSIL on the ground of our preferred
options and our financial constraints, as no budgetary
provision has been made for security post-UNAMSIL.
It is felt that the only viable option for the Special
Court is to retain an international force on site,
preferably a military force or a formed police unit from
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). To
this end, DPKO has initiated consultations with
UNAMSIL, UNMIL and the Special Court to provide
recommendations to the Security Council by July 2005
and to ensure that arrangements are in place in due
time. We hope that the Security Council will support
the continued provision of security to the Special
Court, as the Court was created as a part of the overall
effort of the international community to bring lasting
peace and stability to Sierra Leone.

S/PV.5185

Another crucial issue at this stage in the life of
the Court concerns the transfer to the Court of those
indictees who are still at large. In my capacity as
President of the Special Court, I raise this issue
without forming any opinion on the individual criminal
responsibility of any person indicted before the Special
Court, but to highlight the practical implications of
outstanding cases.

Affairs Office has been producing video summaries of
trial proceedings for the outreach efforts in the
provinces, which are screened by the court’s outreach
programme across Sierra Leone on mobile video units.
I am proud to say that the outreach efforts of the
Special Court have been regarded as a model by the
Tribunals for Rwanda and for the Former Yugoslavia,
and by the International Criminal Court.

As I have earlier mentioned in the course of this
presentation, there are currently two indictees who are
not yet in the custody of the Special Court in Freetown.
The whereabouts of Johnny Paul Koroma, who is
indicted with 17 counts, are not known. However, the
indictment remains valid until evidence of his death
may be available to the Prosecutor. The other indictee,
Charles Taylor, who resigned as President of the
Republic of Liberia in August 2003, has since that date
been granted refuge in Nigeria. On 3 March 2003, the
Prosecutor issued a 17-count indictment against him
for crimes against humanity, violations of article 3
common to the Geneva Conventions and of Additional
Protocol II and other serious violations of international
humanitarian law. His indictment was disclosed by the
Special Court on 12 June 2003. The Special Court has
continued its efforts, so far unsuccessfully, to have
Taylor transferred to Sierra Leone for the conduct of
the trial against him, and all necessary logistical and
financial arrangements are in place.

The location of the Special Court in Sierra Leone
and its hybrid nature have given prominent relevance
to the concept of legacy. The notion of the legacy of
the Special Court is embedded within the Court itself
and within the civil society community surrounding it.

A delay in the transfer and trial of Charles Taylor
will have a negative impact in terms of completion
strategy, funding and security requirements. Also, the
importance of trying Taylor and Johnny Paul Koroma
before the Special Court cannot be overemphasized
because of the strong impact that this would have on
the perception that the people of Sierra Leone and of
Africa have of the Special Court and of similar
institutions, and on the Court’s contribution to
combating the culture of impunity.
The Special Court has, since its inception,
endeavoured to play an active role in contributing to
the consolidation of peace in Sierra Leone and to the
development of the rule of law. Since the very
beginning of its operations, the Court has been aware
of the need for a strong outreach programme in order to
take full advantage of the unprecedented opportunity
presented by its location. The Outreach Section, which
is entirely composed of Sierra Leonean staff, has
undertaken a wide range of initiatives. In a particularly
innovative programme, the Special Court’s Public

Foremost, the Special Court will leave behind a
sense of justice for crimes committed during the
decade-long conflict in Sierra Leone and will engender
public awareness that criminal accountability for such
crimes is possible.
The Special Court will also leave a legacy for the
Sierra Leonean personnel who represent approximately
60 per cent of the 340 staff members. In many ways,
the Special Court will enable its Sierra Leonean
personnel in all areas of operations, and their local
counterparts, to develop their professional expertise
despite the Special Court’s lack of an explicit capacitybuilding mandate.
It is expected that when the Special Court winds
down, it will also leave behind tangible and material
resources for the Sierra Leonean legal system,
including a state-of-the-art courthouse, a modern
detention facility in full compliance with international
standards on prison accommodation and the highly
specialized collection of the Court’s library.
Globally, our vision and our mission is to leave a
legacy that will serve as a model for ensuring
accountability
for
violations
of
international
humanitarian law in other post-conflict situations, in an
expeditious and financially restrained fashion, without
compromising the observance of fair hearing in the
judicial process.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the Security
Council and, in particular, those Member States who
have funded and supported the Special Court thus far. I
would also like to express my gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his unwavering support at a time
when the United Nations has to face many varied
challenges worldwide.

5

S/PV.5185

The international community cannot afford to let
the Court fail, as such failure would send a negative
message to those struggling to combat the culture of
impunity and would undermine respect for human
rights and international law, thus emboldening any who
may plan to embark on a course of conduct that is in
deliberate violation of international humanitarian law.
With those key issues that I have outlined today
in mind, I urge the Security Council to continue to give
its wholehearted and effective support to the Special
Court in any manner it may consider appropriate, in
particular in the areas of adequate funding, the transfer
of those indictees who remain at large and maintenance
of the necessary security until the end of the operations
of the Court.
As the outgoing President of the Special Court, I
would like to end on a more personal note. I am
honoured, as are all my colleagues — judges of the
Court and the entire staff of the Court — to be a part of
the Special Court and of the determination of the
international community to end impunity. I would also
like to express my gratitude to the Secretariat’s Office

6

of Legal Affairs. I acknowledge with gratitude the
tremendous, healthy and constructive interest shown by
several non-governmental organizations in the work of
the Court.
Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to the
Special Court’s managers who are here today, and to
commend them and all the staff of the Court for helping
to achieve justice for the victims of the Sierra Leonean
conflict — sometimes under harsh circumstances — with
an innovative and true commitment.
The President: I thank Judge Ayoola for his
briefing.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I invite Council
members to a private meeting following the
adjournment of this meeting.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.
