Reeolutlona adopted on the report• of the Third Committee

4. Requests Member States to encourage the giving
of the maximum publicity to the report of the Ad H oc
Working Group of Experts within their territories;
5. Calls upon the Government of South Africa to
report to the Secretary-General on the measures taken
or envisaged in accordance with paragraph 3 above;
6. Requests the Secretary-General :
(a) To take steps to draw the widest possible public
attention to the report of the Ad Hoe Working Group
of Experts;
( b) To report to the General Assembly at its twentyfourth session on the implementation of the present
resolution.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 December 1968.

2441 (XXIII), International Year for Human
Rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1961 (XVIII) of 12 Decemher 1963 designating the year 1968 as International
Year for Human Rights,
Recalling also its resolutions 2081 (XX) of 20 December 1965, 2217 (XXI) of 19 December 1966 and
2339 (XXII) of 18 December 1967,
Having considered the report of the Secretarv-General on the measures and activities undertaken 'by the
Mem1?er Sta_tes, 1:Jnited Nations organs, specialized
agencies, reg10nal intergovernmental organizations and
national and international organizations concerned in
connexion with the International Year for Human
Rights, 27
Believing that, despite the violations of human rights
that ha".e occurred and continue to occur during the
International Year for Human Rights, many of these
measures and activities have contributed to the pron~otion of universal respect for and observance of human
nghts and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Meml~r States
~nited Nations organs, specialized agencies, regionai
mtergovernmental organizations and national and international organizations concerned for their efforts and
undertakings in connexion with the International Year
for Human Rights, in particular in giving effect to the
measures set out in the annexes to General Assembly
resolutions 2081 (XX) and 2217 A (XXI);
2. Further expresses its appreciation to the Member
S!ates, ~nited Nat ions organs, specialized agencies, regional mtergovernmental organizations and national
and international organizations concerned that have kept
the Secretary-General informed of their efforts and
undertakings in connexion with the International Year
for Human Rights and invites them to continue to supply as much relevant information as possible to the
Secretary-General to enable him to prepare a final
report 01~ the International Year for Human Rights to
he suhm1tted to the General Assembly at its twentyfourth session, as provided for in General Assembly
resolution 2339 (XXII);
3. Invites Member States ~o consider prolonging,
after the end of the I nternat1onal Year for Human
Rights and as appropriate, such activities undertaken
during the International Year as would continue to be
2 7 A/7195 and Add.1-9.

49

helpful in the promotion and protection of human rights
and fundamental freedoms ;
4. Considers that the newsletter on the International
Year for Human Rights prepared by the SecretaryGeneral has been of value and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to issue from time to time an
appropriate bulletin containing information on the activities of the United Nations and of the specialized
agenci~s in the_ field of human rights an~ a bibliography
of Umted Nauons documents and publications on that
subject.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 Decem.ber 1968.

2442

(XXIII).

International Conference on
Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2081 (XX) of 20 December
1965 on the International Year for Human Rights,
Noting with appreciation the Final Act of the International Conference on Human Rights 28 held at Teheran from 22 April to 13 May 1968,
C 011vin_ced that. th~ Conference made an important
construct1ye contribution to the cause of human rights
and that its results should be translated into effective
acti~n by States, the competent organs of the United
Nat10~1s _and its family of organizations, and other
orgamzat1ons concerned,
l. Expresses its gratitude to the Government and
people of Iran for acting as hosts to the International
Conference on Human Ri~ht?, for the excellent arrangen?ents and for the hospttahty extended to all participants;
2. Also expresses its apprecw.tion to the SecretaryGeneral, the Executive Secretary of the Conference
and_ the membe:s. of the Secretriat for effectively preparmg and serv1cmg the Conference ;
3. Expresses its satisfaction with the work of the
Conference, which constitutes a solid foundation for
further action and initiatives by the United Nations
and other interested international bodies, as well as by
the States and national organizations concerned;
4. Confirms the views of the Conference on the urgency of elimin:iting denials and violations of human
rights;
. 5. EndorsP., the Proclamation of Teheran 29 as an
nnport~nt ~nd timely . reaffirmation of the principles
embodied 111 the Umversal Declaration of Human
Rights and in other international instruments in the
field of human rights;
6. Calls upon all States and organizations concerned
to take further action with a view to the full realization
of human rights in the light of the recommendations of
the Conference;
7. Urges all States and organizations concerned
to encourage and assist all media of mass communicat\on in giving widespread publicity to the Proclamation of Teheran and the work of the Conference as
ap~r?~riate, and in lending support to the achicvem;nts,
act1nt1es and concerns of the United Nations m the
field of human rights ;
8. fovites the Secretary-General to transmit to the
c?n~petent or~ans of the United Nations and the specialized agencies tho5e resolutions or parts of resolutions
of the Conference which interest them ·
28 United Nations publication
29 Ibid., p. 3.
'

Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2.
