S/2017/963

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 November 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on progress in the implementation
of the political agreement of 31 December 2016
1.
The present report covers developments in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo since 29 September 2017 and is submitted pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2348 (2017), in which the Council requested the Secretary-General to
update it in writing every 45 days on political and technical progress in and obstacles
to the implementation of the Comprehensive and Inclusive Political Agreement
signed on 31 December 2016.

I.

Key political developments related to the implementation of
the agreement
National developments
2.
Challenges related to the implementation of the political agreement of
31 December 2016 persisted throughout the reporting period. The broad consensus
among key political actors that had underpinned the signing of the agreement
continued to erode, as clearly demonstrated by the persistent disagreement and
suspicions between the ruling presidential majority and the opposition platform , the
Rassemblement des forces politiques et sociales de la République démocratique du
Congo acquises au changement, regarding the establishment and functioning of the
National Council for Monitoring the Agreement and the Electoral Process, the
implementation of the confidence-building measures envisaged in the agreement, and
the electoral calendar.
3.
Discussions have been centred on the notion that elections will not be held before
the end of 2017, as envisaged in the 31 December 2016 agreement. This has increased
political uncertainty in a deteriorating socioeconomic, human rights and humanitarian
context and a political climate marked by the utilization of increasingly politicized
discourse by armed groups, particularly in the Kivu Provinces.
4.
Proceedings of the new ordinary session of the National Assembly, which
commenced on 15 September, have been impeded on several occasions by
disagreements between the ruling majority and the opposition on issues related to the
political and security situation and the electoral process. From 6 October to
1 November, opposition members of Parliament suspended their participation in
plenary sessions of the Assembly, with the presidential majority using incidental
motions to block no-confidence motions against the Vice Prime Minister and Minister
of the Interior and Security and the Minister of Justice, both of who m are part of the
ruling majority. On 20 October, opposition members of Parliament submitted a

17-20138 (E)

201117

*1720138*

S/2017/963

petition against the Speaker of the National Assembly, Aubin Minaku, accusing him
of
being
partial
and
undermining
parliamentary
oversight.
On
21 October, the petition was blocked through an incidental motion. The Speaker
suggested that the question of whether incidental motions could block motions of no
confidence should be resubmitted to the Constitutional Court. In 2016, the Court had
declared itself incompetent to rule on this matter, arguing that it pertained to the
internal rules and regulations of the Assembly.
5.
In meetings with civil society representatives in Kinshasa on 10 October and
opposition members on 11 October, the President of the Independen t National
Electoral Commission, Corneille Nangaa, stated that 504 days would be required to
prepare for elections once voter registration was completed in January 2018. Between
12 and 16 October, a number of civil society organizations and opposition groups ,
including the Mouvement de libération du Congo (MLC), the Rassemblement and the
Union
pour
la
nation
congolaise
(UNC)
condemned
Mr. Nangaa’s statement and urged the Commission to hold elections in 2018 shortly
after the completion of the voter registration process. The Chair of the
Rassemblement, Félix Tshisekedi, in remarks to the press, reiterated his call for a
political transition without the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Joseph Kabila, and for a restructuring of the Commission. In a letter submitted to the
National Assembly on 12 October, President Kabila urged the Assembly to consider
several bills under urgent procedure, including the draft bill on the National Council
for Monitoring the Agreement and the Electoral Process, the revised electoral law and
a bill on public order management.
6.
The second tripartite meeting among the Independent National Electoral
Commission, the National Council for Monitoring the Agreement and the Electoral
Process and the Government to evaluate the electoral process was held in Kinshasa
from 14 to 18 October. The final communiqué of the meeting, issued on 18 October,
urged the Commission and the Government to bring in-country voter registration to a
conclusion and recommended that the Commission begin the registration of members
of the diaspora for the presidential elections. The communiqué also encouraged the
Government to continue financing the electoral process; thanked external partners for
their technical and logistical support and called upon them to provide financial
support for the elections in line with the Democratic Republic of the Congo electoral
support project managed by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP);
and urged the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) to work together with the Commission in
determining logistical support requirements. In addition, the communiqué took note
of the pre-electoral phases after the completion of voter registration and requested
that the Commission publish a realistic electoral calendar, in lin e with the
Constitution and the 31 December 2016 agreement.
7.
On 23 October in Kinshasa, the President of UNC, Vital Kamerhe, issued a
communiqué announcing the party’s decision to withdraw its representative Pierre
Kangudia Mbayi, Minister of State in Charge of the Budget, from the Government.
Mr. Kamerhe stated that the decision had been made in protest of the delays in the
publication of the electoral calendar and the “inevitable postponement” of the
elections until after December 2017, in violation of the 31 December 2016 agreement.
On 24 October, in remarks to the press, Mr. Minaku questioned the rationale behind
Mr. Kamerhe’s decision, noting that UNC, as a party to the negotiations leading to
the
signing
of
the
agreements
of
18
October
and
31 December 2016, was aware of the possibility that the elections might be postponed
until after 2017. On the same date, at a press conference in Kinshasa,
Mr. Mbayi rejected the decision of UNC, arguing that his resignation could lead to a
crisis in the Government and weaken opposition ministers.
2/6

17-20138

S/2017/963

8.
On 30 October, civil society organizations staged protests in several cities across
the Democratic Republic of the Congo demanding that President Kabila step down
by December 2017. In Goma, the protests turned violent, resulting in the deaths of 3
civilians and 2 Congolese National Police officers, the wounding of 15 civilians and
4 members of national security forces, and the arrest of 37 protesters.
9.
On 5 November, at a press conference in Kinshasa, Mr. Nangaa announced that,
in keeping with the relevant provisions of the 31 December 2016 agreement,
presidential and legislative national and provincial elections would be held on
23 December 2018. He noted that the support of international partners would be
required in order to meet the deadlines for holding the elections. Mr. Tshisekedi
rejected the electoral calendar, arguing that it violated the Constitution and the
agreement, and called on the people to remove President Kabila from power. The
former Governor of Katanga Province, Moïse Katumbi, and the Secretary-General of
MLC, Eve Bazaiba, rejected the calendar, describing it as provocative and
non-consensual. Mr. Minaku called on all the political stakeholders to strive to meet
the electoral deadlines and argued that the electoral calendar published by the
Independent National Electoral Commission was in line with the agreement, which
provided for the possibility of postponing elections until after December 2017
following a joint assessment of the electoral process by the Commission, the National
Council for Monitoring the Agreement and the Electoral Process and the Government.
On 7 November, the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki
Mahamat, urged all Congolese stakeholders to play their part in ensuring strict respect
for the electoral calendar.
Regional developments
10. Regional actors continued to engage with regard to the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in support of efforts to bridge the divides among
the signatories to the 31 December 2016 agreement. From 28 September to
1 October, Mr. Mahamat visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo, meeting with
representatives of the relevant Congolese institutions and opposition members
signatories to the agreement. He encouraged his interlocutors to overcome their
disagreements in order to promote an environment conducive to a peaceful and
consensual electoral process, in line with the Constitution and the agreement. He
committed himself to strengthening the support provided b y the African Union, in
coordination with all relevant national and international actors. Mr. Mahamat ’s visit
was followed by a visit by the African Union Peace and Security Council to the
country from 22 to 26 October.
11. On 15 October, the President of South Africa, Jacob Zuma, visited Kinshasa.
Presidents Kabila and Zuma, in a joint communiqué, reiterated their support for the
decisions made at the thirty-seventh summit of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC). In the final communiqué of the summit, SADC Heads of State
and Government had, inter alia, taken note of the requirement to postpone elections
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo until after December 2017.
12. On 19 October, the Heads of State and Government of the countries signa tory
to the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region held the eighth high-level meeting of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism in Brazzaville. The final communiqué of the meeting noted
that, despite delays in its implementation, the 31 December 2016 political agreement
remained the viable framework for ending the crisis in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and underlined the need to implement the confidence -building measures
envisaged therein. The communiqué commended the significant progress achieved in
the voter registration process, underscored the need for the early publication of a
consensual electoral calendar and an electoral budget, and encouraged the
17-20138

3/6

S/2017/963

Government to ensure the adoption of the requisite electoral legislation. In addition,
it welcomed the decision of SADC to appoint a special envoy to support the electoral
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and also welcomed the outcome of
the meeting on the country that had been held on the margins of the United Nations
General Assembly on 19 September.

II.

Key developments related to the implementation of the agreement
Electoral developments
13. The Independent National Electoral Commission continued to make progress
towards the finalization of voter registration with the start of registration in the
remaining areas, namely, Kasai and Kasai Central Provinces and two territories of
Lomami Province. MONUSCO and UNDP continued to provide support for the
process.
14. As at 24 October, 60 per cent of registration centres were operational
(registration centres have to remain open for 90 days). As at 10 October, the
Independent National Electoral Commission had reported the registration of more
than 42 million potential voters countrywide. Women represent 47 per cent of the
currently registered electorate.
Restrictions on political space and violence as they relate to the implementation
of the agreement in the electoral context
15. MONUSCO continued to document violations of civil and political rights as
well as fundamental freedoms during the reporting period. In September 2017, the
United Nations Joint Human Rights Office documented 112 violations, bringing to
708 the number of human rights violations documented since the beginning of 2017
with regard to restrictions of democratic space. State agents continue to be responsible
for most of the most recent violations, including 52 by the Congolese National Police,
27 by the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 10 by the National
Intelligence Agency and 9 by political/administrative authorities. Violations consist
mainly of arbitrary arrests and detentions and violations of the rights to the freedoms
of opinion, expression and peaceful assembly. Seventy-seven human rights defenders
and six journalists were victims of human rights violations. Most of the perpetrators
of such violations continue to benefit from impunity, with no significant follow -ups
or convictions in these cases recorded.
Confidence-building measures
16. Progress achieved in the implementation of the confidence-building measures
remained insufficient. On 22 and 23 October, in the context of the visit of Felix
Tshisekedi to Lubumbashi, Haut-Katanga Province, the Congolese National Police and
the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo arrested approximately 80
militants, including 6 women and 50 members of the Union pour la démocratie et le
progrès social, at the headquarters of the opposition party in that city. The Mayor of
Lubumbashi had not authorized any activity in relation to the visit, including meetings
with local militants of the Rassemblement. In a press release issued on 23 October, my
Special Representative condemned those arrests, expressed deep concern about the
ongoing acts of intimidation against opposition members, called for the immediate and
unconditional release of those arbitrarily arrested, and reminded the Congolese
authorities of their obligation to respect the fundame ntal freedoms and civil and
political rights of all persons, in accordance with the Constitution and the international
obligations of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. On 24 October, all those arrested
were released, including 32 persons on bail.

4/6

17-20138

S/2017/963

17. The Congolese authorities continue to enforce the general ban on opposition
demonstrations that has been in place since September 2016. Such prohibitions were
strengthened during the reporting period in several localities, including Bunia, Ituri
Province; Mbuji-Mayi, Kasai Oriental Province; and Lubumbashi. On
29 September, authorities in Ituri Province prohibited a demonstration by the civil
society platform Collectif d’actions de la société civile with respect to the publication
of the electoral calendar. On 30 September, the Congolese National Police arbitrarily
arrested 49 members of the Collectif in Goma and Kisangani who had been gathering
in front of the Independent National Electoral Commission. The 16 persons arrested
in Kisangani were released after being detained for 12 hours by the Congolese
National Police, while the 33 persons arrested in Goma were released on 3 October.
As at 27 October, 133 political prisoners and prisoners of opinion were held in
detention facilities across the country, more than double the number of individuals in
the same category detained a year ago.

III.

Good offices efforts for the implementation of the agreement and
regional developments
18. In pursuit of his good offices mandate in support of the implementation of the
31 December 2016 agreement, my Special Representative continued to hold separate
meetings with key stakeholders, including the Government, the National Council for
Monitoring the Agreement and the Electoral Process, the Independent National
Electoral Commission, the Rassemblement, the Group of Seven, the presidential
majority and civil society. My Special Representative also continued to engage with
representatives of the African Union, the European Union, the International
Organization of la Francophonie, SADC, the Economic Community of Central
African States and key regional actors. Discussions revolved around ways to promote
the implementation of the agreement to pave the way for the holding of peaceful and
credible elections as soon as possible. In particular, discussions were focused on the
need for the swift publication of the electoral calendar, the adoption of the requisite
legislation on elections and the National Council, the funding of the electoral process,
the implementation of confidence-building measures, respect for fundamental
freedoms, and the need for enhanced coordination within the international community
in support of the electoral process.

IV.

Observations
19. Despite the mounting levels of disagreement between its signatories regarding
its implementation, the political agreement of 31 December 2016 remains the
framework guiding the political transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
This was most recently reaffirmed at the meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism held in Brazzaville and continues to be acknowledged by Congolese
interlocutors across the political spectrum. At this critical juncture, with the end of
2017 a few weeks away, a renewed political commitment is required to rebuild trust
among all political actors, and between the political class and Congolese citizens, in
order to identify a consensual way forward, in line with the agreement and the
Constitution. I remind the national authorities of the great responsibility that they bear
in demonstrating continued political will and ensuring that the agreement is respected.
The opposition has an important role in finding solutions to the political crisis and
preserving stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
20. I welcome the efforts of regional partners, including the African Union and
SADC, to promote inclusive dialogue on the implementation of the political
agreement. I encourage regional actors to enhance their engagement in or der to help

17-20138

5/6

S/2017/963

all Congolese stakeholders overcome their differences and ensure that the Congolese
authorities prepare the ground for credible elections, in a timely manner, in line with
the agreement and the aspirations of the Congolese people.
21. I have taken note of the calendar published by the Independent National
Electoral Commission on 5 November 2017. While it is regrettable that the crucial
polls have been postponed, yet again, I reaffirm the availability of the United Nations
to work in coordination with the African Union, the European Union, the International
Organization of la Francophonie and SADC to establish an independent team of
experts to provide technical support to the Commission as required in support of this
process. I call on the Government, the presidential majority and the opposition to play
a constructive role in meeting the deadlines set out in the electoral calendar.
22. I welcome the progress achieved on voter registration and urge the Independent
National Electoral Commission to bring this process to a successful conclusion within
the earliest possible time frame. The opening of the remaining registration centres in
the Kasai region as soon as possible will be a key step towards completing this process
in a timely manner. I call upon the Government and Parliament to ensure the adoption
of the electoral legislation and urge the Government to continue to disburse the
necessary financial allocations to the Commission in a timely manner. I also
encourage the international community to provide adequate support for the electoral
process.
23. I urge the Government to fully implement the confidence -building measures set
out in the 31 December 2016 political agreement, and to respect all the political rights
and freedoms of Congolese citizens enshrined in the Congolese Constitution and in
accordance with the international obligations of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Since the signing of the agreement, 64 political prisoners have been released.
However, I am deeply concerned that Congolese citizens continue to be arbitrarily
arrested and illegally detained for expressing their political opinions. At least 133 of
them remain in detention for such reasons. I stress the importance of releasing all
persons detained arbitrarily, including human rights defenders and opposition
members. I am concerned that journalists, political opponents and civil society
activists remain subject to intimidation and violence in relation to their political
activities.
24. I call on the Government to ensure that all Congolese citizens, regardless of
their political affiliation, can participate freely in public affairs and fully exercise
their human rights and fundamental freedoms, in particular the freedoms of
expression and peaceful assembly. I also call on the relevant authorities to ensure that
all violations of such rights and freedoms are brought to an immediate halt and that
the perpetrators are held to account. Respecting fundamental rights and freedoms, and
combating impunity, are of paramount importance to create the conditions necessary
for the holding of peaceful and credible elections.
25. Bringing the electoral process to a successful conclusion in a consensual and
timely manner and in line with the 31 December 2016 agreement is essential to
preserve the gains achieved in the Democratic Republic of the Congo over the past
decade. I therefore call on all Congolese stakeholders to rebuild trust among
themselves, instil confidence in the political process and place the interests of the
country and the people at the forefront. As the end of the year approaches, it is crucial
that a consensual way forward, which places peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo at the centre, be found without further delay.

6/6

17-20138
