UNITED NATIONS

i‘7-.,.

SECURITY COUNt%!fFiARy
THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2460’”

MEETING:

NEW

2 AUGUST

1983

YORK

CONTEtiTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2460)
Adoption of the agenda

1

....................................

...............................................

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Morocco
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15481);
Letter dated 9 November 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Niger to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15483);
Letter dated 8 February 1983 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15599);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15764);
Letter dated 27 July 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Democratic
Yemen to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15890) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

WPV.2460

.

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2460th
Held

in New York

President; Mr. Luc de La BARRE
(France).

MEETING

on Tuesday,

Letter dated 8 Februarv 1983 from the ChargC d’affair-es a. i. of the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15599);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Rep&
sentative of Qatar to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15764);
Letter dated 27 July 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Democratic Yemen to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
_ (S/15890)

de NANTEUIL

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2460)
1. Adoption
2.

2 August 1983, at 10 a.m.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with decisions taken at earlier meetings on
this question [2#OZst, 2412th to 2414th. 2438th, 2457th and
2459th meetings], I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Cuba, Djibouti,
Democratic Yemen, Egypt, the German Democratic
Republic, Greece, India, Iraq, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Kuwait, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malaysia, .Mali, Matuitania,
Morocco, Niger, Oman,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, Sudan, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, Yemen and Yugoslavia to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber; I invite the
representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) to take a place at the Council table.

of the agenda.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15481);
Letter dated 9 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Niger to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15483);
Letter dated 8 February 1983 from the Charge
d”affaires a. i. of the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15599);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Qatar to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/l 5764);
Letter dated 27 July 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Democratic Yemen to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15890).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zari,f (Afghanistan), Mr. Sahnaun (Algeria), Mr. Ai-Sabbagh (Bahrain),
Mr. Wasiuddin (Bangladesh), Mr. Caballero Rodriguez
(Cuba), Mr. Houjbne (Djibouti). Mr. AI-Ashtal (Democratic
Yemen), Mr. Khahl (Egypt), Mr. Ott (German Democratic
Republic), Mr. Dountas (Greece), Mr. Krishnan (India),
Mr. Mohammad (Iraq), Mr. Rajaie-Khorassani (Islamic
Republic of Iran), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait). Mr. Fakhoury
(Lebanon), Mr. Burwin (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr.
ZainaI Abidin (Malaysia), Mr. Traore (Mali), Mr. Ouid
Hamody (Mauritania), Mr. Mrani Zentar (Morocco), Mr.
Oumarou (Niger), Mr. Ali (Oman): Mr. Al-Boainin (Qatar),
Mr. Zowawi (Saud? Arabia), Mr. San-h (Senegal), Mr.
Madar (Somalia), Mr. Eljaki (Sudan), Mr‘ El-Fattal
(Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Lessir (Tunisia), Mr. Gdkce
(Turkey), Mr. AI-Qasimi (United Arab Emirates), Mr. Sallam (Yemen) and Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber; Mr.
Terzi (Palestine Liberation Organization) took a place at
the Council table.

The meeting was called to order at IO.55 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenclh was adopted.
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15481);
Letter dated 9 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Niger to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15483);

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
1

received a letter from the representative of Israel in which
he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the question on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite him to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. BIum (Inael) took
a pIace at the Council table
3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
first speaker is the representative of Saudi Arabia. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
4. Mr. ZOWAWI
(Saudi Arabia) (interpretation from
Arabic): Mr. President, I wish to thank you and the
members of the Council for having afforded me the
opportunity to participate in the debate on the item now
under discussion. I congratulate you, Sir, on your assump
tion of the presidency of the Council for this month and
express our full confidence that you will guide the Council’s proceedings on this subject in which we are keenly
interested with your well-known
competence and
integrity.
5. At a time when we are looking forward to the iust
and effective fulfilment of the Council’s tasks under your
presidency, we want to express our appreciation for the
competence with which the work of the Council was
accomplished under your predecessor during the month
of July.
6. One may well wonder what inspires the policies of the
Israeli entity-this
entity that was created by Zionist
organizations on the territory of Arab Palestine. Indeed,
in all the annals of history there is nothing to compare
with what is taking place in the occupied Arab territories,
even during the worst ,of the defunct repugnant colonial
era. At a time when the colonialist countries had already
embarked on the liquidation of their colonies in occupied
countries following the Second World War and the
United Nations was established, the racist Zionist movement managed to usurp the homeland of another people,
displacing it and setting up a foreign State on its ruins.
Not content with its pm-1967 achievements, ‘the Israeli
entity has since pursued a process of planned expansion
and the oppression of the Palestinian people in the occupied territories for one single undisputed purpose: to’obliterate what remains of the Palestinian people, expropriate
their homeland, displace the inhabitants and Judaize the
Arab territories and resources in such a way that these
innocent people have had no option but to abandon
hearth and home and join the 2 million refugees who have
been living for scores of years in a state of displacement
and misery outside their homeland, in camps and neighbourhoods that, even in the Diaspora, have not been
spared the ravages of Israeli campaigns of destruction and
extermination.
7. As for the occupied Arab territories, the Israeli
regime is carrying out a devilish design to usurp them

from their Arab owners and build settlements for the
Jews with a view to the de facto annexation of those territories to Israel, in contravention of the Charter of the
United Nations and relevant resolutions of the Organization, especially Council resolution 242 (1967), and of the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, 12 August 1949,’ and all other
relevant international laws and norms. It has resorted to
lying, cheating and the falsification of facts. That has been
the hallmark of the Zionist movement since its inception.
Israel resorts to lame excuses and flimsy pretexts for all its
measures, but has yet to convince the international
community.
8. The international community is shaken daily bv. fresh
criminal acts of aggression again& the Arab populaiion of
the occupied territories and the neighbouring Arab countries. The latest incidents took place in the Arab city of
Al-Khalil where the Jews opened fire and hurled grenades
at the Islamic University of Al-Khalil during classes, killing 3 students and injuring more than 36. During that
attack, the Jewish aggressors wore masks, not for fear of
punishment by the Israeli authorities, but to enable the
Israeli authorities, who did not want to reveal who were
the perpetrators of those terrorist acts of aggression, to’
cast doubt on the identity of the perpetrators and raise the
possibility that the aggression was carried out by the
Arabs themselves. The Israeli authorities are oblivious to
the fact that the Palestinian Arab people in the occupied
territories are totally defenceless. There is not a single
incident in which the Arab population has used weapons
against the occupation authorities. The only weapons
available in Al-Khalil and the entire West Bank are those
provided by the Israeli authorities to the Jewish settlers in
order to terrorize the Arab population, whose land and
natural resources have been usurped in broad daylight
and in full view of everyone. The Israeli authorities do not
want to admit that the only Arab weapons are the stones
that have sometimes been used by students as a result of
the campaign of oppression and terrorism and the arbitrary measures imposed by the occupation authorities and
the Jewish settlers. The Israeli authorities also forget that
Al-Khalil and most of the towns of Gaza and the West
Bank are under constant curfew. This curfew is imposed
only on defenceless Arab towns and villages and never on
the armed Jewish settlements. Thus the Jewish settlers can
rampage through Arab areas, setting fires, engaging in
acts of sabotage and committing murder, as had hap
pened earlier in the vegetable market and the central station in Al-Khalil.
9. It is abundantly clear that the murderers who took
part in the incidents at the Al-Khalil
University are
fanatic Jews who were armed and encouraged by the
Israeli authorities. Did we not see the settlers occupy part
of Al-Haram Al-Ibrahami Al-Sharif in 1968, with the sup
port of those authorities? And did not the Jews establish
certain settlements and Jewish neighbourhoods inside and
outside Al-Khalil and confiscate Arab lands? Israel claims
that the arms it supplies to the Jews in the occupied Arab
territories are for self-defence and not aggressionoblivious to the fact that the presence of those settlers in
the occupied territories per se constitutes an act of aggres-

IS. The Council is once again seized of a situation that
has been a burden on the conscience of the international
community for many years now. Ir. the larger context of
an expansionist policy, the Zionist Government of Israel
has on a systematic basis resorted to the most inhuman
and barbaric means in order to tiplement
its designs
aimed at altering the demographii composition of the
Palestinian and other Arab territties it has occupied
since 1967, thus paving the way for their final annexation.

sion the victims of which are the Arabs. Self-defence is a
right of the victim, not of the aggressor. The Israeli logic
is curious. It shotis a split personality in Israel and in
Zionism.’ It is noteworthy in this respect that a limited
number of Israelis have started to take independent positions, expressing freely certain points of view; among
them are Mrs. Yehudit Karp, tiho resigned her chairmanship of the Commission to investigate the practices of
Jewish settlers because she was convinced that the Israeli
authorities encouraged the settlers to commit terrorist
acts. But the existence of such a Commission is no source
of security because the governing machinery continues to
breed a feeling of enmity and hostility, as well as the idea
of expansion and- displacement advocated by Meir
Kahane in order to promote a Greater Israel free of
goyin-non-Jews.

16. Two main practices have been instrumental in carrying out the ambitious plans of the Zionist entity. The first
is to settle as many Jewish families as possible in the
newly established settlements and in the Palestinian town
and villages, and the second is to evacuate as many
members of the Palestinian and Arab indigenous population as possible from those territories, forcing them to
seek refuge in the neighbouring Arab countries.

10. We call on the international community .once more
not to permit the Israeli authorities to disregard United
Nations restilutions that express the will of the international community. It is not in the interest of the United
Nations or of States, especialiy the big Powers, to apply
different yardsticks to international conduct. It is not at
all admissible to consider certain resistance movements as
legitimate governments when they wage “wars of liberation” and at the same time to cogsider the Palestinians
who are struggling against the arbitrary aggression of
Israel as “terrorists”. This discrimination in international
criteria will undermine the international Organization
and produce excesses that may also lead to a world war.

17. According to the norms and principles of international law, and in particular the Gepeva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,
of 12.August 1949,’ any attempt by the occupying Power
to alter the physical character, demographic composition
and institutional structure of territories under its occupation are strictly prohibited, and situations resulting from
these attempts are considered illegal and void of any
validity.
18. When considering the same issue in 1968, the Council, by its resolution 252 (1968), proclaimed illegal the
settlement policy of the Government of Israel. This pronouncement was more recently confirmed in resolution
465 (1980) of the Council.

11. As for the latest events in Al-Khalil, we urge the
Council to condemn the Israeli acts in such an explicit
way as to leave no doubt about them and to declare null
and void all settlement measures taken by Israel..There
should be a statement to the effect that the Council would
be forced to take the necessary appropriate measures, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, to
implement its resolutions. We hasten to say that what has
happened in the occupied Arab territories would not have
taken place had the Council assumed its responsibilities
under the Charter. We have urged that repeatedly in
order to safeguard the Charter and for the sake of international place and security.

19. The Zionist regime, fully assured of the support of
all kinds it receives from its Western friends, and particularly.from its patron, the United States, has so far not.
only failed to pay the slightest attention to the.repeated
calls of the international community but has even in
recent years intensified implementation
of its heinous.
schemes for a Greater Israel. An ever-increasing number
of incidents have brought shock and horror to peace- and
justice-loving humanity. That is why we do not consider
the recent escalation of terror and violence against the
Palestinian Arab population of Al-Khalil as an isolated
event. It is but a ring in the chain of the terrorization of
the civilian population of the occupied territories to the
extent of forcing them to abandon their land and property
and to seek shelter in neighbouring Arab countries.

12. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfiom
French): The
next speaker is the representative df Afghanistan. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
13. Mr. ZARIF (Afghanistan): Mr. President, I should
like to thank you, and through you the members of the
Council; for having kindly invited my delegation to participate in the discussions on the situation in the occupied
Arab territories. Allow me also to extend to you, Sir, our
felicitations on your assumption of the presidency for the
month of August. We are certain that your outstanding
qualities, both personal and professional,, will guide the
deliberations of the Council. We wish you every success in
the fulfilinent of your duties.

20. The military occupatidn authorities and the Zionist
settlers armed by them have not fallen short of the use of
any and all horrendous measures that could facilitate
attainment of their goals. Consequently, the populations
and the locally elected authorities of fhe occupied Palestinian Arab teiritorie‘s have been subjected’to constant
acts of harassment, repression and intimidation.
These
acts have recognized ho boundaries, moral or otherwise.
Private houses and other properties, local markets;public
facilities and, in particular, schools and universities have
served as permanent targets of military and settler vigilante attacks. Even highly sacred Muslim placei such as

14. May I also pay a tribute to your predecessor for the
manner in which he conducted the work of the Council
during the month of Juii.
,
3

mosques and shrines have not been exempted from these
acts of vandalism and terror.

to ensure implementation
of its resolutions. It should be
noted that the main obstacle to implementation
by the
Council of its previous decisions and relations is the abuse
of the veto power by the United States. This position of
the United States has totally paralysed the Council and
prevented it from taking effective action; therefore, the
United States bears full responsibility for the continuation
of the tragic situation in the occupied territories.

21. During all of-last month there were repeated manifestations of these acts in the city of Al-Khalil and some
other towns in the occupied Palestinian territories.
Houses were attacked, Palestinian-owned buses, cars and
shops were set ablaze, electricity and power supplies were
cut off, the sanctity of mosques was violated and the University of Hebron was a target of grenade and gas-bomb
attacks, and students and teachers were shot at. Similar
incidents occurred in Nablus and Bir Zeit. During the
shootings at Al-Khalil University of students and professors, 3 Palestinian Arabs died and more than 30 were
wounded. The military Government of the occupying
Power stood by and did virtually nothing to prevent the
armed settler vigilantes engaging in these cynical attacks.

27. The people of the world, and first and foremost the
people of Palestine and other ‘occupied territories, have
placed their confidence and hope in the Council and
expect it to assume its responsibilities under the Charter.
Peace, justice and tranquillity cannot be restored to the
region unless an end is put to the aggression, occupation
and expansionism perpetrated by the Zionist regime.
28. The PRESIDENT
(interpretatiunfrom
French): The
next speaker is the representative of Turkey. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

22. The Zionist authorities have implied that the recent
spiral of violence against the Palestinians was justified
because of an attack on a Jewish settler. Reports from
different sources have indicated that the wounded settler,
who was attacked by unidentified persons, was not
attended by the Israeli military, which thought he was an
Arab. It is established that had the wounded person been
promptly taken to the hospital, he would have been
saved.

29. Mr. GGCE (Turkey): At the outset, I should like to
take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency for the current month. Your
outstanding skills and abilities are well known to us all,
and we are confident that the deliberations of the Council
will once again benefit greatly from your wisdom and
experience.

23. Whatever the pretext for the Zionist elements, the
main cause of violence and bloodshed is the stubborn
denial of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian and
Arab peoples and occupation of their land by Israel. It is
evident that more and more blood will be shed and people
will die unless a comprehensive, just and lasting peace is
achieved in the Middle East that would ensure total withdrawal of Israeli forces from all occupied Palestinian and
Arab territories and ensure effective exercise by the Palestinian people of their national rights, including the right
to establish their national State in Palestine under the
leadership of the PLO.

30. I should also like to express our deep appreciation to
your predecessor, the representative of China, for the skill
he displayed in guiding the Council during the month of
July.
31. The Council is addressing itself once again to the
tragic situation in occupied Arab territories created by the
persistence of Israel in pursuing policies of annexation,
illegal settlements and endless and increasingly brutal
repression.

24. The international community has produced several
versions of such a settlement, notably the six-point Soviet
proposal [see S/15403, annex], the Fez plan [see S/15510,
annex] and numerous resolutions of the General Assembly. Thanks to the flexibility of the PLO, the chances for
achieving a settlement would have been tangible had they
not been torpedoed by the intransigence of Israel and its
overseas supporters.

32. We have learned with trepidation of the shocking
occurrences in the city of Al-Khalil, which are yet another
manifestation of the fact that Israel is adamant in the
pursuit and execution of policies of repression in the Arab
territories under its occupation, thus further aggravating
the plight of the Arab Palestinian people and the gravity
of the situation in the Middle East. The ever-increasing
number of Israeli settlements in the occupied Arab territories which have been expropriated and taken over by the
Israeli authorities is particularly alarming. Arab Palestinians are systematically being deprived of their land and
means of livelihood. The Israeli aim appears to be the
liquidation of the Palestinian cause and of the Palestinian
people’s struggle for national liberation.

25. In violation of the relevant resolutions of the Council and the General Assembly, Israel has continued with
its policy of settlements in the occupied territories. During
the past two months alone, three new settlements have
been established and more than 30,000 dunums of land
belonging to the Palestinian Arabs have been conf&cated.

33. It is perhaps not necessary here to elaborate further
on Israel’s record in the occupied territories, which is well
known to us all. I should like to reiterate that Turkey, as a
country which has always taken a resolute stand against
the illegal policies of Israel in the occupied Arab territories, is convinced that to be just, lasting and comprehensive the solution to the question of Palestine must, as a

26. Unless the Council adopts effective measures to
force Israel to cease forthwith its illegal activities, there
will be an increasing danger of outbursts of violence and
armed clashes. The Council should, in our view, explore
ways and means, including the adoption of measures
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,-.
4

of the General Assembly. We have also set forth our
views at meetings of those United Nations committees
that deal with issues related to Israeli activities and their
most serious consequences and implications. We have
more than once spoken strongly for the implementation
of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including its right to self-determination and to the establishment
of its own independent State. We have more than once
emphasized that the total, unconditional withdrawal of
Israel from the occupied Arab territories, including Arab
Jerusalem, is one of the prerequisites for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East. We have
more than once pointed out that the’ Israeli policy of
aggression, territorial expansion, annexation and illegal
settlements, pursued in flagrant violation of international
law, can only add to the increase of tension in the powerkeg situation in the Middle East, which threatens a new
conflagration at any moment.

minimum, entail the withdrawal of Israel from all Arab
and Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, including
Jerusalem, and allow the full exercise of the inalienable
rights and legitimate aspirations of the Arab Palestinian
people, including the right to establish its own indepen:
dent State. Without Israel’s withdrawal from the occupied
Arab Palestinian territories and the return of the Palestinians to their homeland there can be no solution to the
Palestinian problem. Turkey also firmly believes that it is
the duty of the international community to remind Israel
of its responsibilities under the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,
of 12 August 1949,’ in the territories under its occupation.
Similarly, it is incumbent on the Council to take appropriate measures to prevent Israel from further violating the
rules and norms of international law and the inalienable
rights of the Arab Palestinian people.
34. It is most denlorable that Israel is resolute in nursuing policies of annexation, of creating illegal settlements
and of repression. The Government of Turkey calls on
Israel once again to put an end to this policy. Failure to
do so will result in further aggravating the situation in the
occupied territories and render the realization of a lasting
peace and security in the region unfeasible. In this context, Turkey offers its full co-operation to the Council in
its efforts aimed at finding a just, comprehensive and lasting solution to the question of Palestine.
A

.

40. It goes without saying that this policy poses a serious
threat to peace and security not only in the region, but
also in the world at large, for the consequences for the
tensions in the Middle East are on a much broader scale
than the regional scale. The entire world awaits a peaceful
settlement there.
41. Yet, as is known, for years the policy of the Israeli
authorities has made it impossible to fmd a just and lasting solution to the crisis. It is also known that Israel alone
could not afford to play the role of the spearhead of
aggression. In its actions, however, it can fully rely on
those forces which, in the escalation of tension in the
Middle East, see the possibility of attaining their objectives. Israel knows that its war machine enjoys the unrestricted and unquestioning support and assistance of its
strategic ally, the United States, which looks earnestly
towards a military buildup in the region and towards tensions and aggression that serve its objectives. Advertising
piecemeal approaches and separatist agreements, its foreign policy actively enhances its _strategic goals.
-.

35. Mr. KRYSTOSIK
(Poland): At the very outset, Sir,
permit me to congratulate you warmly on your assump
tion of the presidency for the month of August. We are
confident that your experience and abilities will contribute’to the efficiency and fruitfulness of our deliberations
and that the Council will succeed in discharging its important duties.
36. At the same time, I wish to express my sincere appreciation to the outgoing President, Mr. Ling Qing, of the
People’s Republic of China, for his diplomatic skill and
dedication and for the exemplary manner in which he
guided our proceedings in the month of July.

42. Our firm point of view on the situation in the Middle
East is well known. There is no need to repeat it at length
once again. It is in the records of the Council, as well as in
the documents of other bodies of the _United
Nations.
..- -

37. May I also take this opportunity to join in welcoming to the Council the new representative of the Netherlands, Mr. van der Stoel, and to wish him success in his
work.

43. However, my delegation cannot but strongly stress
anew that the present resumed consideration by the Council of the situation in the occupied territories takes place
under extremely grave circumstances. The previous cases
of repression and the use of force and terror which were
considered not so long ago are still fresh in our memory.
The smoke from the previous shootings has barely cleared
when yet another act of violence against the Palestinian
Arabs has been committed.

38. For many years, the situation in the occupied Arab
territories has been on the agenda of the Council. For a
long time now, the international community has been witnessing a constant deterioration in the situation there as a
result of the policy of the Israeli occupation authorities.
The world has been seeing the enormous sufferings of the
Palestinian people. It has been watching the steps taken
by the aggressor in defiance of the Charter of the United
Nations, of resolutions adopted by the Council and the
General Assembly, of the provisions of international law
and of world public opinion.

44. The constant recurrence of acts of brutal terror and
violence, such as the recent ones in the city of Hebron,
should be a grim and tragic reminder that the Council
should fulfil its responsibility concerning the Arab and
Palestinian population in the West Bank and other occupied territories. The Council should take effective and
urgent action. It should very forcefully declare the illegal-

39. Poland’s position concerning the Israeli policies of
aggression and creeping annexation has been presented
many times, both in this chamber and from the rostrum
5

ity and inadmissibility of Israeli settlements, which- have
become a deadly weapon -in the p&y of annexation
pursued by the Israeli authorities.

ent arrogance and its flouting of the purposes of the Charter, the principles of international law, the resolutions of
the United Nations and all moral norms and rules. This
meeting is but a link in a chain of meetings of the Council
that Israel has done everything possible to thwart.

45. One need not argue that the expanded construction
of new Israeli settlements, the expropriation of Arab property to carry out these projects and the application of such
methods as: the .demolition and sealing of dwellings and
commercial premises constitute the integral parts of a policy directed at changing the legal, physical and demographic status of the occupied Arab territories. Proof of
Israeli expansionism can be seen in .its unilateral annexation of the eastern part of Jerusalem, a deliberate coloniration effort leading to a -gradual economic and
administrative integration of the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip with Israel, and by the extension of the Israeli juridi;
cial and administrative system over the Golan Heights, as
well as by the dubious practices in the southern parts of
Lebanon. These practices, accompanied by various forms
of repression and terror, permit us to nurture no illusions
as to the true intentions of the occupation authorities.
,
46. In the opinion of the Polish delegation, the provisions foreseen in the draft resolution [S/ZS895J constitute
the least that the Council can do to live up to the requirements of the grave situation in the territories under Israeli
occupation and to meet the expectations of the -intemational community-that
an end be put to the process of
deterioration of this situation -before the policy of fails
accomplis in annexation of Arab territories achieves its
sinister long-range objectives.

52. As a result of the absolute political support given to it
by a super-Power, a permanent member of the Council,
Israel continues to tighten its grip over the population of the
occupied West Bank. Thatsupportalso frustrates the will of
the absolute majority of the States Members of the United
Nations as embodied in innumerable resolutions in support
of Arab rights, including the right of the Palestinian people
to self-determination.
Those resolutions condemn the
Israeli occupation and consider as null and void all the
measures taken by Israel to annex the Golan Heights and
Arab Jerusalem and to build Jewish settlements.
53. As all the members of the Council know, however,
Israel’s ambitions are focused on Arab territories emptied
of their indigenous inhabitants. The Palestinians have
refused to submit to repressive and oppressive measures,
to the confiscation of lands and to thelimitation
of their
freedoms; that is, they have refused to accept the artificial
reality of gradual Judaization, which the occupation
authorities are attempting to impose on them. Therefore,
the leaders of Israel. have been possessed by an insane,
blood-thirsty determination,
unprecedented in modem
history since the fall of nazism, physically to liquidate the
Palestinian people.
54. We do not think that this obvious conclusion is an
excessive one. What other explanation is there of this ferocious campaign being carried out by armed Jewish settlers
against defenceless Palestinians in the West Bank? What.
other explanation is there of the spoliation of schools and
universities, of indiscriminate killing, of desecration of the
holy places and houses of prayer in the Holy City of
Al-Quds and other Arab cities, of the confscation ,of
lands, of the demolition of houses, and of the dismissal of
mayors and elected members of municipal councils-or,
if deportation does not work, of their murder? That is
only part of the list of Israel’s barbaric Israeli crimes, with
which United Nations documents are replete.

47. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Qatar. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
48. Mr. AL-BOAININ
(Qatar) (interpretation from
Arabic): It gives me pleasure at the beginning of my statement, Sir, to express sincere congratulations to you on
your assumption of the presidency for the month ,August.
I am confident that, with your experience and ability and
under your guidance, the Council’s proceedings will
succeed.

55. Worse still, the, determination of the Israelis to liquidate the Palestinians.at any price has led to various barbaric campaigns aimed at harming the population of the
.West Bank and Gaza, through both military and political
manoeuvres. To achieve its designs, Israel did not hesitate
to ravage Lebanon and to occupy its land, as it is still
doing. Its leaders did not deny that their main purpose
was. to eliminate the Palestinians. The proof of that-if
proof were needed-is the ferocious bombardment of Beirut and the .camage at Sabra and Shatila and the~continuing massacres in occupied southern .Lebanon, the West
Bank and the Gaze Strip.

49. I also wish, Sir, -to take this opportunity to express
appreciation of the competence that your predecessor, the
representative of China, displayed in directing the work of
the Council in July.
50.. The convening of, the Council in the wake of ‘the
bloody events that befell the occupied Arab city of AlKhalilis in itself a significant indication that the situation
in the occupied Arab territories has deteriorated in such a
way as to jeopardize international peace and security.
51. However, this is not the first meeting of the Council
to be held in response to the will of. the international
community, which, in the face of the unceasing and
increasingly audacious crimes of Israel, cannot but try
time and time again, within the framework of its competence provided for by the Charter of the United Nations,
to adopt measures that will put an end to Israel’s persist-

56. The delegation of the State of Qatar has denounced
the Israeli practices in the occupied Arab territories, in
particular the policy of building illegal Jewish settlements,
which is,considered to be one of the main obstacles to the
achievement of peace in the Middle East. My delegation
6

therefore urges the members of the C?ouncll to give rein to
the will of the international community, which Israel has
thus far’ been able to thwart, and thereby to discharge
fully their responsibility in the face of this act of wanton
aggression against the Palestinian people and to grant
that people its national and political rights, undiminished,
as set forth in- United Nations resolutions.
57. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Sudan. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
58. Mr: ELFAKI (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic):
It gives me pleasure, Sir, to extend to you, on behalf of the
delegation of the Democratic Republic of the Sudan, our
warmest congratulations on your assumption of the presidency for this month. We are fully confident that your
diplomatic abilities and wide experience will enable you to
lead the work of the Council to a successful conclusion.
59. At the same time, I cannot but convey our great
appreciation to Mr. Ling Qing, the representative of the
friendly People’s Republic of China, for the competence
with which he guided the Council last month.
I
60. The events and gross violations now taking place in
the occupied Palestinian territories are but one link in the
chain of the deliberate Zionist plot by which Israel has
been seeking for many years to annihilate the Arab people
of Palestine and to destroy completely the foundation of
its Arab, Christian and Islamic cultural life throughout
the occupied Arab territories.
61. .--In putting into practice this criminal aggressive
scheme, Israel has not confined itself to waging war after
war on various spurious pretexts and justifications.
Rather, after achieving large-scale expansion and occupation, it has resorted to practices runing the gamut of acts
of terrorism and crimes against the Arab citizens and
against their holy places and their lands in order to force
them, directly or indirectly, to abandon their homes and
lands and to flee for their lives.

I

62. Persisting in its folly and intoxicated with its own
military might, Israel continues to implement its settlements scheme with all the means at the disposal both of
the State and the authorities-and
these means are
numerous-and
of the citizenry itself, through various
organizations, parties and individuals. This endeavour
complements and supplements the acts of the Government and is daily reflected in numerous reports of crimes,
assassinations and acts of aggression committed against
the population of Arab territories, who stand steadfast
under occupation despite torture, humiliation and terrorism. They are defenceless save for their belief in their
God, their homeland, their lands and their usurped rights.
This is a condition imposed on them while groups of
imported Zionist settlers are permitted to bear all kinds of
weapons and use all means to carry out murder and terrorism. This is happening in a State that is armed to the
teeth and, as was stated by a previous speaker the other
day, one that not only acquires weapons from the most

modem arsenals but even manufactures them for sale in
the worst markets, such as that of racist South Africa.
63. The recent events in Al-Khalil and other Arab cities
and towns and the attack on the Islamic University of
Al-Khalil on 26 July, with the shooting of 3 of its Arab
students and the wounding of 40 others, are all part and
parcel of the Zionist terrorist scheme designed to drive the
indigenous population from the Arab territories and to
Judaize them completely.
64. The Council has met every time that Israel carries
out another phase in its criminal settler scheme, even
though the Council declared three years ago that the settlements established by Israel in the Arab territories occupied since 1967 were illegal and should be dismantled,
since their presence constituted a major impediment to
peace, as stated in resolution 465 (1980) and other relevant resolutions of the Council. But Israel still persists in
its folly, heedless of resolutions adopted by the entire
world represented in the Council as the supreme international organ responsible for the maintenance of intemational peace and security. As is clearly evident from its
policies and practices, Israel pays no heed to international
norms and laws which consider its policy of establishing
settlements in the occupied Arab territories illegal and
which stipulate that the acquisition of territory by force is
inadmissible.
All international
instruments,. foremost
among them the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August
1949,’ call upon the occupying Power to respect the rights
of the population of the occupied territories and prohibit
their deportation or evacuation by any means, not to mention acts of terrorism which Israel persistently commits
every day. Naturally, Israel realizes all of this, but, as
repeatedly stated by its representative before the Council
and other United Nations organs, it will not comply with
resolutions nor be guided by international instruments
and norms so long as it can act ~with impunity.
65. The intransigence and arrogance of Israel and its
denial of the existence of the Palestinian Arab people and
their legitimate rights to self-determination and to their
lands, its use of terrorism, threats and force to destroy
and annihilate the Palestinian Arab people, to humiliate
them and bring them to their knees, instead of acknowledging their legitimate rights that have been acknowl-’
edged by the whole world, all affirm the magnitude of
Israel’s dependence on and belief in oppression, war,
aggression, expansion and terrorism as the sole option in
its relations with the Palestinians and the Arabs.
:
66. Together with others in the Council and in other
important international. bodies, we have called upon
Israel to realize fully that peace is indivisible and that
justice is not confined to any one people. The question of
Palestine and the rights of the Palestinian people are without a doubt at the core of the conflict in the Middle East.
There can be no lasting, comprehensive and just peace in
that region without Israel’s total withdrawal from the
Arab and Palestinian territories occupied since 1967,
including Jerusalem, and the restoration of the legitimate
and inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including

their rights to self-determination and to the establishment
of their own independent State on their territory under
the leadership of the PLO, their sole legitimate representative. Here I should like to reiterate the support of the
people and Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Sudan and their solidarity with the heroic and valiant
struggle being waged by the fraternal Palestinian Arab
people and with the PLO and its leaders, who are the
symbol of the Palestinian revolution, and our brother, the
valiant freedom tighter Yasser Arafat, Chairman of the
Executive Committee of the PLO.
67. The failure of the United Nations and of the entire
international community represented in the Council so far
to induce Israel to renounce its policy of establishing.settlements gives rise to concern and indignation. But we
hope that the Council will this time condemn and
denounce Israel’s barbaric actions in the occupied Arab
territories and hold it fully responsible for those crimes. It
is incumbent upon the Council, since it is responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security, to
take such measures in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations as would put an end to the Israeli practices which fall outside the laws and norms forming the
basis of relations among nations, foremost among which
is international law and the Charter, We sincerely ,hope
that the present meetings of the Council will not, like their
predecessors, be a mere reaction to another link in the
chain of acts carried out by the Israeli conspirators
against the Palestinians and Arabs pending yet another
link and another series of meetings of the Council. We call
upon the entire international community to assume its
political, humanitarian
and moral duties towards the
Palestinian Arab people, who have been suffering from
the scourge of oppression, displacement, terrorism and
deprivation-and
even massacres and genocide-for
half
a century while the conscience of the world and humanity
remains silent.
68. Mr. MARGETSON
(United Kingdom): Mr. President, I should like to join others in warmly welcoming
you to the presidency of the Council. I am sure that your
wit and diplomatic skills will steer us safely through this
period.
69. I should like also to thank the representative of
China, whose skilful and courteous way of dealing with
our affairs was particularly noticeable during his term as
President of the Council in the month of July.
70. I can be brief. My delegation is on record many
times as having deplored the dangerous cycle of violence
and repression in the occupied territories. We do so yet
again today.
71. The latest atrocity in Hebron is one of a series that
will not be stopped until the underlying causes have been
removed.
72. This atrocity has been condemned by the Israeli
authorities at the highest level. We note that fact, and I
am sure that others, even if they have not mentioned it in
their statements to the Council, will have noted it also.

We hope there will be a full and determined investigation
into this incident, which led to the deaths of three young
students and the wounding of many others at the University of Hebron.
73. During this debate we have listened to an indictment
of Israel and its policies delivered ,very often in highly
emotional language. I know emotions run deep on both
sides, but I do not believe language of this sort will have
much effect on Israeli attitudes or policies. Indeed, it may
well serve to reinforce Israel’s apparent imperviousness to
the results of debates in the Council. Such language
makes it easy for Israel to discount or to write off such
debates as the mere froth of fanatics. It would be wrong
to do so, but, surely, the Council should not make it easier
for it to do so. I therefore dissociate myself from the tone
of much of the criticism of Israel. I do not, however,
dissociate myself from some of the substance.
74. We have listened to many speakers who have
expressed the sincerely held fears of many Arabs that the
Arabs in the occupied territories are being squeezed out of
their land by pressures from Israeli policies and by acts of
terrorism.
75. My Government regards Israeli policies in the occupied territories with profound and continuing concern.
We are. deeply worried by the Israeli policy on settlements. It is this that lies at the heart of the mistrust and
tension there.
76. I say, yet again, that we consider these settlements to
be contrary to international law and to the principle of the
inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by force.
This principle is embodied in Security Council resolution
242 (1967).
77. The Israeli settlements policy undermines confidence that Israel is ready to negotiate freely about the
final state of the occupied territories. My Government
calls on Israel, just as President Reagan has called on
Israel, to put an end now to this damaging policy and to
declare an immediate settlements freeze.
78. I do not suggest that it is the Israeli settlements policy
which alone prevents a move by all parties towards a negotiated settlement. That is certainly not the case. But I believe
the best way to lower tension now and to start to rebuild
confidence between Israel and its neighbours would be to
relaunch efforts towards a negotiated settlement.
79. I call on the parties to exercise the restraint that will
be required.if the necessary, but elusive, dialogue is to
replace the unnecessary, but pervasive violence, which, I
regret, characterizes the region at present.
80. Mr. ICAZA GALLARD
(Nicaragua) (interpretation
from S@nzish): I should like first of all, Sir, to congratulate you very warmly on your assumption of the presidency for the month of August. We are convinced that
our work will benefit from your diplomatic
skillcharacteristic of your country-and
from your intelligence and experience.

-89. In the May propaganda campaign, the Israeli
Government pointed out that the number of places available for living was limited but that in the future there
would be more land for all those Jews who wanted it. To
facilitate decisions in favour of the settlements, the Israeli
Government lends between $120,000 and $150,000 to families who live in “developing cities”-that
is what the
’ Israeli authorities have called what is nothing more than
an illegal act, scorning all international norms and authority and violating peace-and that represents between four
and six times more than is loaned to families living in!
other places in Israel.

81. We also wish to congratulate Mr. .Ling Qing, of
China, for the wise and exemplary manner in which he
conducted our proceedings during the past month.
82. Since the suspension of the Council’s meetings on
this item, we have been kept fully informed, through letters addressed to the President of the Council, regarding
the outrages and crimes of which the Palestinian people
has been the victim at the hands of the Zionist Govemment and system in the occupied Palestinian and Arab
territories. There is no need to go into the long list of
specific instances of these crimes of which the international community is well aware. Unfortunately, it is no
exaggeration to say that Zionist terrorism has manifested
itself in all imaginable forms-assassinations,
kidnap
pings, threats, imprisonment,
expulsions, demolition of
homes and punishment of families, landowners and entire
populations.

90. The Israeli movement known as Peace Now has
denounced what the Zionist Government has been saying,
namely, that, since the invasion of Lebanon, Palestinians’
are “more willing to sell their land”. What that really
means is that recently there has been a considerable
increase in acts of violence against the Palestinian people
and a systematic increase in expropriation and plundering
by the Israeli military authorities.

83. Israel is indiscriminate in its abhorrent acts: children, students, women, trade unionists and refugees-all
are victims of this policy. They are all considered equally
guilty of what the racist regime views as a crime: being
Palestinian.

91. All the mistreatment inflicted on the Palestinian
people has become widespread practices that have repeatedly been denounced in the United Nations. We all know
that the human rights of the Palestinians, without exception, have been crudely violated by Israel, and it is practically an institutionalized process in the United Nations to
search out permanent ways of curbing those practices. As
Council resolution 452 (1979) declares, Israel’s policy of
establishing settlements in the occupied territories has no
legal validity and constitutes a violation of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949.’ Similarly, paragraph
5 of Council resolution 465 (1980) states, inter alia:

84. As to the executioners of the Palestinian people, we
can say that they are primarily the Israeli authorities, to
which can be added the settlers, whose conduct has from
time to time been critic&d by the Israeli Government.
85. The appeals of the Government of Israel to the
settlers not to take the law into their own hands have no
credibility whatsoever, primarily because they come from
those who are the instigators and the prime movers of the
very abuses they would control and, secondly, because
punishment of the guilty is practically non-existent, the
sentences imposed being ridiculously out of proportion to
the seriousness of the crimes.

“that all measures taken by Israel to change the physical character, demographic composition, institutional
structure or status of the Palestinian and other Arab
territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, or
any part thereof ‘have no legal validity.”

86. The recent killing of Palestinians in the city of
Hebron is but one link in a long chain of crimes committed by Israel in the Palestinian territories. The seriousness
of the situation in the settlements is becoming more critical day by day, and the facts supplied by the PLO and
Arab States should be of concern to all members of the
Council. In particular, we listened attentively to the representative of Jordan when he indicated that the number of
Israelis transferred to the occupied territories since 1967
had reached more than 200,000 and that Israel planned to
bring that number to 200,000 persons by the end of the
decade [2457rh meeting, para. Z4J.

92. Also, Israel is in flagrant violation .of the abovementioned Geneva Convention, in particular the sixth’
paragraph of article 49 which prohibits the occupying
Power from evacuating or from transferring a part of its ,
own population to the territory occupied by it.
93.

The draft resolution which has been circulated
is a balanced document which my delegation
fully supports. This draft, which is based largely on principles accepted by the Council in earlier resolutions and
adheres strictly to the norms of international law, should
enjoy the unanimous support of the members of the
Council.
[S/l58951

87. According to the Israeli press, since 10 May Israeli
ministries and settlement organizations have launched a
“Campaign to populate the settlements in Judea, Samaria
and Gaze”. That campaign is conducted by the Ministries
of Agriculture, Science and Development, and Housing,
together with the Organization for Settlements and other
semi-official Zionist organizations.

94. Neither the tortures, harassment, threats, massive
reprisals nor the plundering constitutes the most serious
violation of the human rights of the people of Palestine by
Israel, because all that is the result of the denial of a more
basic right-the right of the Palestinian people to an exist- a
ence. Israel does not recognize that right and has demon-

88. To attract possible settlers, the Israeli population
was bombarded with propaganda about the material
benefits to be gained in the settlements.
9

strated that ad nauseam. The massive killing of
Palestinians has taken place over the years, and the
bloodshed in the genocidal acts at Sabra and Shatila that
shocked and horrified the world is still fresh.
95. Equally important is the Palestinian people’s right to
self-determination;
its denial is the root cause of other
violations of human rights of a population of nearly 4
million. The end of military and political occupation of
Palestinian territory is an indispensable prerequisite if the
Palestinian people is to exercise its other rights.

recommendations.
do so thus far.

Regrettably, it has not been possible to

99. Finally, the Council was urged to consider the .
report of the Security Council Commission established
under resolution 446 (1979) [S/Z4264 and to reactivate
that commission to determine the facts regarding the
establishment of unlawful settlements by Israel in the
occupied territories and the consequences thereof.
100. In the light’ of these recommendations and on the
eve of the International Conference on the Question of
Palestine, to be held at Geneva, the time is appropriate for
the Council to take action as the primary body responsi- ble for the maintenance of international peace and security. Recommendations such as these and the actions set
forth in the draft resolution now before the Council
[S/Z58953 constitute urgent and immediate tasks for the
Council. The Arab States, the PLO and all peoples that
cherish peace and justice are hoping that the Council and
its members will abide by their inescapable obligations,
for failure to do so would seriously jeopardize the prestige, effectiveness and role of this distinguished body and
the role it should play.

96. I should like here to cite the Political Declaration
adopted by the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, which held at
New Delhi from 7 to 12 March. We consider particularly
relevant to the Council’s deliberations the condemnation
in that declaration of United States support of Israel in all
fields, especially the military and political support, without which the Zionist State could not continue its policy
of flouting and scorning the Council’s resolutions and
decisions; nor could it continue its illegal occupation of
Arab and Palestinian territories. I would also remind the
Council of the appeal made in that declaration to the
United States, a permanent member of the Security Council, to cease its abuse of the right of veto, which has prevented the Council from taking the necessary action to
implement the universally recognixed principle of the
inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territories by force,
and to enable the Palestinian people to recover its inalienable rights. Also relevant to this debate is the appeal made
to the members of the Security Council to play their role
and discharge their responsibilities so that the Council
may .mke appropriate measures, in conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations, to establish and guarantee
peace and security in the Middle East. The time has come
for the Council to take the necessary measures under
Chapter VII of the Charter, -in view of Israel’s conduct
ever since its establishment in Palestine in 1948 [see
S/15675 and Corr. I and 2, annex].

101. The PRESIDENT ‘(interpretation from Frdz): ‘he
next speaker is the representative of Bahrain. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make’ his
statement.
102. Mr. AL-SABBAGH
(Bahrain) (interpretation from
Arabic): At the outset, Sir, permit me to express our congratulations on your assumption of the presidency for the
month of August and to pay a tribute to your abilities and
your experience in successfully conducting the work of the
Council.
103. I am also pleased to express our appreciation to the
representative of China for the masterful way in which he
presided over the proceedings of the Council during the
month of July.

97. The various preparatory meetings of the International Conference on the Question of Palestine made clear
that the cause. of the Palestinian people enjoys broad,
world-wide support, From 11 to 15 April of this year, at
the regional meeting of Latin America held at Managua,
the various rights of the Palestinian people were reaffirmed and important recommendations were made to the
States of the region and to the United Nations to take
action to contribute to a just, comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the problem of Palestine. Among the matters being dealt with by the Council which were discussed
at that meeting and which appear in its final document I
might mention the appeal addressed to the Council to
investigate actions committed by Israel against the Palestinian people in violation of the norms of international
law and to report the results of that investigation.

104. The acts of violence that have occurred in AlKhalil, Nablus, Bir Zeit and other towns of the West Bank
are the inevitable result of Israel’s continuous occupation
and of the perpetuation of its aggressive expansionist
policy. Israel has confiscated about 60 per cent of the
territory of the West Bank, not to mention Gaza and the
Golan Heights. It resorts to systematic terrorization of
the inhabitants of these territories, forcing them to leave
their towns and villages.
105. The Jewish bands that ravaged the Islamic University of Al-Khalil on 26 July, killing three innocent civilians and injuring many others, were a manifestation of
that systematic policy of carefully planned terrorist activities against Arab citizens in order to force them to flee
their homeland. It is no secret that these repressive measures are carried out in full view and with the knowledge of
the Israeli army and security forces. These activities fall
within a series of acts of systematic Israeli terrorism exemplified by the massacres of Sabra and Shatila and, a few
years earlier, in the massacres of Qibya and Deir Yassin.

98. The Council was also asked to endorse the recommendations of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and to use all the
relevant provisions of the Charter to implement those
10

106. The mass poisoning to which schoolgirls in the
West Bank were subjected last March, as well as the consequences for the Arab inhabitants there, ranging from
fear to mass hysteria, were covered in detail in the international press.

113. The sixth paragraph of article 49 of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons,
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,’ stipulates that: “The
Occupying Power shall not deport or transfer parts of its
own civilian population into the territory it occupies.”
The policy of establishing settlements is a flagrant violation of that principle.

107. Ail this has taken place against the backdrop of the
impotence of the United Nations, the Security Council
and the international community. Yet everyone realizes
the heavy moral and political responsibility borne by the
United Nations vis-cl-vis Palestine and its Arab population.

114. The State of Bahrain appeals to the Council to discharge fully the responsibilities entrusted to it under the
Charter of the United Nations. It must fulfil its obligations to protect the populations of the Arab and Palestinian occupied territories from the acts of aggression
being carried out by armed Israeli settlers. The great Powers, because of their special responsibilities for safeguarding peace and security in the region, and as a matter of
right and justice, must also work towards that end by
bringing pressure to bear on Israel in conformity with the
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly.

108. Israel owes its existence to resolution 181 (II)
adopted by the General Assembly on 29 November .1947.
Ever since then, world public opinion has become well
aware of Israel’s expansionist designs and its continuous
acts of terrorism against the Arab population. In these
crimes Israel has invoked historical and Talmudic claims,
as well as giving security reasons. While this has taken
place, there has been complete apathy of international
morals and conscience. Those who claim to defend
human rights should not close their eyes to what has been
taking place in the occupied Arab territories in flagrant
violation of human rights, which are the same for everyone and not confined to one people to the exclusion of
others. The friends and allies of Israel must persuade it to
comply with the Council’s resolutions.

115. The response of the Council to the request to call
this important meeting underlines the gravity of the
events that have overtaken the population of the occupied
Arab Palestinian territories, as well as of the threats that
imperil peace and security,in the Middle East. The ques:
tion of Palestine lies at the heart of the Middle East problem; the wishes of the Palestinian people must be realized
and they>must be enabled ‘to have their own State on their
national SoiL The Council must call for implementation
of resolution’465 (1980), which stressed the illegality and
illegitimacy of the Israeli settlements. The best way to end
the Arab-Israeli. conflict is to reach a just and lasting
peace, acceptable to all parties, through implementation
of the resolutions of the Security Council. The Council
must redouble its efforts’ to compel Israel to respect its
relevant resolutions and to take into account the national,
inalienable rights of the qaiestinian people, as well as their
right to exercise selfdetermination
under the leadership
of the PLO.

109. Israel’s policy in the occupied Arab territories,
especially in the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and the
Syrian Golan Heights, is based on annexation. To achieve
that goal, it has used all means to oppose the achievement
of a just and lasting peace and has frustrated all efforts
and peace initiatives, the latest being the Twelfth Arab
Summit Conference, held at Fez in November 1981 and
September 1982 [see S/ISSlO, annex].
110. In applying that policy, Israel has resorted to violence and the use of force, considering war a convenient
way to oppose the aspirations of the Arab peoples. It has
at all times sought to impose capitulation on the Arabs
and to force the Palestinians to abandon their lands so
that they can be settled by Zionists.
111. Side by side with this military activity is the policy
of establishing settlements. The tactic foIlowed, with complete logic, has been to perpetuate chaos and disorder,
leading to the dismemberment of these areas. Israel’s secui
rity is based on its pursuing preemptive war against its
Arab neighbours and the other States of the region. This
logic led it to bombard the Iraqi nuclear reactor that was
built for peaceful purposes.
112. In its resolution 465 (1980), the Council condemned the policy of settler-expansionism
of Israel,
declaring that all the measures taken were illegal and
stated that continuation of that policy obstructed efforts
to establish a just peace in the region and contravened all
international norms and laws concerning war and the
occupation of territories.

116. Israel, as I mentioned earlier, owes both its very
existence and the recognition of that existence to a United
Nations resolution. It should not therefore be very difficult for the Council, with the authority vested in it under
the Charter, to compel Israel to implement the Council’s
resolutions concerning the illegality of the Israeli settlements, as well as other resolutions of the Council, such as
resolution 242 (1967). That would be conducive to the
strengthening of confidence of peoples and States in the
United Nations as an edifice of peace and justice, as well
as to increasing the confidence of the world in the Organization and in its ability to halt aggression and to establish
peace, security and justice in a region that has experienced
so much chaos and anguish, a region whose States must
now turn their energies to development’in an atmosphere
of genuine peace.
117. Mr. van der STOEL (Netherlands): First of all,
may I extend to you, Sir, my congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency. The Council will undoubtedly benefit greatly from the outstanding abilities you
have shown on so many occasions.

‘.ll

,

‘

118. I should also like to pay a tribute to the representative of China, who presided over the Council with so
much wisdom and patience in the month of July.

122.. I whole-heartedly agree with the remarks made by
the representative of the United Kingdom with regard to
the tone of the present debate. At the same time, however,
.this debate reaffirms once more the nearly unanimous
view of the international community that the Israeli settlement policies and practices have grave consequences for
all efforts and initiatives towards a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace in the Middle East. It is a matter of
grave concern to my Government that all peace efforts in
the Middle East now seem to have bogged down again.
Israel’s settlements policy is clearly one of the most
serious obstacles to progress towards a peaceful settlement in the area. However, another essential prerequisite
for peace is that all parties to the conflict recognize the
right of all States in the region, including Israel, to exist
within secure and internationally recognized boundaries.
In our opinion, the achievement of a comprehensive and
lasting peace is hardly conceivable without all parties
adhering to this fundamental principle, which, as is wellknown, was set out by the nine member States of the
European Community in their declaration published at
Venice of 13 June 1980 [S/14009]. The Netherlands, for
its part, remains convinced that there can be no real peace
or stability in the region unless the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination, with all that this implies, is
recognized and laid down in a comprehensive settlement,
which would at the same time recognize the principle of
security for all States in the region.

119. This is not the first time this year-that we have met
to consider the situation in the occupied Arab territories.
Recent disturbances in the city of Hebron have made it
imperative, however, to address this question urgently
once more. The Netherlands Government condemns the
recent killings committed in that city that claimed the life
of one Israeli student who was stabbed to death in the
town market-place on 7 July and the lives of three Arab
students, as well as the wounding of many others when
masked gunmen opened fiie on a crowd of students at the
Islamic University of Hebron on 26 July. At present it is
still’unclear who committed these shameful acts. As the
occupying Power, however, the .Goverriment of Israel
bears responsibility for maintaining order in the occupied
territories. We note that the Israeli authorities have
announced that they will investigate the various incidents
in and around Hebron. We call upon them to conduct
such investigations thoroughly and extensively and to see
to it that those responsible for these acts are brought to
justice.
120. In his letter dated I1 July 1983 [S/Z5865l, the
representative of Israel has informed us of the decision of
the Israeli authorities to dismiss the appointed Mayor of
Hebron, Mr. Mustafa Al-Natshe, and the members of the
City Council. We deplore that decision, and we disagree
with the reasons given for it. In our opinion, the Mayor of
Hebron can hardly be blamed for the disturbances in his
city, which are caused mainly, by outside pressures.
Instead of dismissing the ‘Mayor, a clear decision of the
Israeli authorities not to allow the expansion of Israeli
settlements into the centre of that city would have been
more helpful in calming down the situation.

123. In conclusion, let me state that the Netherlands will
cast a positive vote on the draft resolution, contained in
document S/15895, concerning the situation in the occupied territories. In casting our positive vote on this draft,
however, we wish to place on record that in our view the
wording of operative paragraph 6 should have been more
balanced. As I have stated before, the Netherlands condemns all killings which have recently taken place in
Hebron.
124. The PRESIDENT
(inrerpreration.fiom French): The
next speaker is the representative of the Libyan ‘Arab
Jamahiriya. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

121. The events in Hebron are visible evidence of the
negative and dangerous consequences of Israel’s settlement policy. The position of the Netherlands on this matter is quite clear. We have repeatedly stated that the
provisions of the Hague Convention of 1907* and of the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,’ are applicable
to the territories occupied in 1967. It is therefore our firm
view that the Israeli settlements in those territories, as well
as the changes in the status and in the demographic structure of those territories, which are a major source of tension, have no legal validity under international
law.
Moreover, Israel’s settlements policy runs counter to the
principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war, as specified in Council resolution 242 (1967).
During his recent visit to Israel, the Netherlands Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. ‘Hans van den Broek, reiterated
this view. Moreover, we have repeatedly called upon the
Government of Israel to rescind forthwith its decision
further to increase the number of settlements in the occupied territories. Each construction or expansion of a settlement will only increase the strong and justified resentment
of the inhabitants. of the occupied territories.

125. Mr. BURWIN (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (inferpreration from Arabic): I congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency for this month, and I extend
thanks to you, and through you to the members of the
Council, .for allowing my delegation to participate in the
deliberations on this important question.
126. I should also like to express gratitude to Mr. Ling
Qing, the representative of the People’s Republic of
China, for his wise conduct of the Council’s work last
month.
127. The Council meets once again to consider the problem of the Palestinian people and the situation in the
occupied territories in general. The situation has been
deteriorating from day to day as a result of the practices
of the Zionist entity, or, rather, the neo-Nazi entity. These
practices have been carried out consistently and systematically for more than 30 years, during which the neo-Nazis
12

have perpetrated crimes and illegal and immoral acts
which- contravene the Charter of the United Nations,
and the international convenants on human rights that
govern the occupied territories, the principle of equality
and the right of peoples to self-determination. This entity
did not confine itself to the usurpation of Palestinian territories in 1948 and non-compliance with United Nations
resolutions; it persisted in a racist policy of annexation,
forcing the Arab population to evacuate their territories
so as to bring in aliens from various parts of the world
and arming them. Human rights have been consistently
violated in the occupied Arab territories, and discriminatory racist laws have been imposed against the Arabs.

Christians and Muslims,
of any democracy. These
declared ideas are the essence of the concrete practices
currently unfolding in the occupied Palestinian and Arab
territories, The most recent example was the terrorist
attack on the Islamic University of Al-Khalil, on 26 July,
which resulted in the murder of three university students
and the wounding of many others.
132. I do not wish to burden the Council with the details
of events. Suffice it to recall the statement in this regard of
our brother, Zehdi Labib Terzi, the representative of the
PLO, to the Council ‘on 28 July [2457th meefitzg].
133. The policy, of the ne&Nazi Zionist entity is one of
aggression, expansion, terrorism’ and racism, which is
defended sometimes by the pretext of ~security and at
other times by that of religious right. This policy will
persist, despite the outcry and appeals of the world conscience. As the General Assembly was told by Mr. Victor
Gauci, Rapporteur of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, on 30
November 1982:

128. The Zionist entity has committed acts of aggression
against the neighbouring Arab countries, attacked the
nuclear reactor in Baghdad, invaded Lebanon, where its
forces are still sowing terror among the civilian population, annexed the Golan Heights and Jerusalem, despite
the opposition of the international community, and has
been establishing settlements illegally in the West’Bank,
Gaxa and the Golan Heights. It has established more than
150 settlements on more than 50 per cent of the land in
the West Bank, using more than 80 per cent of the water
sources. There are more than 150,000 new invaders in the
West Bank and Gaza, to say nothing of those in the
Golan Heights. Since 1967, the Zionist occupation authorities have issued more than 1,000 military decrees to justify
their illegal practices, in contravention of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,’ which prohibits any
demographic or geographic change in occupied territories.

“Influential voices assert with greater conviction that it
is time to call a halt to this policy and to the muddled
approaches of the past.
“Perhaps the most poignant and significant call for a
new approach was made on 26 October . . . by the
novelist Amos Kenan. Let me use his own words:
‘As long as you Americans help us to stand up,
we Israelis have no chance to stand on our own feet.
We have no chance to have peace as long as you
support us in war. We have no chance to straighten
out our relationships with our neighbours as long as
you help .Us forget that they, too, are legitimate
children of humanity and that they, too, have legitimate rights.*‘*)

129. As for the violation of human rights in the occupied Arab territories, these. have taken several forms,
including depriving the Arabs of education by closing
down universities and schools, expelling teachers and
changing the curricula; the dismissal of elected mayors;
the demolition of houses; the imposition of mass punishments; the desecration of places of worship; and the periodic imposition of a curfew on some towns in the West
_Bank.
130. Those policies and practices of the neo-Nazi entity
proceed from odious racist dogmas, such as those of
“God’s chosen people” and “Greater Israel” and the
establishment of a State in which there is room only for
the Jew, as defined by Zionism. The leaders of the Zionist
movement direct their aggression against the Arab people
because the Zionists consider Arabs to be the major
impediment to the realization of the expansionist schemes
of zionism and a threat to the Jewish character of the
State of Israel.

134. The tragedy of the.Palestinian people and the instability in the Arab region should be laid at the door of
successive American Administrations.
The international
community knows that the Zionist entity could not have ;
persisted in murdering thousands of Arabs, displacing an
entire people and carrying on a policy of expansion and
aggression without the enormous economic and military
assistance flowing unconditionally
from the United
States, aid which was used for murdering the Palestinian
people, for repeated acts of aggression against the Arab
States and for establishing settlements.
135. According to The New York Times of 26 June,
American assistance to the Zionist entity has amounted
over the past years to more than $25 billion; the same
source states that the assistance allocated by the present
American Administration
to that entity amounts to 2.5
billion, including military assistance of $1.7 billion. That
figures in the annual budget and is in addition to large
sums proposed by some members of Congress to increase
support for the Israeli war- machine.

131. Hence, the arming of the settlers is a concrete
expression of the ideas of fanatical Zionists such as Rabbi
Meir Kahane, who has been calling for the expulsion of
all non-Jews from Israel. Even when it comes to Jews,
Rabbi Kahane has a certain opinion as to who is to be
considered a Jew. Thus, there is racist discrimination
between adherents of the Jewish religion. This rabbi also
calls for the exercise of democracy in Israel to be confined
to the Jews, depriving the indigenous Arab population,

136. Nor has the unlimited support of the United States
for the _Zionist entity been confined to the military and
13

economic fields; it extends to the political and human
spheres as well and to the .sigtiing, of the strategic ce
operation agreement between the United States and the
Zionists.

well-known acumen will serve the Council, and all of us,
in very good stead.
144. Our appreciation goes also to your predecessor,Mr. Ling Qing, representative of the People’s Republic of
China, who successfully guided the deliberations of the
Council during the month of July with wisdom and
dedication.

137. The position taken in the United Nations, and particularly in the Security Council and other international
forums, by the United States Government in support of
the Zionist entity is well known. It is proof of the collusion of the United States Government with the Zionist
regime in its policy of aggression against the Palestinian
people and the Arab nation aimed at imposing AmericanZionist solutions of capitulation and American hegemony
and control in the Arab region. Acts of military provocation and terrorism by United States ships and planes in
the Arab region, and the American policy, which is completely biased in favour of the Zionist aggressor, have
exacerbated tensions in the region, increased the threats
to international peace and security and obstructed all
international efforts and initiatives to achieve peace in the
Middle East.

145. The Council is again considering the consequences
of the aggressive policy of Israel, which is stopping at
nothing in order -to subjugate the people and illegally
acquire Palestinian and other Arab territories. This is
being done by aggression, repression and persecution.
The expansion into the territory of neighbouring countries is continuing.
146. The crisis in the region is continually being exacerbated, and the indiscriminate use of force and arms has
brought about a situation in which peace and security
have practically ceased to exist. In this environment of
aggression and terror imposed by Israel, illegal settlement
on Palestinian and Arab soil and property is continuing,
in flagrant violation of the decisions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council.

138. The actions of the United States Government have
been brought about by the blackmail of United States
officials and institutions by Zionist organizations and by
the intervention of those organizations in United States
political life and by all kinds of immoral means to control
American decision-makers and put pressure on them in
the service of the Zionist entitv.

147. The Palestinian issue cannot be resolved by terror
and repression in the Palestinian homeland. Violence perpetrated by the occupation forces against the Palestinian
people, against its youth and its students, is aimed at
intimidating them and at annihilating their resolve not to
be enslaved and not to yield in the face of threats of
further destruction and, usurpation.
.

139.. The United States Government uses the Zionist
entity as a tool with which to control the Arab region and
to sow discord among Jews, Christians and Muslims.
140. It has’been universally acknowledged that the core
of the Middle East question is the question of Palestine
and that any solution of that question which does not
take account in the first place of the legitimate ,rights’ of
the Palestinian people to ‘self-determination
and to the
establishment of an independent State on its territory will
,.
remain incomplete and be doomed to failure. :
;
141. In order to prevent the‘Council’s current delibemtions from ,becoming another occasion on which mere concern is expressed over the plight of the Palestinian people,
we call on the Council to shoulder its responsibilities
under the Charter by holding the Zionist entity responsible for these acts of terrorism and condemning its expansionist Zionist practices and policies in the occupied
Palestinian and Arab territories. The Council must take
concrete steps to deter the aggressor, end the policy of
establishing settlements and dissuade States from aiding
the Zionist entity in pursuing its settlements policy and its
violation of human rights in the occupied territories.

148. The Palestinian people has more than once shown
that it will not surrender its rights to independence and
freedom. No one can deprive this courageous and martyred people of those rights today; its struggle merits our
full-fleged solidarity and support.
149. The peoples of Yugoslavia fought and won their
freedom and independence, and they are jealously guarding
it. This is one of the sources of our support of the people of
Palestine and of its sole legitimate representative, the PLO,
and of our belief that freedom cannot exist if it is not
enjoyed by all.
150. Last week, the Chairman of the Executive Committee of the PLO, Yasser Arafat, paid a visit to Yugoslavia.
The President of the Presidency of the Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, Mr. Mika Spiljak, had talks with
Chairman Arafat. Mr. Spiljak pointed out on that occasion once again that the just aspirations of the Palestinian
people should receive the undivided support of all countries and peoples dedicated to freedom, independence and
peace.

(inte~retationfrom~~e~ch):
The
142. The PRESIDENT
next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

151. The non-aligned countries have repeatedly pointed
out that the Israeli policy of aggression in the Middle East
is one of the most dangerous threats to peace and security
in the world. At the Seventh Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New
Delhi from 7 to’ 12 March, non-aligned countries once

143. Mr. GOLOB (Yugoslavia): Sir, I congratulate you,
the representative of France, on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of August. We believe that your
14

again strongly supported the Palestinian cause and called
for a solution of the crisis based on the principles of the
policy of non-alignment and of the Charter of the United
Nations.

156. The United Nations is and has to remain the centre
of the activities aimed at resolving the question of Palestine
and laying the foundations of peace and security in that
region. We should like to note that the PLO has once
again shown its faith in the United Nations and in this
body in particular, rightfully expecting the Council to find
an adequate response to halt the Israeli aggression, expansion and oppression and to uphold the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people.

152. Yugoslavia, together with other non-aligned countries, considers that the question of Palestine and the Middle East conflict can be settled only in accordance with
relevant United Nations resolutions. Such a settlement
must be just, comprehensive and lasting; it should ensure
the withdrawal of Israel from the Palestinian and other
Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem,
and enable the Palestinian people under the leadership of
the PLO, its sole legitimate representative, to exercise its
inalienable rights to self-determination and national independence and to establish an independent and sovereign
State in Palestine.

157. The realization of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people to self-determination and to the establishment of its own State can neither be postponed nor
tampered with. In these times of trial, the Palestinian
people and the PLO, as its sole legitimate representative,
need and deserve our support in order to safeguard and
strengthen their unity and independence.

153. It is inadmissible to acquire territory by force. This
is why the non-aligned countries rejected all Israeli policies designed to modify the geographical characteristics,
demographic composition or legal status of the Arab and
Palestinian territories occupied by Israel since 1967 and
why they do not recognize any change made by Israel in
those territories.

158. It is our view that the Council should reaffirm that
the Israeli settlements in the occupied territories are illegal
and inadmissible and should make one more effort to
exert real and effective pressure in order to halt such
Israeli policy. The United Nations, and the Security Council in particular, bear a great responsibility for the achievement by the Palestinian people of the exercise of their
rights and for the solution of the crisis in the Middle East,
and this task is a duty of utmost priority.

154. Furthermore, no solution can be considered justified and comprehensive without the participation of the
PLO in negotiations on an equal footing. This implies
recognition of the right of all States and peoples of the
region to independence within secure and recognized
borders, free from the threat or use of force.

159. Bearing in mind all these facts and the urgency of
the situation, we urge the Council to adopt the draft resolution that has been submitted to it [S/l5895j, sponsored
by the Group of Arab States.

155. Sixteen years ago the Council adopted resolution
242 (1967), calling for the withdrawal of Israel from all
territories occupied after 5 June 1967. After all these
years, the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and Jerusalem
remain under occupation, and so do the Golan Heights
and a considerable part of Lebanon. Such behaviour by
Israel is a challenge to which the Council should respond.
We should like to repeat here again that the right of Lebanon to independence should be upheld and its territorial
integrity -restored.

The meeting rose at 1.05 pm

NOTES
’ United Nations,
Treuty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
* Carnegie Endowment
for International
Peace, The Hugue Conventions and Declarations of 1899 and 1907 (New York, Oxford University
Press, 1915).

’ OfJcial Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-seventh Session,
Plenary Meetings, 84th meeting, para. 99 and 100.

:

15

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT
SE PROCURER
LES PUBLICATIONS
DES NATIONS
CSlES
Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depozttutres
du monde entier. Informez-vous
auprts de votre libraire ou adresset-vous
a : Nations L’nies.
Section des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
,KAK

IlOJIYYMTb

M3JlAHMR

OP~AHM3AL&lM

kisnawn

OpraHtt3auwI
06%ennHeHHbtX
N areHTCTaaX BO Bcex paiionax hnrpa.
MaraskiHe
kink4 mmme
no anpecy:
rtponaxe
kwtaHkiR,
Hbto-tiopti
ttnkt

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

Oti-bEAMHEHHblX

HAUH~I

Haunii MOKHO
xym~b
B BHC+CHMS
varaNlHa\
Hasonnre
cnpaekii 06 rt3naHnax B Bauteu
KHlli(;HO~t
Oprawi3aurin
06benrttienttbtx
Haunti.
Cekunn
no
rneseea.

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estiin en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Nactones Unidas. Section dr Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New

York

oa400

90-@X05-October

1991-2.050

..
