V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

6. Also notes with satisfaction the decisions of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme and the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to expand and
strengthen their support to the joint venture and invites
them to continue their support so that the United
Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office may carry out its expanded responsibilities at a level commensurate with the
pressing needs of the region;
7. Urges all Governments, organizations of the
United Nations system and other intergovernmental
bodies, private organizations and individuals to respond
favourably, bilaterally or through the United Nations
Sudano-Sahelian Office or any other intermediary, to
requests from the Governments concerned of the region
for assistance in combating desertification;
8. Welcomes, in this regard. the inclusion of the
programmes of the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian
Office among those considered at the United Nations
Pledging Conference for Development Activities and
urges all Governments and donor organizations to consider contributing to the United Nations Trust Fund for
Sudano-Sahelian Activities;
9. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to continue to report
annually to the General Assembly, through the Economic and Social Council, on the implementation in
the Sudano-Sahelian region of the Plan of Action to
Combat Desertification.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/73.

Implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/ 172 of I 9 December 1977,
in which it approved the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification, 121 and its resolutions 33 /88 and 33 /89 of
15 December 1978 and 34/184, 34/185 and 34/187 of
18 December 1979, dealing with various aspects of the
implementation of the Plan of Action,
Taking note of the relevant sections of the report of
the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its eighth session m and Governing Council decision 8 / 17 of 29 April I 980 121 on the
implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification,
Having considered the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on
the implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification, rn the report on financing the Plan of
Action, prepared by the Secretary-General in consultation with the Governing Council, 125 the study on
the same subject prepared by a group of high-level
specialists· in international financing convened by the
Executive Director of the Programme, as called for in
General Assembly resolution 34/184, 12 " and the report
of the Secretary-General on the restoration and improvement of the Fouta-Djallon massif, 12 '
121

A/CONF.74/36, chap. I.
122
See Official Records of the General Assemblv. Thirty~fifth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/35/25).
"' Ibid annex I
124
A/35/411, an~ex.
12
' A/35/396.
126
Ibid., annex.
12
' A/35/368.

133

I. Notes with concern the findings of the analysis made by the Administrative Committee on Coordination and the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme 128 of the constraints
on the implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification, particularly the problem of insufficient
financing and the increasing demands on the scarce
resources of countries suffering from desertification;
2. Takes note with satisfaction of the decision by the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme to include pilot projects for the development and restoration of the Fouta-Djallon massif in the
programme to combat desertification. in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 34 / I 85, and of the
initiatives taken by the Executive Director of the
Programme for the implementation of those projects;
3. Expresses its satisfaction at the initiatives taken
by the United Nations Environment Programme in
seeking to overcome those constraints through its coordinating and catalytic role in the United Nations system,
its role in seeking additional means and measures for
financing the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification, the convening by its Executive Director of the Consultative Group for Desertification Control, and efforts
by the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office, on its
own behalf and as a joint venture with the Programme,
in combating desertification in the Sudano-Sahelian
region, and invites the organs, organizations and bodies
of the United Nations system to extend their full cooperation to the Programme in its task of ensuring the
implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification:
4. Invites the Governments of countries affected by
desertification to continue to give priority, as. far as
possible, to desertification-control projects in their development plans and in their requests for multilateral
and bilateral financial support:
5. Strongly· appeals to international financial institutions, multilateral financial institutions and Governments of industrialized countries, and of those developing countries in a position to do so, to give their financial support and contribute generously to the Special
Account, with a view to enhancing the implementation
of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification;
6. Urges -the Consultative Group for Desertification
Control to develop its work further, in order to ensure
the availability of the financial resources required for
the implementation of the projects supported by it:
7. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
and the study annexed thereto of the group of high-level
specialists on additional measures for financing the Plan
of Action to Combat Desertification:
8. Requests the Secretary-General to draw the attention of donor Governments and international organizations concerned to the continuous threat of desert encroachment and to the meagre resources available for
combating desertification and further requests him to
mobilize the international community with a view to implementing speedily the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification;
9. Also requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To prepare, in consultation with the United
Nations Environment Programme and with the assistance
of similar groups of experts on the subjects concerned
to be convened by the Executive Director of the
Programme:
·
'·'• See .\;3'i/41 I, annex. ,eel. IV

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

134

(i)

Feasibility studies and concrete recommendations for the implementation of the additional
means of financing deemed practicable by the
Secretary-General, including those providing
for a predictable flow of funds;
(ii) The detailed modalities of obtaining resources
on a concessionary basis;
(iii) A full feasibility study and working plan for the
establishment of an independent operational
financial corporation for the financing of desertification projects;
(b) To report on the results of the above-mentioned
studies to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
10. Calls upon the United Nations Environment
Programme, in its co-ordinating and catalytic role, to institute, in co-operation with the organs, organizations
and bodies of the United Nations system, specific
programmes of research and training at the national,
regional and international levels, and to invite private
foundations and other grant-making institutions to cooperate financially and technically in the implementation of those programmes;
11. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to continue to report
every other year to the General Assembly, through the
Economic and Social Council, on the over-all implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/74.

International co-operation in the field of the environment

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on
the work of its eighth session' 2 " and the proposals of the
high-level group of experts on the interrelationships between population, resources, environment and development, annexed thereto,
Taking into account the note by the SecretaryGeneral on international conventions and protocols in
the field of the environment,'"'
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution
I 980/49 of 23 July I 980 concerning international cooperation in the field of the environment,

Endorsing that resolution in which the Economic and
Social Council reaffirmed that environmental considerations should be viewed in the context of national plans
and priorities and the development objectives of all
countries, in particular the developing countries,
Having in mind the importance which the International Development Strategy for the Third United
Nations Development Decade attaches to an ecologically
sustainable development process,' 1 '
I. Takes note of the report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme on the
work of its eighth session-and of the decisions contained therein;
129
Official Records of the General Assemh/1•, lhirty,fijih Session.
Supplement No, 25 (A/35/25).
11
" A/35/359.
"' See resolution 35/56 above. annex. para. 41

2. Takes note with appreciation of the efforts and
progress made in the development of a broad SystemWide Medium-Term Environment Programme and a
Perspective Document:',,
3. Requests all appropriate organs, organizations
and bodies of the United Nations system to continue to
co-operate with the United Nations Environm·ent
Programme in the preparation of the System-Wide
Medium-Term Fnvironment Programme and the Perspective Document:
--1. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to take into consideration in its programme activities the provisions of the
International Development Strategy for the Third United
Nations Development Decade and, through its coordinating and catalytic rok. to continue to promote the
concept of sustainable ecological development, in particular through the promotion and further elaboration
of ways and means for the integration of environmental
concerns in development programmes and projects;
5. Endorses tht: recommendations of the Governing
Council of tht: United Nations Environment Programme on the wnrk of the United Nations system on the
interrelationships between resources, environment, people and development, as they appear in the annex to its
report on the work of its eighth session, as well as those
put forward by the Economic and Social Council in its
resolution 1980/49. and requests the Secretary-General
to take the requisite steps for their implementation;
6. Stresses the importance of the United Nations
Conference on New and Rene,\able Sources of Energy.
to he held in 1981. and calls upon the United Nations
Environment Programme to contribute actively to and
participate in the preparatory work for the Conference;
7. Welcomes the growing co-operation between the
United Nations hwironment Programme and the United
Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) and
urges them to intensify that co-operation through, inter
a/ia, joint meetings of their bureaux with the Executive
Directors of both organizations on an annual basis:
8. Also welcomes the decision of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Environment Programme to convene, prior to its tenth session, an ad hoe
meeting of governmental experts in environmental law,
welcomes the offer hy the Government of Uruguay to
serve as host for the meeting and urges Governments
and the Governing Council to take all the necessary
measures for the preparation of that meeting, including
the provision of adequate consultancy:
9. Further welcomes the launching, in March 1980,
of the World Conservation Strategy and urges all Governments and international organizations, as well as
organs. organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system. to take it into account in developing their
policies and programmes:
10. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to take the necessary
measures, in particular within the context of the systemwide medium-term environment programme, to safeguard. inter alia. the efficient use of the Fund of the
United Nations Environment Programme and the
stimulating, co-ordinating and catalytic role played by
the United Nations Environment Programme in reviewing the financial support to ongoing activities and
through its careful and selective policy with respect to
new commitments for a balanced programme;
Official Record., oj the General ,lssemh/_\', 1hirty 0 /ijih Session.
Supplement .\o. l_'i I\ _h 2,1. raras 171 and 172.
