Decision

1. Talœs note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General of 11 March 1992 on the situation in
Somalia, 182

At its 3069th meeting, on 24 April 1992, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Somalia t(, participatc,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitlcd "111e
situation in Somalia: report of the Secrctary-C:rCncral (S/23829
and Add.1 and 2)". 43

2. Urges the Somali factions to honour their commitment
under the cease-fire agreements signed at Mogadishu on 3
March 1992, 183
3. Urges al] the Somali factions to cooperate with the
Secretary-General and to facilitate the delivery by the United
Nations, its specialized agencies and other humanitarian
organizations ofhumanitarian assistance to all those in need of
it, under the supervision of the coordinator mentioned in
resolution 733 (1992);

Resolution 751 (1992)
of 24 Aprll 1992

The Security Council,
Considering the request by Somalia for the Sccurity Council
to consider the situation in Somalia. 174

4. Requests the Secretary-General to pursue his humanitarian efforts in Somalia and to use ail the resources at bis
disposai, including those of the relevant United Nations
agencies, to address urgently the critical needs of the affected
population in Somalia;

Reaffimiing its resolutions 733 ( 1992) of 23 J anuary 1992
and 746 (1992) of 17 March 1992,
Having considered the report of the Secrctary-C:rencral of
21 and 24 April 1992 on the situation in Somalia. 184

5. Appeals to all Member States and to ail humanitarian
organizations to contribute to and to cooperate with these
humanitarian relief efforts;

Taking note of the signing of the cease-fire agreements in
Mogadishu on 3 March 1992, 183 including agreements for the
implementation of measures aimed al stabilizing the cease-fire
through a United Nations monitoring mission.

6. Strongly supports the Secretary-General's decision
urgently to dispatch a technical team to Somalia, accompanied
by the Coordinator, in order to work within the framework and
objectives outlined in paragraphs 73 and 74 ofhis report and to
submit expeditiously a report to the Security Council on this
matter;

Taking note also of the signing of letters nf agreement in
Mogadishu, Hargeisa and Kismayo on the mechanism for
monitoring the cease-fire and arrangements for the equitablc
and effective distribution of humanitarian assistance in and
around Mogadishu,1 85

1. Requests that the technical team also develop a highpriority plan to establish mechanisms to ensure the unimpeded
delivery of humanitarian assistance;

Deeply disturbed by the magnitude of the hum an suffering
caused by the conflict and concemed that the continuation of
the situation in Somalia constitutes a threal to international
peace and security,

8. Calls on all parties, movements and factions in
Mogadishu in particular, and in Somalia in general, to respect
fully the security and safety of the technical team and the
personnel of the humanitarian organizations and to guarantee
theircomplete freedom ofmovement in and around Mogadishu
and other parts of Somalia;

Cognizant of the importance of cooperation hctwecn the
United Nations and regional organizations in the contcxt of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the U nitcd Nations,

9. Calls upon the Secretary-General to continue, in close
cooperation with the Organization of African Unity, the League
of Arab States and the Organization of the Islamic Conference,
his consultations with all Somali parties, movements and
factions towards the convening of a conference for national
reconciliation and unity in Somalia;

Underlining the importance which it attaches to the
international, regional and non-governmental organizations.
including the lntemational Committee of the Red Cross,
continuing to provide humanitarian and other relief assistance
to the people of Somalia under difficult circumstanccs,
Expressing its appreciation to the regional organizations,
including the Organization of African Unity. the I-eague of
Arab States and the Organization of the Jslamic Confcrence,
for their cooperation with the United Nations in the effort to
resolve the Somali problem,

10. Calls upon all Somali parties, movements and factions
to cooperate fully with the Secretary-General in the implementation of the present resolution;
11. Decides to remain seized of the matter until a peacefu!
solution is achieved.

1.
Talœs note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General of 21 and 24 April 1992 011 the situation in
Soma) ia; 184

Adopted unanimously al the 3060th
meeting.

57

(a) To seek from ail States information regarding the
action taken by them conceming the effective implementation
of the general and complete embargo on ail deliveries of
weapons and military equipment to Somalia imposed by
paragraph 5 of resolution 733 (1992);

2. Decides to establish under its authority, and in support
ofthe Secretary-General in accordance with paragraph 7below,
a United Nations Operation in Somalia;
3. Requests the Secretary-General immediately to deploy
a unit of fifty United Nations observers to monitor the ceasefire in Mogadishu in accordance with paragraphs 24 to 26 of
the Secretary-General's report;

(b) To consider any information brought to its attention
by States conceming violations of the embargo, and in that

context to make recommendations to the Council on ways of
increasing the effectiveness of the embargo;

4. Agrees, in principle, also to establish under the overall
direction of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
a United Nations security force to be deployed as soon as
possible to perform the functions described in paragraphs 27 to
29 of the report of the Secretary-General;

(c) To recommend appropriate measures in response to
violations of the embargo and to provide information on a
regular basis to the Secretary-General for general distribution
to Member States;

5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue bis
consultations with the parties in Mogadishu regarding the
proposed United Nations security force and, in the light of
those consultations, to submit bis further recommendations to
the Security Council for its decision as soon as possible;

12. Notes with appreciation the ongoing efforts of the
United Nations, its specialized agencies and humanitarian
organizations to ensure delivery of humanitarian assistance to
Somalia, particularly to Mogadishu;

6. Welcomes the intention expressed by the SecretaryGeneral in paragraph 64 of bis report to appoint a Special
Representative for Somalia to provide overall direction of
United Nations activities in Somalia and to assist him in bis
endeavours to reach a peaceful resolution of the conflict in
Somalia;

13. Calls upon the international community to support,
with financial and other resources, the implementation of the
ninety-day Plan of Action for Emergency Humanitarian
Assistance to Somalia;
14. Urges ail parties concemed in Somalia to facilitate the
efforts of the United Nations, its specialized agencies and
humanitarian organizations to provide urgent humanitarian
assistance to the affected population in Somalia and reiterates
its call for the full respect for the security and safety of the
personnel of the humanitarian organizations and the guarantee
oftheircomplete freedom ofmovement in and around Mogadishu and other parts of Somalia;

7. Also requests the Secretary-General as part of bis
continuing mission in Somalia to facilitate an immediate and
effective cessation ofhostilities and the maintenance of a ceasefire throughout the country in order to promote the process of
reconciliation and political settlement in Somalia and to provide
urgent humanitarian assistance;
8. Welcomes the cooperation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States, the Organization of African
Unity and the Organization of the Islamic Conference in
resolving the problem in Somalia;

15. Calls upon ail Somali parties, movements and factions
to cooperate fullywith the Secretary-General in the implementation of the present resolution;
16. Decides to remain seized of the matter until a peaceful
solution is achieved.

9. Calls upon ail parties, movements and factions in
Somalia immediately to cease hostilities and to maintain a
cease-fire throughout the country in order to promote the
process of reconciliation and political settlement in Somalia;

Adopted unanimousJy al the 3069th
meeting.

Decisions

10. Requeststhe Secretary-General to continue as a matter
of priority bis consultations with ail Somali parties, movements
and factions towards the convening of a conference on national
reconciliation and unity in Somalia in close cooperation with
the League of Arab States, the Organization of African Unity
and the Organization of the Islamic Conference;

In a letter dated 24 April 1992, 186 addressed to the
President of the Security Council for the attention of the
members of the Council, the Secretary-General referred to
paragraph 6 of resolution 751 (1992) of 24 April 1992 by which
the Council had welcomed bis intention to appoint a Special
Representative for Somalia to provide overall direction of
United Nations activities in Somalia and to assist him in bis
endeavours for a peaceful resolution of the conflict in that
country.

11. Decides to establish, in accordance with rule 28 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council, a
Committee of the Security Council consisting of ail the members of the Council, to undertake the following tasks and to
report on its work to the Council with its observations and
recommendations:

The Secretary-General informed the Council that having
completed the necessary consultations, be intended to appoint

58
