UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/26785
23 November 1993
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3318th meeting of the Security Council, held on 23 November 1993, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item "The question of South
Africa", the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the successful completion of the
multi-party negotiating process in South Africa, and the conclusion of
agreements reached therein on an interim constitution and electoral bill.
These agreements constitute a historic step forward in establishing a
democratic, non-racial and united South Africa.
"The Security Council looks forward to the elections to be held in
South Africa in April 1994. It urges all parties in South Africa,
including those which did not participate fully in the multi-party talks,
to respect agreements reached during the negotiations, to re-commit
themselves to democratic principles, to take part in the elections and to
resolve outstanding issues by peaceful means only.
"The Security Council reiterates its determination to continue to
support the process of peaceful democratic change in South Africa for the
benefit of all South Africans. The Security Council commends once again
the work being done by the Secretary-General and the United Nations
Observer Mission in South Africa (UNOMSA) in assisting that process. It
invites the Secretary-General to accelerate contingency planning for a
possible United Nations role in the election process, including
coordination with the observer missions of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), European Community (EC) and Commonwealth, to enable
expeditious consideration of a request to the United Nations for such
assistance. In this connection, the Council urges early establishment of
the Transitional Executive Council and the Independent Electoral
Commission.
"The Security Council considers that South Africa’s transition to
democracy must be underpinned by economic and social reconstruction and
development, and calls on the international community to assist in this
regard."

-----

93-65587 (E)

231193
