A /69/PV.101

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

101st plenary meeting

Tuesday, 1 September 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda items 13 and 115 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
(a) Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/69/L.85)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held a debate on agenda item 13
and its sub-item (a), jointly with agenda item 115, and
adopted resolution 69/15, at its 51st plenary meeting, on
14 November 2014. Members will also recall that, under
sub-item (a) of agenda item 13 and agenda item 115, the
Assembly adopted resolution 69/108, at its 65th plenary
meeting, on 8 December 2014, and adopted resolution
69/244 and decision 69/550, at its 77th plenary meeting,
held on 29 December 2014. Members will further recall
that, under the same items, the General Assembly
adopted decision 69/555, at its 78th plenary meeting, on
16 January 2015, and decision 69/557, at its 81st plenary
meeting, on 5 March 2015.
I am pleased to address this plenary meeting
convened to take action on draft resolution A/69/L.85,
by which the Assembly would transmit the draft

outcome document of the summit for the adoption of
the post-2015 development agenda to the seventieth
session for adoption during the summit. The successful
conclusion of the negotiations, on 2 August, was a
fitting culmination to the nearly two years of intensive,
inclusive preparations and negotiations. It took a
considerable amount of effort, flexibility and a spirit of
compromise by all to arrive at this point.
We should all be proud of what we have attained
together. The draft outcome document, entitled
“Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, which world leaders will
adopt later this month in New York, is a historic
achievement. The spirit with which the draft outcome
document was formulated and agreed by consensus
is a triumph for multilateralism. We have proved that
the global community can work together to address
pressing issues facing humankind, while making the
necessary commitments for the benefit of all.
I would like to take this opportunity to convey
my sincere appreciation to Member States, observers
and all stakeholders for their active and constructive
engagement throughout the process. I wish to pay
special tribute to the co-facilitators, Ambassador David
Donoghue, Permanent Representative of Ireland,
and Ambassador Macharia Kamau, Permanent
Representative of Kenya, for their steadfast commitment
in steering the negotiations to a successful conclusion.
I highly commend His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his personal commitment
and the continuous support provided by the Secretariat

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-26926 (E)

*1526926*

A/69/PV.101

and by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs
in particular. I also thank Ms. Amina Mohammed,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Post-2015
Development Planning, for her tireless efforts. And I
thank civil society, non-governmental organizations,
major groups, parliamentarians, the private sector,
youth, local authorities, academia, philanthropic
organizations and all stakeholders who provided
valuable inputs.
By putting the eradication of poverty, improving
livelihoods for all, transforming economies and
protecting our planet among its core objectives, the
new agenda is ambitious, inclusive and transformative.
It seeks to leave no one behind. The 17 Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) — the main component of
the new development framework — are comprehensive
and address the social, economic and environmental
dimensions of sustainable development in an integrated
way.
While the SDGs will be universally applicable,
there is also recognition of national circumstances,
different levels of development and the needs of
countries in special situations, particularly least
developed countries, landlocked developing countries,
small island developing States and Africa.
As I have underscored before, the task ahead will
be to ensure the successful implementation of the new
development agenda, once adopted. In that context,
integrating it into our respective national development
plans, mobilizing adequate financial resources,
technology development and transfer and capacitybuilding and ensuring effective follow-up and review
will be critical.
Taken together with the adoption of the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda of the third International
Conference on Financing for Development, we now
have a comprehensive framework that will support the
implementation of the new agenda.
We have to ensure that the unfinished business of
the Millennium Development Goals, which have been
incorporated into the Sustainable Development Goals,
is carried forward. In that regard, greater attention will
be needed in the areas of education, health, water and
sanitation, advancing gender equality and women’s
empowerment, and the creation of employment, among
other things. Furthermore, greater investments will
be required in many areas, such as infrastructure
development, the promotion of inclusive and sustainable

2/30

01/09/2015

economic growth and development, the improvement
of productive capacities, and the creation of more
opportunities for employment, especially for youth.
The international community and citizens around
the world have waited for this moment with anticipation
and great expectations. By adopting the draft resolution
before us today and transmitting the draft outcome
document to the summit for adoption of the post-2015
development agenda, we will have taken an important
step towards putting our world on a more prosperous,
inclusive and sustainable path. As we embark upon this
collective journey, we have to uphold the pledge that no
one will be left behind.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: Today is the start of
a new era. We have travelled a long way together to
reach this turning point. For 15 years, our pursuit of
development has been inspired by the eight Millennium
Development Goals, which embodied our ambition to
eradicate extreme poverty and appalling social ills.
Five years ago, members asked me to initiate
thinking on a post-2015 development agenda. Two years
later, at the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, the General Assembly embarked upon
a process to craft a set of sustainable development
goals — the SDGs — to be at the centre of that agenda.
The General Assembly set in motion unprecedented
international reflection, consultation and negotiations.
All Member States joined in. We asked countless
people what they wanted the world to be like in
2030. The General Assembly listened to civil society
organizations, academia, the private sector and many
others, establishing a new standard for the inclusion of
stakeholders in United Nations policy-shaping. Member
States spoke to each other and carried on a constructive
dialogue. The Assembly overcame differences in the
interest of the common good, and after three years of
negotiations it reached an agreement, in early August,
on a bold vision for transforming our world.
I commend the President of the General Assembly,
as well as the co-Chairs of the Open Working Group
and the co-facilitators of the post-2015 negotiations, for
their extraordinary leadership. Today we are ready to
hand over this Agenda to world leaders for endorsement
at the summit later this month.
Agenda 2030 aims high. It puts people at the centre
of development. It aims to foster human well-being,

15-26926

01/09/2015

prosperity, peace and justice on a healthy planet. It
pursues respect for the human rights of all people and
gender equality. It speaks to all people in all countries
and calls for action from everyone everywhere. It aims
to inspire and create genuine partnerships among all
countries and actors.
This Agenda marks a paradigm shift. It
completes the unfinished business of the Millennium
Development Goals, lifts the level of ambition and
tackles emerging issues and challenges. It recognizes
the close interdependence of the economic, social and
environmental dimensions of sustainable development.
It breaks new ground in the way it links peace and
security to sustainable development, while highlighting
the centrality of the rule of law, accountable institutions
and access to justice. It presents solutions to deal with
root causes of the complex problems in our world
today, from migration and conflict to exclusion,
violence against women and humanitarian crises. And
it prioritizes the vulnerable and marginalized, vowing
to leave no one behind.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is
an agreement of which the General Assembly can be
proud. Its implementation will require all stakeholders
to continue to champion this cause. Reliable data and
indicators will be essential for measuring progress and
making sure our efforts reach everyone.
The year 2015 is a watershed year for putting the
world on a sustainable pathway. The financing for
development agreement reached in Addis Ababa in July
and the efforts to forge a new path forward on climate
change in Paris in December are critical elements
for the success of our endeavours. Together, they are
foundational steps to begin implementing the 2030
Agenda.
They will be followed next year by further crucial
steps, including the World Humanitarian Summit in
Istanbul in May, the Habitat III Conference in Quito
in October and the special session of the General
Assembly on the world drug problem in April. I urge
the Assembly to continue showing the same strong
commitment, flexibility and vision it has demonstrated
in adopting the new development agenda.
At this month’s summit, we expect Heads of State
and Government not to only endorse the new Agenda
but also to affirm their strong political commitment
to its timely implementation. I am delighted that
more than 150 world leaders, as well as His Holiness

A/69/PV.101

Pope Francis, will join us to start this new era for
sustainable development. We must all now act with the
utmost ambition and mobilize the maximum political
will.
Seventy years ago, the United Nations was born
from the experiences and convictions of great men
and women who had seen the horrors of war. With the
adoption today of draft resolution A/69/L.85, the United
Nations will bring the international community to the
cusp of decisions that can help realize the founders’
dream of a world of peace and dignity for all.
I thank the General Assembly for having taken the
world so far on our collective journey towards a better
world for all the world’s peoples. Let us all now work
with determination to reach that destination.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General of
the United Nations for his statement.
Before proceeding further, I should like to make an
oral revision of a technical nature to the annex of draft
resolution A/69/L.85. In the footnote on page 13 of the
document, a reference should be added to addendum
2 of the report of the Open Working Group on
Sustainable Development Goals (document A/68/970),
which includes a compilation of statements submitted
by some Member States following the issuance of the
compilation contained in addendum 1. The footnote
would now read as follows: “Contained in the report of
the Open Working Group of the General Assembly on
Sustainable Development Goals (A/68/970 and Corr.1;
see also A/68/970/Add.1 and Add. 2).”
If there is no objection, we shall continue to
consider the draft proposal as orally revised.
It was so decided.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/69/L.85, as orally revised.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/69/L.85, entitled “Draft outcome document
of the United Nations summit for the adoption of the
post-2015 development agenda”, as orally revised.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/69/L.85, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/69/L.85, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 69/315).
The President: Before giving the floor to the
speakers in explanation of position, may I remind

15-269263/30

A/69/PV.101

01/09/2015

delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.

representative of Maldives on behalf of the Alliance of
Small Island States.

Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.

The draft outcome document of the intergovernmental
negotiations
on
the
post-2015
development
agenda — entitled “Transforming Our World: The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development” (resolution
69/315, annex) — is the culmination of months of
intense negotiations that sought to ensure that the final
document provided a clear and transformative road map
to sustainable development in which economic, social
and environmental issues would be carefully integrated
in a balanced manner. Importantly, the document
reflects our strong desire to ensure that no one is left
behind. CARICOM wishes to thank all Member States
for the spirit of cooperation they displayed, which
contributed significantly to the timely finalization of
the draft outcome document. We also wish to put on
record our commendation of the co-facilitators of the
preparatory process, Ambassadors Macharia Kamau
and David Donoghue, the Permanent Representatives
of Kenya and Ireland, respectively, for their committed
leadership and fortitude in guiding us to the conclusion
of the intergovernmental negotiations, on 2 August.

The Group welcomes the successful conclusion
of the negotiations on the post-2015 development
agenda and the draft outcome document, entitled
“Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, which was agreed by
consensus on 2 August. The Group notes that this is
not a perfect document, but it represents a political
balance that delivers a meaningful and ambitious
post-2015 development agenda that builds on the
Millennium Development Goals in order to adequately
and predictably address the development interests of all
States Members of the United Nations in the true spirit
of an enduring global partnership for development.
Eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions
is recognized as the greatest global challenge there is,
and as an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development. Importantly, the agenda also recognizes
our different national realities, capacities and levels
of development, and respects our national policies and
priorities.
On behalf of the Group of 77 and China, we
would once again like to express our gratitude to the
co-facilitators, to you personally, Mr. President, and
to the Secretary-General and the entire Secretariat.
We are particularly grateful to the co-facilitators for
guiding us through this intergovernmental process in
an open and transparent way that has given all Member
States an opportunity to ensure that their interests and
concerns are reflected. We would also like to convey our
gratitude to the major groups, including civil society
organizations, that have supported our work through
this constructive process. I would like to conclude by
welcoming the adoption of today’s resolution 69/315,
which transmits the draft outcome document of the
negotations on the post-2015 development agenda to the
General Assembly for action at its seventieth session.
Miss Richards (Jamaica): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the 14 States members
of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM). We align
our statement with the statement just delivered by the
representative of South Africa on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China and with the one to be delivered by the

4/30

We have before us a new development agenda that
is truly unprecedented in scope. For the next 15 years,
both developed and developing countries will be guided
by an inclusive and implementable blueprint that not
only reflects the three dimensions of sustainable
development but is people-centred above all, with
provisions that ensure a whole-of-society engagement
as well as the contribution of all stakeholders in a
manner consistent with their respective roles, capacities
and existing obligations. That sustainable development
agenda, together with the recently adopted Addis
Ababa Action Agenda and the accord to be adopted
in December at the end of the 2015 Paris Conference
of the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, represents a pivotal step forward for
humankind that will, if fully implemented, yield the
future we want. Accordingly, CARICOM commits
to contributing to a robust, systematic and effective
follow-up and review process.
In conclusion, we wish to use this occasion to
reaffirm our commitment to this transformational
agenda aimed at delivering sustainable development
for present and future generations. The CARICOM
member States therefore recommend the document
under consideration today to their Heads of State for

15-26926

01/09/2015

their adoption and endorsement at the summit to be
held later this month.
Mr. González Franco (Paraguay): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the
32 States members of the Group of Landlocked
Developing Countries (LLDCs). At the outset, I would
like to congratulate the General Assembly on the
progress that has been made so far on the long road
we have travelled in our quest for a new development
agenda to guide our countries and communities for the
next 15 years. We joined others in recommending the
adoption of this important draft outcome document
(resolution 69/315, annex).
On behalf of the LLDCs, I would like to express
our appreciation for the excellent leadership of
the negotiation process by the two co-facilitators,
Ambassadors Macharia Kamau of Kenya and David
Donoghue of Ireland. I furthermore commend member
countries for their hard work, and civil society for its
active participation and valuable input into the process.
The consultations and negotiations were conducted in
an inclusive and transparent manner, including all the
preparatory work done after the holding of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development in Rio
de Janeiro.
Being landlocked continues to be a major contributing
factor to the high incidence in our countries of extreme
poverty, as well as a source of our structural constraints.
LLDC economies are vulnerable to external shocks,
systemic weaknesses in global trade and its financial
and economic architecture and to volatility and
contractions in key global indicators. In view of the
seriousness and complexity of the challenges we face,
I believe it is important to emphasize that landlocked
developing countries fully endorse the ambitious and
transformational vision set out in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, and recognize that
eradicating poverty in all its dimensions is the greatest
challenge of our time and an indispensable requirement
for sustainable development. We share the objectives of
promoting a world free of poverty, hunger and disease
and one in which human habitats are safe, resilient and
sustainable. We reaffirm our commitment to achieving
a better world in which every country enjoys sustained,
inclusive economic growth and can provide decent
work for all.
We appreciate the fact that the new agenda
acknowledges that each country faces specific

A/69/PV.101

challenges in its pursuit of sustainable development
and that the most vulnerable deserve special attention,
including those dealing with the unique and special
challenges related to being landlocked. We are therefore
grateful for the collective commitment that the
international community makes in the draft document
with regard to ensuring the full implementation of
the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked
Developing Countries for the Decade 2014-2024. We
would like to underscore the complementarity between
the goals and targets set out in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the six priority areas of
the Vienna Programme of Action, and to emphasize
that the successful and timely implementation of both
blueprints will be essential to local, national, regional
and global efforts to spur social and economic progress
in our countries.
Lastly, the LLDCs reiterate the importance of
a renewed and strengthened global partnership for
sustainable development that includes South-South and
triangular cooperation, as well as cooperation between
and among the relevant international and regional
organizations, and between public- and private-sector
actors. We emphasize the importance of meeting, by
all and in a timely fashion, of the commitments spelled
out in this draft document. We stress that effective
partnership will be crucial in mobilizing and sharing
the knowledge, expertise, technology and financial
resources needed to implement the various goals and
targets of the 2030 development agenda and of the
Vienna Programme of Action.
Mr. Tupouniua (Tonga): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 12 Pacific small island developing
States at the United Nations. We associate ourselves
with the statement to be delivered by the representative
of Maldives as Chair of the Alliance of Small Island
States, and for those of us who are members, with the
remarks delivered earlier by the representative of South
Africa as Chair of the Group of 77 and China.
We join others in expressing our sincere
congratulations to you, Mr. President, and to the
co-facilitators — His Excellency Ambassador Macharia
Kamau, Permanent Representative of the Republic
of Kenya, and His Excellency Mr. David Donoghue,
Permanent Representative of Ireland — for their
remarkable and stellar leadership, commitment and
passion in steering a transparent, open, fair, balanced
and inclusive process that truly has the potential to live

15-269265/30

A/69/PV.101

01/09/2015

up to its promise to banish the scourge of poverty from
our midst and leave no one behind.

namely, Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.

The Pacific small island developing States are
pleased to play an integral part in setting the historic
legacy of a truly universal and sustainable development
agenda process, as we saw the potential for the agenda
to meet the specific needs and vulnerabilities of our
small island developing States and those in our Pacific
islands region. We well know that the road was not easy,
and we applaud the spirit of flexibility, compromise
and multilateralism that paved the way to where we
are today. The dual promises from the agenda, both
universal and transformative, set a very high bar.
The response of all who took part in the creation of
the agenda, both inside and outside the Hall, has been
admirable and commendable.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting to ensure follow-up to the
intergovernmental negotiations that led to the draft
outcome document contained in the annex to resolution
69/315, on the post-2015 development agenda, to be
adopted during the upcoming United Nations summit
to be held from 25 to 27 September. We would also like
to thank the Permanent Representative of Ireland and
the Permanent Representative of Kenya for their effors
to facilitate the intergovernmental negotiations on the
post-2015 development agenda — negotiations that
lasted for more than two years.

We are pleased to take another positive step towards
the realization of the agenda today by taking action
to transmit the draft outcome document — entitled
“Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development — to the seventieth session
of the General Assembly for consideration during the
summit for the adoption of the agenda. We reaffirm
our strong commitment to the draft outcome document,
whose universality reflects our deepest concerns about
the changing climate, which threatens not only our
prospects for sustainable development but also our very
survival, as well as an ocean under threat on which we
rely for livelihoods. The international community must
continue to maintain high ambition in the negotiation
process of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, so as to achieve a legally binding
climate agreement for adoption at the twenty-first
United Nations Climate Change Conference, to be held
in Paris, as part of a global effort to heal the health of
our planet and to eradicate poverty by 2030.
The commitment we displayed in negotiating this
draft document must now be directed towards its full,
speedy and effective implementation. We recognize
the imperative of national ownership and leadership of
the universal development agenda. We must also work,
through the High-level Political Forum on Sustainable
Development and the United Nations fit-for-purpose
system, so as to ensure that the needed programmes,
mechanisms and actions on the ground are taken so that
truly no one is left behind.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I speak on
behalf of the members of the Gulf Cooperation Council,

6/30

The Gulf Cooperation Council engaged with all
partners throughout the negotiations. We would like to
express our gratitude to all those who contributed to
the success of the dialogue and negotiations. We would
also like to thank those who devoted time to share their
experiences and knowledge with us. The negotiations
demonstrated the importance of dialogue and
compromise in narrowing differences. In that context,
our countries would like to state their position with
regard to certain points of the draft outcome document.
With regard to Goal 5 — “Achieve gender equality
and empower all women and girls” — we have
reservations about the use of the term “early” marriage.
Child marriage is banned by our respective legislations.
With regard to Goal 8, we would also like to state
that we have the sovereign right to implement all
decisions pertaining to migrant workers.
We also have reservations with regard to all points
on reproductive health that might run counter to sharia
law.
With regard to inheritance, our legislation respects
women’s rights. Often, women’s share is greater than
that of men. We are currently undertaking efforts to
safeguard women’s rights pertaining to inheritance in
line with our national legislation.
We are committed to respecting internationally
recognized human rights. With regard to the use of the
word “gender”, it can refer both to men and women.
With regard to “families”, we understand that to mean
a husband, a wife and children. We regret the absence
of any direct mention of families in the draft outcome
document and their role in implementing and achieving
sustainable development.

15-26926

01/09/2015

In referring to those reservations, I also wish to point
out that they were also indicated during proceedings of
the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development.
Mr. Waheed (Maldives): I have the great privilege
and honour to speak on behalf of the States members
of the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS). We
align our statement with the statement delivered by the
Permanent Representative of South Africa on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China.
First, let me take a moment to extend our
condolences for the lives lost in Dominica, as well
as our concern for all those affected by Tropical
Storm Erika, and by Hurricane Danny before it. With
Hurricane Fred now developing near Cabo Verde, these
are stark reminders of the ever-present vulnerabilities
of small island developing States (SIDS) to the effects
of extreme weather events exacerbated by the effects of
climate change.
I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, and
your appointed co-facilitators — His Excellency
Mr. Macharia Kamau, Permanent Representative of
the Republic of Kenya, and His Excellency Mr. David
Donoghue, Permanent Representative of Ireland — for
their tireless efforts and the superb job that they have
done to map a pathway towards achieving not only a
concise and robust agenda, but one that is comprehensive,
inclusive and implementable. AOSIS worked diligently
on this agenda because we desire the creation of a
world where poverty and hunger no longer exist; where
due diligence is paid to our planet and environment;
and where our countries and peoples are resilient and
prosperous.
Following several months of intense negotiations
and three years of hard work, it was a very fulfilling
experience to finally, on 2 August, informally agree
on the draft outcome document entitled “Transforming
Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development”. We were encouraged by the flexibility
shown by all, and enthused by the commitment we saw.
On behalf of AOSIS, I would like to take a moment to
thank all the negotiators and participants in the process,
including our partners, the United Nations system and
the impassioned members of civil society.
Today, we have taken action to transmit the
draft outcome document to the seventieth session for
consideration during the summit for the adoption of
this robust agenda for our peoples. We again pledge our
fullest commitment to making this world a better place

A/69/PV.101

where no one is left behind. Implementation is the key
to its success. Therefore, we call on the United Nations,
our developed partners, civil society, the private sector
and all citizens to do their part in ensuring that by
2030 we can realize the true purpose and intent of our
agenda.
We wish to take this opportunity to highlight that,
for this agenda to be accomplished, we must work
together in unity. We must put in place mechanisms that
best assist the ones furthest behind, the ones most in
need. We have to work in a coherent and cohesive way.
That is where we believe that the High-level Political
Forum, with the support of the United Nations and the
relevant regional commissions, can play an integral
part.
For SIDS and other countries in special situations,
there should be increased support for strengthening
data collection and capacity-building, as well as
developing national and global baselines, so that we
are better able to identify and respond to this agenda,
while also transparently and accurately tracking our
progress. We join the call by the Secretary-General’s
Special Adviser on Post-2015 Development Planning,
Ms. Amina Mohammed, for developed countries to
assist with technology and financing, which represent
an investment in our future that will eventually realize
the collective interests of the global community. As we
all know, delaying action comes at a very high price, so
let us not waste this opportunity to change the course
of history.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our commitment to
realizing the dream of Agenda 2030, to eradicating
poverty and to conserving and sustainably using our
environment, including our oceans and seas, to truly
transform our world.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I have the honour to
deliver this joint statement on behalf of the following
countries: Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Ecuador, India, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Peru, the
Philippines and my own country, Indonesia.
First, we would like especially to recognize and
thank the co-facilitators for the relentless efforts and
hard work that led to the successful conclusion of the
negotiations on the draft outcome document on the post2015 development agenda, as set out in the annex to
resolution 69/315, adopted earlier. We likewise extend
our sincere appreciation to the outstanding team that
supported the co-facilitators’ work.

15-269267/30

A/69/PV.101

The draft outcome document was carefully crafted
through a long, inclusive process. We now have before
us a document that comprehensively incorporates
the necessary elements and measures for eradicating
poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including
extreme poverty, as well as achieving sustainable
development in its three dimensions — economic, social
and environmental — in a balanced and integrated
manner.
However, with regard to the amendments on targets
2.5 and 15.6, related to access to genetic resources, which
were introduced during the last phase of the negotiations
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, our
countries want to convey the following concerns and
considerations.
Targets 2.5 and 15.6 should, and could, have been
addressed without making substantive changes to such
targets, taking into consideration the fact they had been
extensively discussed and agreed by consensus at the
Open Working Group on Sustainable Development
Goals and endorsed by resolution 68/309. In that
respect, the 2030 agenda states:
“We encourage ongoing efforts by States in
other forums to address key issues which pose
potential challenges to the implementation of our
Agenda, and we respect the independent mandates
of those processes.” (resolution 69/315, para. 58)
Therefore, we reiterate that the amended targets
should not undermine the level of ambition of other
international agreements.
Targets 2.5 and 15.6 should be interpreted and
applied in accordance with the objectives of the Nagoya
Protocol, in which the international community agreed,
first, on
“the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising
from the utilization of genetic resources, including
by appropriate access to genetic resources and by
appropriate transfer of relevant technologies”;
and, secondly, to
“take measures, as appropriate, with the aim of
ensuring that traditional knowledge associated
with genetic resources that is held by indigenous
and local communities is accessed with the prior
and informed consent or approval and involvement
of these indigenous and local communities”.

8/30

01/09/2015

Fulfilling targets 2.5 and 15.6 is crucial to achieving
food security and nutrition, health and the sustainable
management of biodiversity. The achievement of the
Goals and targets on these issues is essential if we are
to fulfil the overarching goal of poverty eradication in
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Finally, I would kindly ask you, Mr. President,
to ensure that this statement and our understanding
on these targets are formally noted in the General
Assembly records.
Ms. Engelbrecht (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, I would like to reiterate our deep gratitude
to the co-facilitators, Ambassador Macharia Kamau,
Permanent Representative of Kenya, and Ambassador
David Donoghue, Permanent Representative of Ireland,
as well as to the Secretariat, for their tireless efforts
to produce this draft outcome document (resolution
69/315, annex), which was the result of many hours of
work and intergovernmental negotiations. We must also
express our thanks for the coordination, conciliation
and cohesion work undertaken by South Africa in its
capacity as the Chair of the Group of 77 and China.
We align ourselves with the statement that was just
made by the representative of South Africa on behalf of
the Group of African States.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in voting
to transmit to the upcoming summit the document
entitled “Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development”, would like to express
its reservations and clarifications of position on
specific aspects and elements in the draft document.
Specifically, we would note the following.
First, we have a reservation on the preamble
in connection with each instance where it reflects
primarily a single vision of sustainable development
that is fundamentally aligned with the interests of
the Western world, given that the preamble, the first
part of a document of such importance, is intended
to project a vision of how it wants the sustainable
future for humankind to be — even if it contains many
positive elements, such as the recognition of combating
poverty and inequality as objectives key to sustainable
development. On the other hand, the preamble eclipses
the recognition of different views, models, strategies
and policies that make great contributions to sustainable
development.

15-26926

01/09/2015

Mr. Emiliou (Cyprus), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
Secondly, we reiterate our reservations on specific
targets set out when the final document (A/68/970/Add.1)
of the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development
Goals was adopted. In that context, when our country
explained its positions and reservations on the report,
we expressed a reservation on the concept of “modern
energy for all”, as reflected in Goal 7 and in targets
7.1 and 7.b. We expressed those reservations on the
concept, as we had previously with regard to the
outcome document of the Rio+20 Conference, The
Future We Want” (A/66/288, annex), on account of
the lack of clarity regarding the concept of “modern
energy”, including, inter alia, the possible use of new
technologies and the necessary assessment of their
use in the national context in the light of the national
priorities for sustainable development and the relevant
legal frameworks and policies.
In addition, Venezuela expresses reservations
with regard to target 12.c, as also pointed out at the
Rio+20 Conference. For Venezuela, on the basis of
its 1999 Constitution, the reference to the removal
of subsidies for fossil fuels has an interventionist
character in States’ public policies. We therefore we do
not accept its relationship with any of the Sustainable
Development Goals. Venezuela will not accept any kind
of evaluation, monitoring, reporting or reviewing of
our national energy policies and measures that involve
an effect on our national sovereignty. That paragraph,
in addition, distances itself from and substantially
modifies the lines agreed upon in the Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation of 2002.
Furthermore, we express reservations with regard
target 14.c. It is necessary to recall once again that
Venezuela is not part of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea. Our country would have preferred
that the text agreed by the Open Working Group on
Sustainable Development Goals be retained, as this is
a highly sensitive matter for our country that touches
upon aspects related to our sovereignty.
Thirdly, and finally, in the section entitled, “Means
of implementation and the Global Partnership”, we
reiterate the reservations and comments made at the
time of the adoption of the document entitled “Addis
Ababa Agenda for Action”, outcome of the third
Conference on Financing for Development, and relating
to paragraphs 31, 49, 60 and 69 of that document,

A/69/PV.101

referring to the removal of subsidies for fossil fuels,
modern energy, low-carbon economies and mechanisms
for establishing the carbon price, respectively, which
are reflected in the current draft outcome document.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): At the
outset, let me thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
President of the General Assembly Sam Kutesa and the
Secretariat for their tireless efforts to draft what will be
the historic outcome document of the United Nations
summit to adopt the post-2015 development agenda
(resolution 69/315, annex).
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the co-facilitators, Ambassador Kamau of Kenya and
Ambassador Donoghue of Ireland, as well as former
Ambassador Csaba Kőrösi of Hungary, for their
outstanding and visionary leadership of the negotiation
process. Under their eminent and capable stewardship,
unprecedented open and inclusive intergovernmental
negotiations with all stakeholders led to an agreed
draft outcome document. The processes whereby
the Sustainable Development Goals and the post2015 development agenda were defined have finally
coherently converged into a unified 2030 strategy for
sustainable development, with poverty eradication,
sustainable development and human rights at its core.
We hope that the success on the first two key 2015
decision points, the third International Conference on
Financing for Development and the post-2015 summit
later this month, will add to the positive outcome of the
third key event — the climate change negotiations — thus
paving the way for a new climate change agreement in
Paris. We are confident that the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda, the Sustainable Development Agenda and the
new global agreement on climate change will provide
a strong foundation for action at the national, regional
and global levels for poverty eradication and economic,
social and environmental sustainability.
This is a once-in-a-generation opportunity that
must be seized, with our highest political commitment.
Kazakhstan stands ready to offer the best of itself to
the joint international effort to realize a new vision
for a transformative era that has a significant impact
on humankind by facilitating a transition to a truly
sustainable, just and equitable future.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to thank Mr. Sam Kutesa, President of the General
Assembly, for convening today’s meeting to adopt
resolution 69/315. My delegation wishes to join others

15-269269/30

A/69/PV.101

in welcoming the imminent adoption of the historic
document entitled “Transforming Our World: The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”. I would
like to commend the strong and able leadership of
the co-facilitators, Ambassadors David Donoghue of
Ireland and Macharia Kamau of Kenya, who brought
our many different positions together and guided us
to consensus. I also commend the strong leadership
of the co-facilitator of the Open Working Group on
Sustainable Development Goals, Ambassador Kőrösi
of Hungary. Without their tireless and selfless efforts
we would not have arrived at this moment here today. I
would also like to express our deep appreciation to all the
delegations, observers and various other stakeholders
engaged in the process for their constructiveness and
flexibility.
This has been a long-running process that dates
back both to the Millennium Declaration and “The
future we want” (resolution 66/288). Japan has been
actively engaged in the whole process, and contributed
earnestly to the negotiations. The text of the draft
outcome document (resolution 69/315, annex) is not a
perfect one, since it still includes the points I referred
to in Japan’s explanation of position at the end of the
deliberations of the Open Working Group last year.
But overall, my delegation believes we have a good,
forward-looking agenda that we can be proud of before
future generations. In particular, we are very pleased
with the sharp focus on people-centredness, as well
as the references to the importance of preparedness
for natural disasters, universal health coverage and
quality infrastructure, all of which Japan emphasized
throughout the negotiation process. We are also satisfied
with the document’s consistency with the outcome of
the third United Nations World Conference on Disaster
Risk Reduction, held in Sendai in March.
The implementation of this universal, transformative
and people-centred agenda will be crucial and very
difficult. Japan will make every effort to implement its
goals and targets, in cooperation with other Member
States, stakeholders and international organizations, so
that we can eradicate poverty and transform our world
into a sustainable planet where no one is left behind.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to express Colombia’s satisfaction with
today’s adoption of the 2030 agenda for sustainable
development (resolution 69/315, annex). This is a
historic event and the beginning of a new era, as the
Secretary-General said. I would like to congratulate

10/30

01/09/2015

President Kutesa and the Assembly for fulfilling their
mandate, and to thank the presidency for its leadership
in concluding the negotiations and arriving at a
consensus agreement on the 2030 agenda for sustainable
development.
I would also to join my colleagues in expressing our
gratitude to Ambassadors Macharia Kamau and David
Donoghue, as well as to Ambassador Csaba Kőrösi,
who was there for the earlier part of the process, for
their untiring efforts to ensure that the agenda would
become the reality that it has now achieved today with
the decision to transmit it to the seventieth session
for adoption. I would like to thank all who worked
day and night on the text before us today. It happened
not just through our consensus but also through the
participation of thousands of people. I would like to
thank the Secretary-General’s team, led by Ms. Amina
Mohammed, Special Adviser on Post-2015 Development
Planning, to whom we owe special thanks.
The agenda is the result of the work of three years,
beginning in June 2012, starting with a proposal made
by Colombia, at the 2012 United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development in Rio de Janeiro, that we
establish goals and targets to address the outstanding
issues of the Millennium Development Goals and
help to put our planet and its resources on a path to
sustainability. To do that, we agreed to create a working
group. It began with 30 representatives and eventually
became a fully multilateral negotiation process in
which all Member States were able to participate, along
with representatives of civil society and academia.
The United Nations was open to everyone. Today, for
the first time, we are looking at a universal agenda
that includes the three dimensions of sustainable
development in its 169 interrelated goals, which have
the potential to change our societies’ direction.
Our commitment is primarily to eradicating poverty
and hunger; it is strengthened by the commitments in
the agenda on protecting the environment by, among
other things, transitioning to sustainable patterns
of consumption and production. Its implementation
includes everyone — indigenous minorities; people of
African descent; vulnerable groups such as the elderly,
children, young people and lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender persons; migrants, regardless of their
migration status, and people with disabilities, among
many other groups, including the various forms of the
family. Our efforts should focus on the implementation
of the agenda, and we know that will be no easy task.

15-26926

01/09/2015

Nationally, regionally and globally, we must find
ways to ensure that our institutions can work in a
coordinated fashion to design and implement public
policies, plans and programmes aimed at achieving the
agenda’s goals, and that we have coordinated follow-up
that can ensure the goals’ effectiveness and efficiency
over the next 15 years. We also need to establish
successful partnerships between the public and private
sectors and civil society in every country, and to define
the best regional strategies for supporting the agenda’s
implementation and, of course, the presentation of data
in accordance with each region’s characteristics and
needs.
Thanks to our work in the dialogues in the Economic
and Social Council, my delegation is also anxious to
see how the United Nations development system will
support the implementation of the agenda. As it states,
we will need planning, strategic implementation and
systematic data and information. We are prepared to
continue to work on the process and to be part of this
positive effort with the support of all.
Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic of Korea): I would
first like to welcome today’s adoption of resolution
69/315, concerning the historic 2030 agenda for
sustainable development. I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank the co-facilitators for their tireless
efforts during the intergovernmental negotiation
process, and the Secretary-General and the Secretariat
for their enormous support. I also commend the active
participation and contributions of all the stakeholders
involved, especially civil-society organizations.
Next September, we will adopt a people-centred
development agenda that encompasses the economic,
social and environmental dimensions of sustainable
development and aims to ensure that no one is left
behind. This unprecedented agenda is ambitious and
transformative in that it includes the goals that all
humankind should strive to achieve together by 2030.
The universal nature of the agenda makes it very
different from anything we have attempted in the entire
history of the United Nations. All countries will have
to implement our joint commitment to goals and targets
through their national development strategies.
Success in achieving the 2030 agenda will not
come from a business-as-usual approach; a changed
mindset will be necessary for that to happen. Bearing
that in mind, we must contemplate how to successfully
achieve the new set of goals. I am confident that we will

A/69/PV.101

be able to build on the mutual understanding reached
among Member States and all stakeholders during the
negotiation process to determine the final details of
implementation.
The Republic of Korea, especially in its capacity as
President of Economic and Social Council, will fully
commit to building a robust follow-up and reporting
mechanism, including the modality of the High-level
Political Forum on Sustainable Development, and
spare no efforts for the successful implementation of
the 2030 agenda. We will also make use of our unique
development experience in sharing how national
motivation and passion for change can transform a
society from hopelessness to hope, and from poverty
to prosperity, which will contribute to the successful
implementation of the 2030 agenda.
The 15 years ahead will be a long journey for
humankind towards sustainable prosperity, and it
will not be an easy one. But as we have learned from
the Millennium Development Goals process and the
intergovernmental negotiations, it is certain that, with
universal efforts by all Member States and stakeholders,
we can all achieve our ambitious goals. I would like to
assure the General Assembly of the strong commitment
of the Republic of Korea to support the realization of
our joint vision.
Mr. Mukerji (India): I thank the President for
convening this meeting.
We align ourselves with the statements delivered
earlier today by the Ambassador of South Africa
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and by the
Ambassador of Indonesia on behalf of the group of
like-minded countries, which includes India.
The draft outcome document that we transmit via
resolution 69/315 to the seventieth session of the General
Assembly for adoption by the leaders who will attend
the summit to be held later this month is the culmination
of intense work undertaken by the entire membership of
the General Assembly over a period of nearly two years.
The adoption of the document will be a tribute to the
leadership that the President provided and to the most
able facilitation provided by Ambassador Macharia
Kamau of Kenya and Ambassador David Donoghue
of Ireland. Broadly speaking, we are satisfied with the
document.
For India and for many developing countries, the
vision of the future cannot but have the eradication of

15-2692611/30

A/69/PV.101

poverty as its overarching goal. We are gratified that is
in fact the case and that there has been no compromise
on the ambition of the agenda either. Its fulfilment, in
our view, can allow poverty to be eradicated within
the span of a single generation. We are also satisfied
with the holistic approach and balanced emphasis on
all the dimensions of sustainable development. Our
own experience has shown that inclusive economic
growth, industrialization, infrastructure development,
skill development and innovation are all essential for
the eradication of hunger and poverty. We are pleased
with the emphasis that has received in the new agenda.
It is also a matter of satisfaction that the agenda, while
being universal, does not confuse universality with
uniformity. It is therefore important that “common
but differentiated responsibilities” be recognized as
the guiding principle of international cooperation on
sustainable development.
I would like to draw particular attention to a
matter that has been of prime preoccupation for my
delegation. We are very pleased that the technology
facilitation mechanism, an important gain from the
third Conference on Financing for Development, is
mentioned in the draft outcome document. Progress
on that matter has been much awaited since efforts
were initiated at the Rio+20 Conference in 2012. The
technology facilitation mechanism, to be based at the
United Nations, has the potential to make it possible for
the international community to leverage the incredible
and transformative power of technology in the task
of poverty eradication. The Sustainable Development
Goals, which are at the heart of the 2030 agenda, relate
closely to India’s own vision of development and speak
to the priorities that our Prime Ministers has outlined
in our domestic context as well.
In conclusion, we thank the President for the
direction provided to the sixty-ninth session of the
General Assembly. By taking to their logical conclusion
the remaining priorities of his presidency, the President
will bequeath to the future a legacy as rich, substantive
and meaningful — if not more — than that of any of his
predecessors.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The African
Group would like to express its sincere congratulations
to the President for the outstanding manner in which
he successfully conducted the long process that has
led us today to an outcome of which we can be proud,
namely, the 2030 sustainable development agenda. I
would also commend the co-facilitators, our colleagues

12/30

01/09/2015

from Kenya and Ireland, whose tireless efforts greatly
contributed to this positive result. I also commend all
the negotiators and the staff of the United Nations,
beginning with Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
himself.
Africa fully endorses this agenda and will spare
no effort to implement it effectively, with the great
ambition of ensuring that no human being, no people,
no group of people or peoples will be left behind. In
order to do that, we need to work resolutely to set up an
adapted, appropriate and global partnership that will
enable us to coherently and seamlessly implement the
17 goals and 169 targets that we have set for ourselves.
The agenda is fully in line with the outcome document
of the third International Conference on Financing
for Development, held recently in Addis Ababa, and
with the holding of the upcoming Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, to take place in Paris in December.
The African Group is preparing to actively
participate and make a positive contribution as we
embark upon the long path that the international
community has charted to ensure we achieve the world
we all want. In that regard, the African Group would
like to make the following observations.
The African Group underscores that the contents
of the 2030 sustainable development agenda should
be interpreted in conformity with national legislation
and States’ development priorities, cultural and ethnic
values, religious contexts and universally recognized
human rights, which are crucial.
With regard to paragraph 19 and target 10.2 of
the annex to resolution 69/315, we do not consider the
phrase “other status” as applicable to the concept of
sexual orientation, sexual identity and groups of the
same sex, or to lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender
persons.
With regard to information and education in the
context of sexual and reproductive health services, as
referred to under Goal 3 and target 3.7, they must be
age-appropriate. The African Group does not think that
comprehensive sexual education should be included as
part of it. First and foremost, parents have the right to
choose the type of education to give to their children — a
right enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, which must be respected. The use of the phrase
“information and education” in the context of sexual
and reproductive health-care services must not give

15-26926

01/09/2015

rise to a right whereby young children and adolescents
have access to any and all services, in disregard for the
responsibility of their parents. Nor must it result in an
obligation to provide them information or services that
are neither lawful nor acceptable at the international
level.
With regard to target 5.4, the African Group
considers that the phrase “within the household”
can refer only to the family. The family, based on a
marriage between a man and a woman, is the natural
and fundamental unit of society.
Furthermore, with regard to target 5.6, on ensuring
that everyone can exercise their right to sexual and
reproductive health — as agreed in accordance with the
Programme of Action of the International Conference
on Population and Development and the Beijing
Platform for Action and the outcome documents of the
various review conferences — the African Group would
like to note that, when it comes to interpretations as to
how the provisions of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development are to be implemented and to any that
may run counter to national legislation, the African
Group would like to state that they must in no way refer
explicitly to the idea of sexual orientation, identity and
so forth.
The African Group understands that the word
“gender”, used in different parts of the text, means only
sex, that is, masculine or feminine. The use of the phrase
“sexual and reproductive health services” and all related
concepts in the Agenda should not be construed to be
establishing a right to abortion. Therefore, the African
Group cannot accept any policy, follow-up, evaluation
or reporting of data concerning such a provision in the
Agenda that would implicitly or explicitly include the
concept of sexual orientation.
Along the same lines, the African Group
underscores that the indicators for monitoring the
progress made on the agreed goals and targets should in
no way undermine, including in the concepts identified,
the right of States to formulate their own national
policies in accordance with Article 2 of the Charter of
the United Nations.
The African Group considers that the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, as well as all
international instruments in the area of human rights
and international law, do not aim at standardizing
the cultural values of world’s peoples. Therefore, the
African Group shall implement the Agenda strictly in

A/69/PV.101

accordance with its domestic realities and universally
recognized human rights, and with full respect for the
ethical, cultural and religious values of its societies.
I would be grateful if the text of my statement
could be issued as a document of the General Assembly
under sub-item (a) of the agenda, entitled “Integrated
and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the
outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and
summits in the economic, social and related fields”, and
agenda item 115, entitled “Follow-up to the outcome of
the Millennium Summit”.
In conclusion, the African Group associates
itself with the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of South Africa on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to express my sincere appreciation to the Permanent
Representatives of Ireland and Kenya, co-facilitators of
the intergovernmental negotiations on the post-2015
development agenda, for their tireless efforts.
We believe that the Agenda for Sustainable
Development is a historic and universal document. Its
strong commitment throughout the text to eradicating
poverty, as the greatest global challenge and an
indispensable requirement for sustainable development,
will play an important role in achieving all the goals
and targets of the Agenda. We highlight the consensus
achieved on the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities, as well as national ownership and
leadership, as solid foundations to facilitate the
implementation of the Agenda at all levels — national,
regional and international.
We re-emphasize the central role of the Highlevel Political Forum. A solid and strong Forum that is
visionary but practical would be in a unique position
to support the advancement of the agenda. It should
demonstrate the high level of political leadership and
guide the agenda in its implementation.
The Islamic Republic of Iran would like to put on
record its observations on the following issues.
We reiterate our previous explanation of position
and reservations on the report of the Open Working
Group on Sustainable Development Goals contained in
document A/68/970/Add.1. In our understanding, there
should be a single voluntary reporting system, and only
by the national governance, based on the principle of
national ownership and leadership. As appropriate,

15-2692613/30

A/69/PV.101

input should be sought from national non-State actors,
United Nations country offices and the Secretariat.
We would like to emphasize the need for
compatibility between the Agenda and the operational
acitivities of the United Nations, in the context of the
quadrennial comprehensive policy review, so as to
enable Member States to implement the Agenda. We
reiterate that any reporting template and reporting
mechanism and their indicators should be agreed and
adopted through an intergovernmental process.
Nothing in this document shall be construed to
run counter, in any way, to the national legislation,
development priorities or the cultural, social and
religious backgrounds of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
This applies, inter alia, to terms such as “other status”,
“other groups”, “sex education”, “gender”, “sexual and
reproductive health and reproductive rights” and “the
family”.
Finally, we reiterate our willingness and our full
engagement in the implementation of the Agenda.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of the Government of Mexico, I
want to put on record how pleased we are that today we
are transmitting to the seventieth session of the General
Assembly the document entitled “Transforming Our
World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”
(resolution 69/315, annex) for adoption at the United
Nations summit to be held at the end of the month
of September. My country welcomes the open and
inclusive process by which we have all been able to
contribute our experience and our vision. The 2030
Agenda belongs to us all.
The process included the useful contact group in
which some countries and other stakeholders participated
with Japan in 2011. It was shaped by wide-ranging
thematic consultations with international civil society,
such as that held by my country in Guadalajara in
2013, by the work of the High-level Panel of Eminent
Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda and
by the excellent report that they produced, and by the
inter-Secretariat group that produced the synthesis
report (A/69/700) of the Secretary-General. The United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development also
gave us an important basis for the formal negotiation
process of the Agenda.
For Mexico, the adoption of Agenda 2030, after
a negotiating process of over three years, will be a

14/30

01/09/2015

historic decision in which the international community
is desisting from old paradigms: we have agreed to
focus the efforts of all countries on the welfare and
fulfilment of all peoples. We are addressing the third
pillar of the United Nations as never before.
Agenda 2030 is an action plan for achieving
sustainable development and the eradication of poverty
in all its dimensions and for attaining a more just
and equitable world through social inclusion. The
Sustainable Development Goals and their indivisible
and interconnected nature are our action plan. For the
next 15 years, we will devote our efforts to achieving
sustainable and inclusive development, which could
not be attained without respecting the rule of law. This
Agenda is a great step towards ensuring that every
person in every country can live his or her life under the
rule of law in which human rights are respected, giving
everyone the same opportunities for development.
In that regard, as my delegation has emphasized
for over 30 years, the protection of the human rights of
migrants, regardless of immigration status, is crucial.
The document makes clear that the goals and targets
apply to all people, which obligates us to commit to
continuing to work to secure, promote and realize
their rights regardless of their immigration status. In
addition, Mexico stresses that the right approach to
addressing the issue of migration is through the human
rights of migrants and their families.
With regard to follow-up and review of the Agenda,
we expect it to be carried out on the basis of the
mandates set out in resolutions 68/1 and 67/290.
We fully support an inclusive and participatory
agenda and a revitalized global alliance. The Declaration
is the result of an effort in which Governments,
parliamentarians, experts, civil society organizations,
the private sector and others have put together a
coherent transformative agenda.
Between now and 2030, this Declaration, the
Sustainable Development Goals and its targets
will guide our policy development. Mexico is fully
committed to the implementation of this Agenda and
will orient its national development and international
cooperation programmes to achieve full compliance.
Mr. Duarte (Brazil): Brazil aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of South
Africa on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and

15-26926

01/09/2015

A/69/PV.101

wishes to make the following remarks in its national
capacity.

Nations framework for sustainable development
agreements to which we are all committed.

We have come to the successful conclusion of a
journey that, building on the legacy of the Millennium
Development Goals and Rio+20, has been considered
the most transparent and inclusive negotiating process
in the history of the Organization. The resulting
outcome (resolution 69/351, annex) constitutes a truly
transformative set of commitments that are universal in
nature and of global application in the light of common
but differentiated responsibilities.

The Agenda’s paragraphs 30 and 31, on climate
change, reflect a reasonable balance based on the
possible consensus that could be achieved during
negotiations. It encourages political commitment
towards an ambitious agreement under the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
but does not prejudge the outcome of the twentyfirst meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention, to be held in Paris.

I wish to commend the President of the General
Assembly, who, together with Ambassadors Macharia
Kamau of Kenya and David Donoghue of Ireland,
whose work as co-facilitators was outstanding, will
have led Member States to adopt by consensus a historic
document. Brazil also expresses its appreciation for
the recognition of the Rio+20 Conference by the
co-facilitators and Member States in their extensive use
of its outcome document entitled “The Future We Want”
(resolution 66/288, annex), throughout the negotiations
of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

The 17 Sustainable Development Goals lie at
the heart of our Agenda. The SDGs include means
of implementation in an integrated and indivisible
framework for action. Brazil aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of Indonesia on
behalf of a group of highly diverse countries dissatisfied
with changes in targets 2.5 and 15.6, on the sharing of
benefits arising from genetic resources and associated
traditional knowledge, as per the Nagoya Protocol.

My delegation joined the consensus on the
preamble of the Agenda. For us, the preamble and the
“Ps” neither reinterpret nor redefine the sustainable
development goals and the three dimensions of
sustainable development. The preamble serves the
purposes of communicating the Agenda. The delicate
balance that we worked so hard to achieve in the Open
Working Group remains intact.
We would have preferred more ambitious and
progressive language with respect to human rights.
Nevertheless, in our view, this is a people-centred
Agenda, even if the text has not encompassed in
language all elements of the human rights edifice. We
commit to implementing this Agenda for all social and
economic groups, including for lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex people, whether or not these
groups and their concerns are specifically stated. We
would encourage all members to proceed in the same
fashion, so that the principle of leaving no one behind
can find real meaning.
Universality
is
a
breakthrough,
making
differentiation even more relevant, in particular
the recognition of our common but differentiated
responsibilities. This is a cherished principle for
developing countries and an integral part of the United

The Addis Ababa Action Agenda is supportive of,
and complementary to, goal 17 and the goal-specific
means of implementation of the SDGs. The Action
Agenda is mentioned in Agenda 2030 in a manner
that undergirds their mutual supportiveness while
recognizing that each is independent, including in their
follow-up. We believe that Agenda 2030 contributes to
contextualizing the Addis Ababa Action Agenda.
Official development assistance (ODA) is still
critically relevant for the implementation of this Agenda.
Although we could not agree on a paragraph on ODA,
we note that paragraph 43 of the Political Declaration
makes an important statement in that regard.
The revitalized global partnership for sustainable
development should be democratic, inclusive and
participatory and should engage all the relevant
stakeholders, including civil society and the private
business sector, under conditions of openness,
transparency and accountability. The United Nations
system must heed the call for greater systemwide cohesiveness and better interfacing with, and
accountability to, the membership, while aligning
agencies, funds and programmes and the Secretariat
with this Agenda, in particular its framework for
implementation. We have recognized the central role
of the High-level Political Forum in the follow-up and
review, and we should commit to improving it, making
sure that its resources and support match the ambition

15-2692615/30

A/69/PV.101

of the workload assigned to it. We are very pleased with
the progress on the technology facilitation mechanism.
It is a small breakthrough in and of itself, a promising
initiative for the United Nations that should be nurtured
and adequately supported.
Brazil is confident that we have produced a draft
document that is worthy of the consideration of our
Heads of State and Government at the upcoming
summit.
Mr. Fornell (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the
Government of the Republic of Ecuador.
I would first like to express my appreciation to
the co-facilitators of the negotiation process and to all
those who participated in the working groups and to
the Secretariat for their commitment and efforts, which
resulted in a draft outcome document for the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, to be adopted by
our Heads of State. The document (resolution 69/315,
annex), which is the result of a long consultation
process, reflects our common perspectives on the
eradication of poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty as the greatest challenge
that we face and whose elimination is a sine qua non for
achieving sustainable development. It is now our job to
work together to implement the actions that will enable
us to achieve those goals.
Ecuador would like to express a reservation about
target 12.c, in line with the statement made last year
regarding the report of the Open Working Group
on Sustainable Development Goals (A/68/970), and
paragraph 225 of the outcome document of the 2012
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(resolution 66/288), since they run counter to provisions
in Ecuador’s Constitution.
I would also like to reiterate the position we
expressed on 19 July 2014 when we approved the
report of the Open Working Group, namely, that
Ecuador interprets target 5.6 in accordance with what
has been established by the International Conference
on Population and Development, as well as with
our Constitution and our national legislation. The
Constitution of Ecuador guarantees the reproductive
rights of working people, including the elimination of
occupational hazards that affect reproductive health,
ensuring of access to jobs and job security without
limitations related to pregnancy or number of children,
maternity and nursing rights and the right to paternity

16/30

01/09/2015

leave. The State of Ecuador prohibits firing working
women either because they are pregnant or on maternity
leave, as well as discrimination linked to reproductive
roles. Our Constitution also guarantees children
and adolescents’ enjoyment of the shared rights of
individuals in addition to those specific to their age.
The State recognizes and guarantees life, including
care and protection, starting at conception.
I would be grateful if this statement and our
interpretation of targets 5.6 and 12.c could be formally
included in the record of today’s meeting.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the adoption by the General Assembly today
of resolution 69/315 transmitting the draft outcome
document on the post-2015 development agenda to
the United Nations summit for its consideration and
adoption.
As an agenda to guide international cooperation
for development for the next 15 years, the post2015 development agenda is of profound historic
significance. The document reaffirms the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities,
among other basic principles guiding international
cooperation for development. While placing continued
focus on poverty eradication and other development
issues, the document places greater emphasis on
the concept of sustainability, stresses the need for
balanced development for the economic, social and
environmental pillars, provides comprehensive means
of implementation and creates a sound mechanism for
follow-up and review.
As a continuation and upgrade of the Millennium
Development Goals, the post-2015 Agenda gives new
impetus to international cooperation for development
and lays a solid foundation for a successful United
Nations summit for its adoption. The President of the
General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, Mr. Kutesa,
has personally devoted a great deal of efforts to the
intergovernmental negotiations on the agenda, as has the
Secretary-General, who has worked tirelessly to ensure
the success of the negotiations. It is the most important
achievement of this session, and it will go down in
history, for which we congratulate the President and the
Secretary-General. The co-facilitators also displayed
great patience and wisdom during the negotiations, and
China is grateful for their work.

15-26926

01/09/2015

We look forward to the adoption of the Agenda at
the United Nations summit, so that the international
community can sharpen its focus on development issues,
guide global development through a new development
approach and, in a spirit of win-win cooperation,
build a comprehensive and balanced framework for
international cooperation for development, improve
global partnerships for development and create a better
environment for developing countries, with a view to
achieving a shared level of development around the
world.
China is ready to join others in working tirelessly
to implement the post-2015 development agenda and
international cooperation for development.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is particularly pleased with the adoption of
today’s resolution 69/315. We welcome the ambitious
consensus that we have arrived at in order to ensure
that our Heads of State and Government will be able
to adopt this draft document during the seventieth
session of the General Assembly, later this month.
We would like to thank the co-facilitators of the
process, Ambassadors Macharia Kamau of Kenya and
David Donoghue of Ireland, as well as Ambassador
Csaba Kőrösi of Hungary. Our thanks also go to the
Secretary-General, the Secretariat and the President
of the Assembly, as well as to the representatives of
civil society, the private sector and academia, for their
valuable contributions.
Peru is a country that has worked to meet the
Millennium Development Goals, but we are aware that
the emphasis they place on the eradication of poverty
is not sufficient to bring about the future we want.
There are various factors that go beyond the capability
of primarily national policies, such as climate change
and fluctuations in commodity prices, and that have
the effect of making poverty tought to tackle. In
many countries such as ours there are still various
structural gaps that make it difficult to implement the
sustainable development that our citizens deserve and
ask for. That is why we are particularly pleased to see
social inclusion included as a cross-cutting element
throughout the Agenda, and that poverty is understood
as a multidimensional phenomenon.
The global challenges that we face today require
that we be up to the task through a renewed global
alliance for sustainable development on the theme
“Transforming our world without leaving anyone

A/69/PV.101

behind”. That necessarily entails the implementation
of a person-focused agenda that incorporates the three
dimensions of sustainable development so as not leave
anyone behind.
Peru was one of the first countries to propose the
idea of a new set of sustainable development goals with
universal application to be drafted by the international
community in an open, participatory way. We are
happy to see that the goal has been achieved; however,
we believe that the final goal will be to bequeath to
our children and grandchildren a poverty-free and
sustainable future. Today the international community
can begin to celebrate the seventieth anniversary of the
United Nations with the hope that it will soon have,
for the first time in its history, an instrument at the
ambitious level of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development.
Finally, Peru wishes to associate itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Indonesia
on the topic of food security and genetic resources.
Peru is decisively committed to the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda. We will continue to work
constructively at all levels to ensure that the different
future we want becomes a reality.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): Hungary welcomes the
draft outcome document for the United Nations summit
to adopt the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 69/315, annex). We greatly value the
consensus achieved to transmit it to the summit.
The ambitious and transformative package before
us represents the best chance to build a people- and
planet-centred future with hope, including for future
generations, of not only survival but prosperity and
general well-being.
Important milestones led to this consensus, such
as the formulation of goals and targets in the Open
Working Group on Sustainable Development. Hungary
was honoured to guide that process together with
Kenya. I sincerely thank all Member States and all
stakeholders for the ideas, collaboration and trust that
my delegation enjoyed. As a result of the successful
Conference on Financing for Development in Addis
Ababa and of the intergovernmental negotiations under
the stellar stewardship of the Ambassadors of Kenya
and Ireland, everything is ready for the adoption of the
Agenda to put our world on a sustainable path.

15-2692617/30

A/69/PV.101

Our first and foremost task is to strengthen the
authority of the Agenda by adopting it with resounding
unity and in its entirety, with a common pledge to jointly
turn our words into deeds. Development is action, not
words. Our common future is at stake now. Hungary
is determined to take on its share of responsibility for
ending poverty and hunger, ensuring prosperity for all
and freeing the world from fear and want. We believe
in creating virtuous cycles by meeting responsibilities
and bringing to the common table what we can each
offer.
Development is partnership. Implementation
should be built on a true global partnership that
involves all stakeholders — Governments, the private
sector, non-governmental organizations, academia,
all walks of life, the North and the South — with a
fit-for-purpose United Nations at its centre. First and
foremost, development means human development, of
the people, by the people and for the people. Only that
development in which the people are both the drivers
and recipients of development, and where the interests of
future generations are safeguarded, can be sustainable.
Governments, parliaments and national implementation
plans may go a long way towards charting the path,
but accomplishing what has to be done will require
true involvement and ownership on the part of people,
communities and humankind in general.
As I always say, however, to do that we need
effective communication at all levels. And we need to
translate a complex system of development goals into
programmes that people can relate to and be mobilized
by. People must believe in this Agenda. Furthermore,
they must believe that they are the ones who can achieve
it. To that end, we the peoples of the United Nations and
we the Member States must start now to translate the
abstract vision in an inspiring way in order to mirror
the true will and interests of people. At the end, we can
achieve only the future that people truly believe in.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): At the outset, I would like to
express the appreciation of my delegation for the efforts
of the President of the General Assembly in support
of successfully concluding the intergovernmental
negotiations on the post-2015 development agenda. I
would also like to congratulate the two co-facilitators
of the process, Ambassador Macharia Kamau of Kenya
and Ambassador David Donoghue of Ireland, and to
commend their commitment and outstanding hard work
throughout the process.

18/30

01/09/2015

My delegation actively engaged in the
intergovernmental negotiations on the post-2015
development agenda since its inception. We did so out of
our firm belief that transforming our lives and ensuring
the sustainability of the planet can be achieved only by
eradicating poverty, addressing inequalities, ensuring
sustainable economic growth, respecting human rights,
including the right to development, and empowering
women and girls. All those objectives can be achieved
only through collective efforts, which we believe the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development embodied
(resolution 69/315, annex). We trust that this collective
global effort, which builds on the principle of common
but differentiated responsibilities, will never fade.
My delegation joined the international consensus
in support of the Agenda. In that context, I would like
to provide the following explanation concerning our
views on some of the issues addressed in the Agenda.
With regard to paragraph 18, my delegation
believes that the right of every State to freely exercise
full, permanent sovereignty over all its wealth, natural
resources and economic activity must be in line with
principle 2 of the Rio Declaration on Environment and
Development, which stipulates that such a right must be
exercised in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles of international law and that
States bear the responsibility to ensure that activities
within their jurisdiction or control do not cause damage
to the environment of other States or areas beyond the
limits of national jurisdiction.
My country underscores as well that the provisions
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
must be implemented in a manner consistent with our
national legislation and development priorities, as well
as cultural and ethical values and religious background,
in line with internationally recognized human rights
instruments. All terms in the document should be
interpreted according to each country’s national laws
and policies. Follow-up, evaluation and reporting on
any its provisions will be implemented according to
national specificities.
According to Egyptian law, information and
education should be age-appropriate and provided
with the prior consent of parents and in line with their
right to choose the kind of education given to their
children, as recognized in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. The use of the terms “information
and education” in relation to universal access to

15-26926

01/09/2015

sexual and reproductive health-care services does
not imply any right for young children or adolescents
to access any service without parental consent, or
an obligation to provide them with information and
services that are neither lawful nor acceptable at the
national level. Furthermore, the Egyptian Constitution
fully observes all internationally recognized human
rights instruments, specificaly defining the family
as the natural and fundamental group unit of society,
composed of a father, a mother and children.
This Agenda calls for leaving no one behind. It is
regrettable that Goal 16 omits the issue of ending all
forms of foreign occupation and colonial domination. My
delegation also believes that both target 16.1 and target
16.3 apply to the situation in the occupied territories
in Palestine and other Arab occupied territories, with
the full implementation of all the General Assembly,
Security Council and Economic and Social Council
resolutions on ending foreign occupation and colonial
domination in the occupied territories in Palestine and
other Arab occupied territories, as well as the application
of the relevant provisions of international humanitarian
law, including the four Geneva Conventions of 1949, in
connection with the Arab occupied territories.
My delegation would also like to highlight its
support for paragraph 70, with regard to the launch
of the technology facilitation mechanism. We request
concrete steps to be taken during the seventieth
session of the General Assembly to operationalize the
mechanism.
With regard to the part of the Agenda on follow-up
and review, my delegation would like to emphasize the
voluntary nature of the follow-up and review process
and the role of national Governments as the parties
primarily responsible for following up. Any conclusions
reached at the upcoming meeting of the High-level
Political Forum on Sustainable Development under the
auspices of the Economic and Social Council on the
modalities of the follow-up and review process must
build upon the principles set in resolution 67/290.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the President
for holding this meeting and to commend his efforts
in support of the intergovernmental negotiations on the
post-2015 development agenda.
The contents of this statement will be provided
officially to the Secretariat.

A/69/PV.101

Mr. Fadul Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic):
We associate ourselves with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of Senegal on behalf of the
African Group and with the statement delivered by the
representative of South Africa on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China.
I would like to thank the President for his outstanding
counsel, guidance and oversight of the work on the
post-2015 development agenda. All his efforts have led
to the success of our efforts. I would also like to thank
the co-facilitators, Ambassador Donoghue, Permanent
Representative of Ireland, and Ambassador Macharia
Kamau, Permanent Representative of Kenya. We
appreciate their ongoing efforts and the transparency
they displayed in leading the negotiations. I also thank
the Secretary-General and his representative Ms. Amina
Mohammed. Their efforts have been sincere and have
enabled us to reach this historic moment.
We will soon adopt the agenda that will constitute
the international, regional and national road map
for economic and social development over the next
15 years. My delegation is delighted to participate in
these efforts. We are eager to implement the agenda
by ensuring that our national agencies are involved in
this effort within the framework of our national plan
to eradicate poverty and hunger and to provide lives
of dignity for our people. We hope that international
cooperation and the United Nations system will play a
key role in the implementation of the agenda.
My delegation has some reservations with regard to
target 5.6, which were stated at the time of the adoption
of the report (A/68/970) of the Open Working Group
on Sustainable Development Goals. We renew here
our reservations on that target and on any references
to it, including at the end of paragraph 19. We will set
out these reservations in writing and send them to the
appropriate offices of the Secretariat. Moving away
from those standards would be counter to international
law in its broadest sense, so we are not in favour of such
initiatives.
We expect the upcoming summit will be a historic
event. We are proud of what we have done over the past
15 years and we pledge to cooperate constructively.
Mr. Hannigan (Iceland): At the outset, allow
me to thank Ambassador Kamau of Kenya and
Ambassador Donoghue of Ireland, as well as the
delegation of Hungary, for the sound management of
the processes that have resulted in this historic draft

15-2692619/30

A/69/PV.101

outcome document (resolution 69/315, annex). Under
their excellent leadership, we have managed to finalize
our work well ahead of the summit. Iceland is also
grateful for the invaluable contributions of the major
groups, as well as of individuals such as Ms. Amina
Mohammed.
Since the preparatory stages of the documents of the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
held in Rio de Janeiro (Rio+20), Iceland has focused on
contributing to the substantive areas of gender equality
and the sustainable management of natural resources.
Today’s draft document includes some good language
on natural-resource management and the importance of
sustainable fisheries for food security. Science-based
management of marine resources is fundamental to
food security and economic and social development.
The management of natural resources has become even
more important given the seriousness of land and soil
degradation.
The Rio+20 outcome document (resolution 66/288)
is one of the key parent documents to the one we have
now transmitted to the summit. It has fuller text and will
need to be taken into consideration when interpreting
the Sustainable Development Goals and their targets.
The Goals and targets were written with the aim of
being concise and easily understandable to the public.
This is positive, but it has resulted in a text that in some
places is a mix of previously agreed language and new
text. Therefore, with regard to the connection of this
document to other processes, Iceland sees paragraph 58
of the post-2015 outcome document as crucial, as well
as paragraph 55.
With regard to gender equality and human rights,
Iceland is pleased with the many positive aspects of
this document. However, with regard to target 5.a,
Iceland has consistently pointed out that conditioning
certain women’s rights on national law is inconsistent
with our commitments from the Beijing Platform for
Action and the overall spirit of the post-2015 agenda.
We also believe it falls well below other existing
international agreements and commitments with regard
to women’s economic empowerment. Furthermore,
this target is inconsistent with target 1.4, according to
which everyone, including both men and women, is to
enjoy those rights. It is therefore our understanding that
target 1.4 prevails.
Similarly, we are disappointed with the phrase “as
nationally appropriate” in target 5.4, as we believe that

20/30

01/09/2015

recognizing and valuing unpaid care and domestic work
is a universal challenge and addressing it will underpin
the achievement of the goal on gender equality.
Finally, Iceland regrets that the proposed date for
reaching target 3.6, on road traffic accidents, was not
amended to become 2030, as in other targets. We have
explained our worries that this potentially unrealistic
target year could result in lack of enthusiasm if not
reached in time. Whatever happens, we urge the
international community to keep working towards this
target until we reach it.
Mr. Abdallah (Chad) (spoke in French): First of
all, we endorse the statements made on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, the African Group and the
Group of Landlocked Developing Countries.
On behalf of my delegation, I would like to
congratulate the President of the General Assembly on
the conclusion of our work headed up by the outstanding
co-facilitators, Ambassador Kamau and Ambassador
Donoghue. Their professionalism and dedication have
enabled us to harmonize positions so that we could
adopt by consensus resolution 69/315, on the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. That adoption
was also possible thanks to the collective commitment
of Member States and the contribution of stakeholders,
the private sector, civil society and the United
Nations, who, aware of the shared economic, social,
environmental challenges, came together to eradicate
poverty and implement sustainable development.
For our part, we note with satisfaction that the
Agenda contains a number of principles, including
shared but differentiated responsibility, respect for
the policies defined by Member States and national
ownership. We welcome in particular the support
shown for the African Union’s Agenda 2063, its
10-year plan of action and the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development, and the taking into account
of the priorities of the least developed countries and
landlocked developing countries. By the same token,
we particularly welcome the recognition of the intrinsic
link between peace, security and development, which
will allow us to have an inclusive and multidimensional
approach to development in conflict and post-conflict
countries.
We also commend the pursuit of aims and objectives
in the Millennium Development Goals that have not been
achieved, which remain high on our agenda. Important
goals linked to economic development have been borne

15-26926

01/09/2015

in mind, in particular the crucial need for our countries
to sustainably invest in infrastructure, agriculture and
pastoralism, thus contributing to improving the lives of
people. For our delegation, the reference to industry in
the goals is one of the main challenges for the African
continent, which needs to transform its huge potential in
natural resources on the ground to help its development
and better meet the needs of the more than 2 billion
Africans that we expect to have by the year 2050.
Recognizing the energy gap that needs to be
bridged, we consider that the goals in the Agenda will
undoubtedly contribute to providing energy coverage for
our countries. While making the link between the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda, adopted at the third International
Conference on Financing for Development, we note in
particular the important recommendations set out in
the report of the Secretary-General entitled “United
Nations Decade of Sustainable Energy for All”, which
focuses on investment in the various renewable energy
sources in order to reduce the burden of climate change
(A/69/395). With a view to concluding an ambitious
agreement at the Paris Conference on climate change
in December, our Agenda notes the need to assist
vulnerable countries through initiatives to adapt to and
mitigate climate change.
While we recognize the important progress that
has been made, we would once again like to emphasize
our consistent position on some issues that do not seem
to be in line with universally recognized international
law.
We would like to point out that there is a footnote in
paragraph 54 of the Agenda that refers to the proposal of
the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development
Goals, which contains, inter alia, reservations
expressed by Member States, including those made
by my delegation. I would recall that, through a note
verbale dated 24 July 2014, my country stressed that
it was not bound by the provisions of target 5.6, on
certain review conferences. Underscoring that the
responsibility in the education of children belongs to
the parents, we noted that the reference in the target 3.7
to sexual and reproductive health-care services should
not be interpreted as a systematic recourse to abortion.
With respect to target 5.4, we noted that marriage
leading to a family is a sacred union between a man
and a woman as set forth in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights.

A/69/PV.101

Reiterating the tenor of our note verbale, we would
add that paragraph 19 of the Universal Declaration and
target 10.2 of the Agenda 2030 do not, in our view,
apply to the concepts of sexual orientation or lesbian,
gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) sexual identity.
We will not accept under any circumstances that
implementation of these or other paragraphs and targets
or their interpretation or any related communication
exercise that would give implicit or explicit recognition
to notions of sexual orientation, LGBT or otherwise.
In that connection, my country will implement the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in strict
accordance with its domestic law and universally
recognized human rights and in the spirit of full respect
for the ethical, cultural and religious values ​​and beliefs
of our societies.
As for the rest of the Agenda, we will take the
necessary steps to incorporate it into our national
development strategy, while ensuring an appropriate
implementation and follow-up.
I would be grateful, Sir, if you could enter the text
of this statement in the record of the General Assembly
under sub-item (a) of agenda item 13 and item 115.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation supports today’s
adoption by the General Assembly of resolution 69/315,
on the draft post-2015 development agenda up to 2030.
We trust that this document will be adopted by the
leaders of Member States at the United Nations summit
in September. We consider that the draft agenda
provides a sufficiently full picture of the problem areas
of sustainable development, which most States consider
a priority and which they intend to resolutely tackle
over the next 15 years.
We are pleased to note that the new draft agenda
is a balanced mix of economic, social and ecological
aspects of sustainable development. We deem it right
to place ending poverty, including extreme poverty,
as the number-one goal that needs to be met swiftly.
The strength of the draft document we adopted
today for transmission to the upcoming summit lies
in its inclusion of ways of implementing each of the
17 Sustainable Development Goals and the agenda as
a whole. Its harmonization of the basic principles and
outlines of the follow-up mechanism and review is also
very significant.
However, despite the document’s complex nature,
we are regrettably obliged to conclude that some

15-2692621/30

A/69/PV.101

important topics related to sustainable development
are not reflected in it. In particular, the drug issue is
considered only through the prism of drug addiction
prevention and treatment. The new agenda’s coverage
does not extend to the continued issues we face relating
to combating the illegal production and trafficking of
drugs. Unless those are addressed, preventing drug
addiction will be impossible. Nor does the document
reflect the notion of alternative development as an
effective measure for dealing with the global drug
problem.
Another important aspect is improving our
management of the Internet as one of the most promising
ways we have of increasing access to knowledge,
experience and advanced technology. In our opinion,
the agenda errs in not paying attention to the General
Assembly’s high-level meeting to be held in December
on the review of the implementation of the outcomes of
the World Summit on Information Society.
We believe the new agenda should help to unite our
efforts rather than divide them in combating our shared
challenges. In that regard, we urge all participants to
abide strictly by the principles of national leadership and
freedom in policymaking and to refrain from imposing
unsuitable development priorities and strategies on
others. We would like to take this opportunity to clarify
a number of important points in the new draft agenda.
First, we assume that in paragraph 4 of the
declaration, which cites our desire to see the sustainable
development goals and targets met for all nations,
peoples and segments of society, “segments of society”
refers to social groups and other communities of people
united by any meaningful social feature, whatever it may
be. We believe the new Sustainable Development Goals
should contribute to a mutually respectful dialogue
among all States, without adding to the differences that
divide people or creating artificial new categories and
groups among them.
Secondly, concerning paragraph 11, in reaffirming
the outcomes of all the major United Nations conferences
and summits, our delegation has in mind only those
processes that the Russian Federation has been directly
involved with and whose results it has expressed formal
agreement with.
Thirdly, with regard to paragraph 19, I would like to
note that we consider ourselves bound only by humanrights obligations based on international treaties and
documents to which the Russian Federation is party. The

22/30

01/09/2015

aforementioned positions of the new agenda should not
be interpreted as a change in the Russian Federation’s
legal and political position on those issues, and I ask
that that be reflected in the record of today’s meeting.
In supporting today’s approval of the draft agenda,
the Russian delegation has also supported a compromise
that opens up opportunities for working together even
in areas where our positions differ. After the draft
agenda’s adoption at this month’s summit we will be
ready to work on its implementation, in accordance
with national priorities and within the framework of the
relevant international obligations to which the Russian
Federation is party.
Mr. Di Luca (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina would like to associate itself with the
statement delivered earlier by the representative of
South Africa on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
We would also like to make the following comments in
our national capacity.
Argentina welcomes today’s unanimous adoption
of resolution 69/315 and the agreement to transmit the
draft 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development that
our Heads of State and Government will adopt at the
summit to be held later this month. We believe this is
an important opportunity and one that is an essential
ethical, political and social responsibility, for building
a just, inclusive, equal and peaceful world. Our draft
agenda for 2030 is the result of a long and inclusive
intergovernmental negotiation process, with broad
participation by civil society, academia, regional
organizations and the United Nations system. It reflects
the consensus we have been able to build by bringing
together some very different positions in order to
overcome the challenges we are facing with regard to
sustainable development in all three of its dimensions.
The draft agenda will be universally applicable and
is unquestionably very ambitious. We have set ourselves
the goal of eradicating poverty and hunger in all their
forms throughout the world, and the international
community has set itself clear priorities, ways of
implementing them and mechanisms for following up
on the progress to be made. Once the draft 2030 agenda
is adopted, it is our countries that will be responsible
for implementing it and reaching its goals, with each
country’s varying levels of development being taken
into account.
Argentina believes that comprehensive sustainable
development can be possible only with a cooperative

15-26926

01/09/2015

approach of solidarity that respects diversity and the
individual paths to development that each country
chooses for itself. We should work in close cooperation,
not just between countries but also together with the
United Nations system, regional and subregional
organizations and those of civil society. We also
believe in the importance of achieving genuine political
commitment within the international community,
particularly among developed countries, in order to
ensure that we can create the means of implementation
necessary to achieve our goals and create a world in
which universal, unhampered human rights and dignity
are truly respected. Bearing in mind the role that the
United Nations development system will be called on
to play, we will have to strengthen its institutions in
order to ensure improvement in its alignment with the
mandates and targets established by the Organization
and in accordance with local development priorities.
Finally, I would like to stress that the agreement that
has now been reached concludes a three-year process
of intergovernmental negotiations, and to highlight
the leadership shown in that process by Ambassadors
Macharia Kamau and David Donoghue of Kenya and
Ireland, respectively. Now we begin the difficult task of
making this vision for our future a reality. We hope that
this commitment can be translated into reality in order
to ensure that the draft agenda is fully implemented in
such a way that future generations can look back and
celebrate our commitment.
Mrs. Özgür (Turkey): The year 2015 has been one
of historic significance for sustainable development. In
July, we succeeded in finalizing and adopting the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda. At the beginning of August, we
completed negotiations on the post-2015 development
agenda and its draft outcome document (resolution
69/315, annex), the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. In Paris in December, the international
community is expected to adopt a legally binding
agreement that will determine how we can collectively
address the challenges of climate change beyond 2020.
And today, we have taken another important step in
establishing a framework for the global development
agenda for the next 15 years. We would like to take this
opportunity to once again express our appreciation to
the co-facilitators of the post-2015 intergovernmental
negotiations, the Permanent Representatives of Kenya
and Ireland, for their leadership and efforts, as well as
for the dedication and constructiveness they displayed
during the negotiations.

A/69/PV.101

In conclusion, I would like to note that the reference
in the draft outcome document to the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, which Turkey is
not party to, cannot be construed as a change in the
established legal and political position of Turkey with
regard to that instrument.
Mr. Pipa (United States of America): I want to
begin by applauding all delegations for enabling us
to take this step forward today. Achieving consensus
on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 69/315, annex) in advance of the summit
is a remarkable success, and one that all of us should
be proud of. It is a testament to the purpose and the
promise of multilateralism and to what is possible when
we come together and push each other to go further.
The Agenda offers all our countries a common vision
for what we can and will work collectively to achieve
over the next 15 years, and helps us focus our efforts on
the most critical challenges and actions. We appreciate
the goodwill, cooperative spirit, hard work and passion
demonstrated by all Member States, as well as the
stakeholders who stayed around the clock throughout
our negotiations and gave us ideas and evidence to craft
a better Agenda. Their commitment ensured that we
kept our focus when it was needed most.
We must also thank the co-facilitators once
more, Ambassadors Kamau and Donoghue, for their
leadership and vision throughout the process. We also
want to thank President Kutesa for his leadership as we
head into the post-2015 summit, a critical moment not
only to celebrate our achievements thus far but to spur
action for the successful implementation of the Agenda.
The United States strongly supports the vision
and ambition of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda. We
are committed to their implementation. The Agenda
is global and aspirational and provides for taking into
account different national realities, capacities and levels
of development and respecting national policies and
priorities. That balanced approach does not diminish
our collective resolve or will to reach its milestones; it
strengthens our potential to achieve them.
We would like to take this opportunity to make
important points of clarification on the text, with the
understanding that none of the provisions of the Agenda,
including those characterized as having been agreed,
create or affect rights or obligations under international
law, as recognized in paragraph 18.

15-2692623/30

A/69/PV.101

The United States understands that the language
regarding the “permanent sovereignty” of each State
over “its wealth, natural resources and economic
activity” must be read consistent with States’
obligations under international human rights treaties to
which they are a party, as well as other obligations of
States under international law. Similarly, the Agenda
does not affect potential constraints under international
law or agreements that apply to policy space. Nor does
the Agenda, including paragraph 30, affect the rights
of States to take trade measures. Finally, target 6.5
must be read consistent with existing transboundary
agreements.
We also highlight our mutual recognition, in
paragraph 58, that the implementation of the Agenda
must respect and be without prejudice to the independent
mandates of other processes and institutions, including
negotiations. It does not prejudge or serve as a precedent
for decisions and actions under way in other forums. For
example, the United States continues to view the World
Trade Organization (WTO) as the appropriate forum
for the negotiation of trade issues. The Agenda does
not represent agreement on WTO Doha-round related
issues, nor does it represent a commitment to provide
new market access for goods or services. The Agenda
also does not interpret or alter any WTO agreement or
decision, including the Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights. Similarly,
indicators, governance proposals and language
developed through the process have no precedential
value for the international financial institutions,
including the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and
the World Bank Group.
In supporting the draft document, we reaffirm
our long-standing commitment both to international
development and to the promotion of human rights.
However, we must reiterate the concerns of the
United States with regard to the topic of the right to
development, which are long-standing and well known.
It does not have an agreed international meeting,
and any related discussion needs to focus on aspects
of development related to human rights, which are
universal rights held and enjoyed by all individuals and
which every individual may demand from his or her
own Government.
As we have said many times, the United States
remains as committed as ever to assisting the most
vulnerable on a path towards the achievement of the
Agenda. At the same time, we collectively recognize

24/30

01/09/2015

that it is a universal Agenda that requires action by
all. We underscore that, by its terms, paragraph 12
reaffirms the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities as it was originally set out in
principle 7 of the Rio Declaration on Environment
and Development, where it was explicitly limited to
certain types of global environmental degradation.
The reaffirmation of principle 7 in that limited context
does not imply, and the United States does not accept,
that the principle has relevance or application to the
broad range of issues addressed in the Agenda, or to
sustainable development as a whole.
With respect to paragraph 28 and targets 8.4 and
12.1, the United States views “resource efficiency”
to be at the core of “sustainable consumption and
production”. We interpret those provisions to speak to
the need to enhance national policies aimed at fostering
resource sufficiency and sustainability in a manner
appropriate to each country’s national circumstances.
We further understand the provisions to reaffirm the
universal approach to sustainable consumption and
production that recognize some flexibility is needed in
implementation. The provisions highlight the special
leadership role of developed countries in promoting the
exchange of best practices on sustainable consumption
and production implementation, based on our experience
with environmental protection policies and actions and
our technical expertise and capability.
The United States firmly considers strong
protection and enforcement of intellectual property
rights as providing critical incentives needed to
produce innovation that will enable us to address the
health, environment and development challenges of
today and tomorrow. In that respect, the United States
understands that references to the transfer of, or access
to, technology refer to voluntary technology transfer
on mutually agreed terms and conditions and that all
references to “access to information” or knowledge are
to information or knowledge that is made available with
the authorization of the legitimate holder.
I would now like to make some additional points on
specific language or targets in our Agenda.
With respect to paragraph 44 and targets 10.6 and
16.8, the United States interprets the language to refer to
the effectiveness of developing country representation
and voice under current United Nations institutional
models, not to governance or other changes within the

15-26926

01/09/2015

international financial institutions, including the IMF
and the World Bank Group.
We note that the term “equitable” is used in
multiple contexts in the Agenda, including in Goal 4
and target 6.2. While the United States fully endorses
the importance of universal access to safe drinking
water, sanitation and education, for example, we must
collectively avoid any unintended interpretations of the
term “equitable” that implies a subjective assessment
of fairness that, among other things, may lead to
discriminatory practices. Concerning the reference
to “equal rights to economic resources” in target 1.4,
the United States understands that to mean that laws
regarding ownership, inheritance and other property
rights should be non-discriminatory and that those
rights should be protected in a non-discriminatory
manner.
We understand target 8.7 to refer to the unlawful
“recruitment and use of child soldiers”, which can also
be a form of human trafficking.
With respect to target 15.3, the United States
recognizes the concept of land degradation neutrality
at the national and sub-national levels only and
understands that efforts in furthering that target would
be composed of efforts at the national level, which would
not entail any international administration under the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification,
or otherwise.
With regard to the references to access and benefits
sharing in targets 2.5 and 15.6, the United States
understands “as internationally agreed” to mean as
agreed in international instruments for parties to those
instruments. The implementation of those targets
should take into consideration the important role of
stakeholders and be conducted on mutually agreed
terms. We do not read those targets to suggest any
relationship between intellectual property protection
and access and benefit-sharing policy.
Regarding the reference to “foreign occupation”
in paragraph 35, we reaffirm our abiding commitment
to a comprehensive and lasting peace based on a twoState solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We
remain committed to supporting the Palestinian people
in practical and effective ways, including through
sustainable development. We will continue to work
with the Palestinian Authority, Israel and international
partners to improve the lives of ordinary people towards
a more sustainable future.

A/69/PV.101

In that spirit we, alongside so many in the Hall,
look ahead with anticipation to the implementation of
the Agenda. Adopting the Agenda at this early stage is a
remarkable accomplishment, and one that we have used
to motivate tangible and powerful actions to match our
ambitions. The Addis Ababa Action Agenda, adopted
at the third International Conference on Financing
for Development, in July, is a strong starting point for
our efforts. The Action Agenda provides us with an
ambitious, comprehensive and modern framework for
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),
which includes more than 100 concrete measures and
takes us collectively further than we have gone before
on the full range of the means of implementation topic.
We note that the 2030 Agenda recognizes that the Action
Agenda provides the context for both the interpretation
and implementation of the means of implementation
targets and underscores that the targets can be achieved
through the implementation of the Action Agenda.
In the context of implementation, we particularly
welcome the emphasis the 2030 Agenda places on a few
central, cross-cutting themes and drivers of progress.
While some may have Goals associated with them,
we note them here for the power inherent in their
underlying and cross-cutting quality.
With regard to inequality, we all know well the
history. Despite stimulating remarkable progress, the
Millennium Development Goals let large pockets of
key populations, and even whole countries, slip through
the cracks. This Agenda’s emphasis on leaving no one
behind and on ensuring progress for the most vulnerable
is a notable and critical change. We are pleased to see
it. We welcome its specific emphasis on the inclusion
of all groups and all people, including lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and intersex people.
Gender equality and the empowerment of women
and girls is integral to achieving success with this
Agenda. To that end, the particular recognition
of women’s sexual and reproductive health and
reproductive rights and its importance to development
is crucial.
Science, technology, innovation and data — each
will be critical to accelerating progress in order to
achieve the SDGs. New approaches and innovations
will increase the impact and decrease the cost of
interventions across this Agenda.
With regard to good governance and the rule of law,
to achieve our ambitions, we will need institutions at all

15-2692625/30

A/69/PV.101

01/09/2015

levels that are effective, transparent, accountable and
democratic.

if each of us makes an honest commitment to the future
well-being of their own people.

In terms of sustainability, the SDGs ensure focus
on long-term development, locking in progress by
integrating sustainability in all three dimensions: the
environmental, social and economic. Well-crafted
Goals and targets in areas such as climate-smart
agriculture, renewable energy, healthy oceans, natural
resource management and disaster risk reduction within
these Goal areas will help protect against the reversal
of development gains. Sustainable development relies
on preventing and mitigating conflict and violent
extremism; promoting open, resilient and democratic
societies and local ownership; and advancing inclusive
economic growth.

Israel joined the consensus on the outcome
document (resolution 69/315, annex) due to its
unwavering commitment to sustainable development
and the successful conclusion of the process. However,
our position on the inclusion of politicized language in
paragraph 35, as well as elsewhere, remains unchanged.
Using the development agenda to score insignificant
political points is counterproductive, pollutes the
discussion and moves us further away from working
towards the worthy development goals that we all
aspire to. As we stated throughout the negotiations, the
road to peace — the peace that we all desire — runs
through Jerusalem and Ramallah and is not found
in development resolutions. All outstanding issues
between Israel and the Palestinians can be resolved
only through direct negotiations.

We look ahead now to the September summit for
a great many opportunities to build these out further
and to put on display their promise and our collective
commitment to it. We also look forward to the process
of developing practical and informative indicators for
each of our Goals and targets. These will add clarity
and precision to our efforts here.
We thank all members once again for their work
until now. Onward!
Mr. Roet (Israel): Israel welcomes the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and believes that
it ushers in a new era of sustainable development that
is unprecedented both in scope and ambition. Israel
reiterates its full commitment to the 2030 Agenda and
stands ready to actively contribute to the successful
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs).
We would like to take this opportunity to express our
deep gratitude to the President of the General Assembly
and to co-facilitators Ambassador Donoghue and
Ambassador Kamau, without forgetting Ambassador
Kőrösi. We also would like to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed and the Secretariat for their
steadfast determination and support. We would also
like to acknowledge the significant contribution and
valuable inputs of all Member States and stakeholders,
including civil society organizations, to the process.
The Agenda, if implemented in full, has the power
to once and for all free the world from hunger, disease
and poverty. This can be achieved only if we work
together in the spirit of cooperation and partnership and

26/30

Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): I would like to
thank the President for convening this meeting and
for providing an opportunity to further reflect on our
ambitious collective journey that led the membership
towards the formulation of the post-2015 development
agenda. I extend my words of appreciation to all
delegations that have been involved in this process
and thank the co-facilitators and their teams for their
outstanding leadership, passion and dedication. The
environment of an inclusive and interactive negotiation
maintained and cultivated throughout the process was a
source of inspiration to all and allowed a large number
of Member States and civil society to voice their
interests and concerns and to engage in a constructive
exchange.
As we highlighted previously, the power of the new
development agenda lies in the consideration of the longterm sustainability impact of inclusive development
whereby diversity should be viewed as a source of
strength. Policies of exclusion and discrimination
undermine the sustainability of economic and social
development. Coherent steps should be taken to
eradicate such practices in the post-2015 world.
In that regard, we welcome the commitment to a
revitalized global partnership that will help ensure the
continuous improvement of an enabling environment
through enhanced international cooperation, regional
integration and connectivity.
We welcome the reference to the specific needs
of landlocked developing countries in this Agenda,

15-26926

01/09/2015

as well as the integration of the Vienna Programme
of Action in the text. As a landlocked country facing
structural constraints, it is only natural that we are
fully committed to the idea of eliminating barriers to
international trade and development, including those
stemming from unilateral coercive measures, policies
of blockade and unduly discriminating trade regimes
and other forms of unilateral coercion.
Commitment to global solidarity is what lies at
the heart of the exceptional power of multilateralism.
The formulation of an ambitious plan of action was an
important test of multilateralism up until the very end
of the intergovernmental process. However, we regret
that the last major amendment to the text — namely,
paragraph 38, which was introduced without prior
discussion — failed to fully and properly reflect the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. With due respect for the Charter, we must
quote its Article 1, paragraph 2:
“To develop friendly relations among nations
based on respect for the principle of equal rights
and self-determination of peoples, and to take
other appropriate measures to strengthen universal
peace”.
We look forward to the successful implementation
of the new international commitments, which we
are sure will benefit millions of people and lead to a
better and more sustainable future. We stand ready to
contribute to this global endeavour to the best of our
capacities.
Mrs. Ibrahimova (Azerbaijan): Our delegation
would like to reflect upon the fundamental document
(resolution 69/315, annex), the post-2015 development
agenda, which will guide the entire world towards
shaping a better tomorrow for future generations.
In this vein, the delegation of Azerbaijan expresses
its thanks to the co-facilitators of this complex
process, Ambassador Macharia Kamau of Kenya
and Ambassador David Donoghue of Ireland, for
their leadership and outstanding input in steering the
intergovernmental negotiations.
The post-2015 development agenda, which was the
culmination of three years of intensive negotiations
and great efforts, is a clear road map that highlights
a number of prime and complex objectives, which we
shall strive to reach collectively, just as this document
was drafted collectively, in order to leave no one behind.

A/69/PV.101

As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has highlighted, it
is truly the people’s agenda.
We should do all we can to transfer this agenda
from paper to real-life action. We therefore think that
the targets reflected in the document, especially those
concerning regional integration, have to be pursued
by concrete actions implemented by the international
community, since the development of regions results in
the greater success of the economic and social facets
of our countries. In the meantime, regional integration
cannot be achieved unless regional conflicts are
resolved. It is crystal-clear that there can be no regional
integration and cooperation if one Member State
occupies the territory of another Member State.
Azerbaijan suffers from such regional conflict,
and, despite General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, our neighbouring State Member of the
United Nations continues its illegal occupation. In that
regard, it is evident that the Republic of Azerbaijan will
act based on its highest national interest.
Ms. Loe (Norway): Norway is pleased to join in
welcoming the adoption of resolution 69/315, on the
historic 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
I would like to join colleagues in thanking the
President of the General Assembly and the SecretaryGeneral for all the support that has been given to the
process. I want to commend in particular the two
facilitators, Ambassadors Kamau and Donoghue, for
their outstanding leadership and stamina in guiding
us through the process. I would also like to commend
Ambassador Kőrösi of Hungary who, together with
Ambassador Kamau, guided us skilfully through the
work of the Open Working Group.
This has been a long journey and a unique one. Never
before have so many different actors — Governments,
international organizations, civil society, the private
sector and others — come together to design such a
truly global and transformative agenda. We would
like to them all for their contributions and spirit of
cooperation and for making this journey such an
unprecedented learning experience.
The 2030 Agenda is not perfect, but it gives us the
vision and the tools to eradicate poverty within the next
15 years, while safeguarding the planet, respecting
all human rights and ensuring gender equality. This
ambitious set of goals and targets is an expression of
our common experience and determination.

15-2692627/30

A/69/PV.101

Reaching this historic milestone is just the start.
Norway is fully committed to this joint Agenda and is
eager to start implementing it. The spirit of compromise
that we saw during the negotiations is very encouraging
as we start the follow-up process.
Ms. Franceschi (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Panama aligns itself with the statement made on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China. In our national capacity,
we would like to make a few final timely comments.
We are very happy to see what is happening today.
After an participatory intergovernmental process
lasting several years, Member States now by consensus
have agreed on a new development agenda for the
next 15 years. We would like to express our thanks to
Ambassadors Donaghue and Kamau for the excellent
work of facilitation in this process. They were able to
inspire confidence, reconcile difficult positions and
bring enthusiasm and sense of humour to the process.
Panama welcomes the new agenda and the
commitments. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development is a transformative and ambitious
agenda for a world in turmoil that demands of us a
paradigm shift that will only be possible if each of us
individually understands the implications and makes
profound transformations. This will involve changing
the practices, habits and customs received from our
families, societies and Governments. It means that we
will have to take ethical decisions and not act out of
self-interest; in other words, we cannot continue to do
business as usual.
Today’s adoption is a historic milestone, as several
speakers have mentioned, and the culminaiton of a
multilateral approach. The path forward will be a great
challenge in which the capacities, genuine commitment
and leadership of Member States at the national level
will be put into play. We trust and we hope that the
decisions we make today will truly manifest this
change of mind in our individual leaders and above all
in ourselves that must be our contribution to inspiring
the transformations that future generations deserve.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position. We will now hear
statements after the adoption of the resolution.
I give the floor to the Observer of the European
Union.
Mr. Zampetti (European Union): On behalf of the
European Union and its member States, I would like to

28/30

01/09/2015

take this opportunity to express our sincere gratitude
to Ambassadors Kamau and Donoghue and their teams
for their tireless work and guidance as co-facilitators
of the post-2015 process. It has been a long journey
and, we can say today, a very successful one. Without
their leadership and the constructive engagement by
all Member States and stakeholders, and the crucial
support of the Secretary-General and the Secretariat,
we would not be where we are today. We would also
like to recognize the key contribution of Ambassador
Kőrösi, who was a Chair of the Open Working Group
on the Sustainable Development Goals and who helped
us reach agreement on a crucial component of the 2030
Agenda. Finally, we would like to thank the President
of the General Assembly and his team for supporting
this process.
The European Union and its member States now
look forward to the post-2015 summit, where the Heads
of State and Government and high representatives
will adopt the 2030 Agenda and the timely start of
its implementation. We trust the success achieved in
agreeing on the 2030 Agenda will generate additional
momentum towards a very successful Paris meeting in
December.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Observer of the Holy See.
Monsignor Grech (Holy See): At the outset, my
delegation expresses its gratitude to Ambassadors
Macharia Kamau and David Donoghue for
their leadership and commitment in guiding the
intergovernmental process that led to the agreement
on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Their tireless efforts and perseverance provided for
an inclusive and transparent process that produced the
universal Agenda we have before us today. This Agenda
is a clear sign that, in spite of differences in some
areas, the international community has come together
and affirmed its commitment to eradicating poverty in
all its forms and dimensions and to ensuring that all
children, women and men throughout the world will
have the conditions necessary to live in both freedom
and dignity.
The Agenda rightly puts the centrality of the
human person as the subject primarily responsible for
development. The Holy See remains confident that the
related pledge that no one will be left behind will serve
as the perspective through which the entire Agenda will

15-26926

01/09/2015

be read to protect the right to life of the person, from
conception until natural death.
My delegation believes that a renewed global
partnership will be crucial to the Agenda’s success.
Also, by valuing the enormous potential of youth, by
empowering women and girls, and by recognizing
the role of the family in integral development, we
will ensure the centrality of the human person as the
primary subject responsible for development, while
holding Governments accountable.
As Pope Francis reminds us in his encyclical letter
of 24 May, Laudato Si’,
“environmental problems cannot be separated from
the analysis of human, family, work-related and
urban contexts, nor from how individuals relate to
themselves, which leads in turn to how they relate
to others and to the environment.”
A more integrated approach to development will
make us see better that
“[w]e are faced not with two separate crises,
one environmental and the other social, but
rather one complex crisis that is both social and
environmental.”
Therefore,
“[s]trategies for a solution demand an integrated
approach to combating poverty, restoring dignity
to the excluded, and at the same time protecting
nature.”
The Holy See agrees that the draft agenda is
an ambitious plan of action, with many proper and
laudable aspirations that can be described as a great
cultural, spiritual and educational challenge. We take
the position that for any development plan to succeed,
its underlying efforts must be directed towards an
integral ecology open to categories that transcend the
language of mathematics and biology and take us to
the heart of what is human. We must cultivate a greater
awareness of a human ecology, including appreciation
of our common origin and mutual belonging, and of a
future to be shared with everyone. While agreeing with
most of the goals and targets enumerated in the draft
agenda, the Holy See, in conformity with its nature
and particular mission, wishes to express the following
reservations on some of the concepts it uses.
The Holy See considers that the terms “sexual
and reproductive health” and “reproductive rights”

A/69/PV.101

apply to a holistic concept of health, each in its own
way embracing a person in the entirety of his or
her personality, mind and body and fostering the
achievement of personal maturity in sexuality and in
the mutual love and decision-making that characterize
the conjugal relationship between a man and a woman
in accordance with moral norms. The Holy See does not
consider abortion or access to abortion or abortifacients
as an aspect of those terms.
With reference to the terms “contraception”,
“family planning”, “sexual and reproductive health”,
“sexual and reproductive rights”, “reproductive rights”
and any other terms regarding family-planning services
and regulation of fertility concepts in the document, the
Holy See reaffirms its well-known position concerning
the family-planning methods that the Catholic Church
considers morally acceptable as against those familyplanning services that do not respect spouses’ liberty or
the human dignity and human rights of those concerned.
With reference to gender, the Holy See understands
that term to be grounded in a biological sexual identity
that is either male or female. With regard to paragraphs
2 and 3 of this statement of position, the Holy See also
reaffirms its reservations about the outcome documents
of the Cairo International Conference on Population and
Development and the Beijing Fourth World Conference
on Women.
With respect to education or information
on sexuality, the Holy See stresses the primary
responsibility and prior rights of parents, including
their right to religious freedom, when it comes to the
education and upbringing of their children, as enshrined
in, among other things, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. In that sense, the Holy See wishes to underline
the centrality of the family, the natural and fundamental
group unit of society, as well as the role and rights
and duties of parents in educating their children. The
Holy See places its reservations on paragraph 27 of the
Declaration and targets 3.7 and 5.6.
The Holy See emphasizes that the draft agenda
should be read in line with the properly interpreted
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, including full respect for international law,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
international human rights treaties. With regard to
the non-binding instruments that are also mentioned,
the Holy See emphasizes the important distinction

15-2692629/30

A/69/PV.101

01/09/2015

that must be maintained between treaties that have
been formally negotiated and adopted by States with
the intention of creating legal obligations and other
international documents that do not have the same
authority. The Holy See does not endorse principles in
any international or regional non-binding instruments
that differ from those set out here and articulated in its
teachings.

On behalf of the President, I should like to express
my sincere thanks to Ambassador David Donoghue of
Ireland and Ambassador Macharia Kamau of Kenya, who
demonstrated great political acumen in their conduct
of the complex discussions in the intergovernmental
negotiations. I also thank all Member States for their
valuable contributions to reaching an agreement on
today’s resolution 69/315.

My delegation requests that this statement be
included in the official record of today’s meeting.

The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 13 and of
agenda item 115.

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker on this item.

30/30

The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

15-26926
