VI.

4. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 103 called for under General Assembly resolution 33/178 of 20 December 1978, on replies to the
questionnaire;
5. Calls upon Member States which have not yet
done so to reply to the questionnaire, as called for under General Assembly resolutions 32/63 and 33/178;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session further information provided in response to the questionnaire,
and to submit all the information available which he has
received on the basis of the questionnaire to the Commission on Human Rights, to the Sub-Commission on
Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities and to the Sixth United Nations Congress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders;
1. Takes note also of the report of the SecretaryGeneral104 on unilateral declarations, called for under
General Assembly resolutions 32/64 and 33/178;
8. Invites Member States which have not yet done
so to deposit the unilateral declarations with the
Secretary-General, as called for under General Assembly resolutions 32/64 and 33/178;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
inform the General Assembly, in annual reports, of
unilateral declarations already deposited and of such
further unilateral declarations as may be deposited by
Member States;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment", for the purpose of reviewing the progress
achieved under this item.
106th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
34/168.

Draft Code of Medical Ethics

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, unanimously adopted by the General Assembly
in its resolution 3452 (XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Noting that, in the report submitted by the World
Health Organization to the Fifth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment
of Offenders, 105 it was suggested that a "Health Charter
for Prisoners" might be elaborated with the co-operation
of the World Health Organization,
Recalling its resolutions 3218 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974, 3453 (XXX) of 9 December 1975 and 31/85
of 13 December 1976, in which it invited the World
Health Organization to prepare a draft code of medical
ethics relevant to the protection of persons subjected
to any form of detention or imprisonment against torture. and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
purushment,
Having considered the note by the SecretaryGeneral106 transmitting to the members of the General
Assembly the report of the World Health Organization
on the development of codes of medical ethics,
108 A/34/144.
104

A/34/145 and Add.1-3.

105 A/CONF.56/9.
108 A/34/273.

185

Resolutio111 adopted on the repons of the Third Committee

Noting with appreciation that the Executive Board
of the World Health Organization has endorsed the
principles set forth in the report of its Director-General
on the development of codes of medical ethics and has
requested its Director-General to transmit that report
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate the
draft Code of Medical Ethics 101 to Member States, the
specialized agencies concerned and interested intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council for comments and suggestions, and to
submit a report to the General Assembly at its thirtyfifth session;
2. Decides to consider again the question of the
draft Code of Medical Ethics at its thirty-fifth session,
under the item entitled "Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment".
106th plenary meeting
17 December 1979

34/169.

Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement
Officials

The General Assembly,
Considering that the purposes proclaimed in the
Charter of the United Nations include the achievement
of international co-operation in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental
freedoms for all without distinction as to race sex
language or religion,
'
'
Recalling, in particular, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights 108 and the International Covenants on
Human Rights, 100
Recalling also the Declaration on the Protection of
All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 3452 (XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Mindful that the nature of the functions of law enforcement in the defence of public order and the manner in which those functions are exercised have a direct
impact on the quality of life of individuals as well as
of society as a whole,
Conscious of the important task which law enforcement officials are performing diligently and with dignity,
in compliance with the principles of human rights,
Aware, nevertheless, of the potential for abuse which
the exercise of such duties entails,
Recognizing that the establishment of a code of conduct for law enforcement officials is only one of several
important measures for providing the citizenry served
by law enforcement officials with protection of all their
rights and interests,
A ware that there are additional important principles
and prerequisites for the humane performance of law
enforcement functions, namely:
(a) That, like all agencies of the criminal justice
system, every law enforcement agency should be representative of and responsive and accountable to the community as a whole,
101 Ibid.,

annex.

toe Resolution 217 A (III).
1o9 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
