S/PV.7560

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7560th meeting

Monday, 16 November 2015, 3.10 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Greening. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Mr. Murmokaitė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mrs. Schwalger
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Ms. Sison
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) (S/2015/862)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-36761 (E)
*1536761*

S/PV.7560

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and
2191 (2014) (S/2015/862)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Stephen
O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Ms. Zainab
Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict; and Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I wish to
draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2015/862, which contains the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014).
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: I would like to begin my briefing by
expressing my deepest condolences to those affected by
the recent attacks of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) perpetrated in France and Lebanon.
The Syria crisis is a chronicle of missed
opportunities on the part of the Security Council,
Member States with influence on the parties and the
broader international community to bring the conflict
to an end. More than five years since the unrest in Syria
began, the parties to the conflict continue to commit
unthinkable atrocities on a daily basis, plunging Syria
and its citizens deeper into darkness. I very much
welcome the recent international talks in Vienna. That
momentum must be seized to leave no stone unturned
to put an end to the horrendous war that has cost the
lives of an estimated 250,000 people, given rise to
extremist and terrorist groups and reduced much of
2/25

16/11/2015

the country — a middle-income country — to rubble.
The fighting has also propelled the world’s largest
humanitarian crisis of the twenty-first century, with
some 13.5 million people in Syria in need of some
form of humanitarian assistance, including 6 million
children, and it has driven over 4 million people to seek
safe refuge outside their home country.
The neighbouring countries are shouldering most
of the burden with remarkable generosity and sacrifice.
Yet, many Syrians, who have lost hope and are fleeing
unspeakable violence and whose resources are all but
depleted, are willing to risk their lives in perilous
journeys across the Mediterranean. Some 400,000
people — over 50 per cent of the arrivals by sea in
2015 — are Syrian. And still they flee — yesterday,
today, and without a political settlement, tomorrow and
the day after, and the day after that — each day, even
as winter approaches and, I sadly predict, all the way
through it.
Security Council members and the international
community must also redouble their efforts to oblige
the parties to finally comply with the demands made by
the Council in resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165(2014) and
2191 (2014). As we have sat in the Council Chamber
month after month, we have borne witness to the failure
of all the parties to the conflict to protect civilians.
Each month, I speak of what seems like never-ending
violence killing innocent civilians, including children.
The indiscriminate use of weapons continues
unabated in the Syria conflict. In October, hundreds of
civilians were killed or injured in direct or indiscriminate
attacks by all parties, owing to the continued use of
explosive weapons in populated areas, including through
barrel bombs and other aerial weapons, shelling and car
bombs. On 30 October, several air strikes hit the Al-Hal
market in Douma, rural Damascus, killing at least 60
civilians and injuring 200 more. The day before, air
strikes reportedly hit the main field hospital in Douma
killing at least 15 civilians and injuring 50 others.
Following these attacks, Jaish Al-Islam reportedly used
dozens of prisoners as human shields, placed in cages
around heavily populated areas, to seek to deter further
air strikes in civilian areas. Elsewhere, just a few days
ago, on 10 November, more than 23 people were killed
and 40 injured when non-State armed opposition groups
caused two explosions in Lattakia city.
Meanwhile, ISIL and other terrorist and extremist
groups continue to cause carnage across the country.
For example, in Aleppo governorate, ISIL detonated a
15-36761

16/11/2015

The situation in the Middle East

vehicle-borne improvised explosive device in Haritan,
killing more than 20 people in early October. Not only
are such indiscriminate attacks a tragedy that kills and
injures innocent people; they may also amount to war
crimes. The perpetrators must be aware that they will
one day be held accountable for their actions.
The pace of displacement in Syria remains
relentless. In Aleppo, at least 50,000 people are
confirmed to have been displaced since early October
following an escalation of fighting between non-State
armed opposition groups and the Government of Syria.
The number could be as high as 100,000. ISIL attacks
on Mahin and Hawarin in eastern rural Homs in late
October has led to the displacement of an estimated
25,000 people. Further displacement is expected to
continue at a similar rate unless there is a reduction in
the violence.
Attacks on civilian infrastructure also continue
unabated, including relentless attacks against healthcare facilities and personnel across the country.
According to Physicians for Human Rights, in October
there were 16 attacks on medical facilities — the highest
in a single month since the conflict began — and seven
medical staff were killed. Parties to the conflict must
ensure respect for, and protection of, health facilities
and personnel and patients under international
humanitarian law.
Meanwhile, medicines and medical supplies
continue to be prevented from reaching those who
desperately need them. The overall impact on the health
situation has been devastating, with many civilians,
particularly in areas not controlled by the Government,
unable to access even the most basic medical care. The
routine immunization coverage in Syria has dropped
from 95 per cent in 2010 to 64 per cent in 2015, and
in some places, is as low as 20 per cent. This poses an
acute risk for deadly epidemic disease in many areas.
Surely, meeting the health needs of children, who
represent our future, should be considered the lowest
common denominator of our humanity. We need a firm
commitment from the parties to the conflict to take all
necessary measures to protect civilians and stop the
targeting of civilian infrastructure, including medical
facilities, schools and key infrastructure networks.
In spite of repeated calls by the Council,
humanitarian actors continue to be prevented from
gaining sustained, unhindered access to millions of
people in need. While active conflict and insecurity

S/PV.7560

are limiting factors, the parties continue to delay or
obstruct assistance to people in need. We have only
been able to reach a small proportion of the 4.5 million
people in need in hard-to-reach areas in 2015. Nearly
half of those in need in hard-to-reach areas — some
2.2 million — are living under terror and subjugation in
ISIL-controlled areas, to which the United Nations and
its partners continue to have virtually no access. We
must spare no effort to ensure that these people receive
the assistance they desperately need.
The parties to the conflict, largely ISIL and the
Government of Syria, continue to use siege as a war
tactic, with an estimated 393,700 people living under
siege. This includes some 200,000 people under siege by
ISIL in Deir-ez-Zor city; some 181,200 people beseeged
by the Syrian Government in various locations in
eastern Ghutah, as well as Darayya and Zabadani in
rural Damascus; and some 12,500 people under siege
by non-State armed opposition groups and the Al-Nusra
Front in Foah and Kefraya in Idlib. These people have
next to no access to the basic essentials of life and our
ability to reach them is extremely limited. So far in
2015, the United Nations has been able to reach only
3.5 per cent of people with health assistance and only
0.7 per cent of people with food per month in besieged
areas. Such an inhumane tactic of war is unlawful and
must end immediately.
As I have said to the Council before, we need to
make urgent progress to reach people in hard-to-reach
and besieged areas as living conditions in these areas
continue to deteriorate and the onset of winter is not
far away. So far this year, only 30 per cent of the
convoy requests made by the United Nations have been
approved in principle by the Syrian Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, and less than half of those approved have been
able to actually proceed due to a combination of lack
of final security clearances from Syrian authorities,
lack of safe passage from non-State armed opposition
groups, and insecurity.
I call upon the Syrian authorities to urgently approve
the 46 currently pending inter-agency convoy requests
and allow convoys previously agreed in principle,
which are awaiting their clearance, to proceed. I also
call on non-State armed opposition groups, as well as
listed terrorist groups, to allow the deliveries they are
preventing. Over 1.4 million people in hard-to-reach and
besieged locations would be assisted if these convoys
were able to proceed. The planned humanitarian airlift
to Deir ez-Zor, although approved, has been unable

15-367613/25

S/PV.7560

The situation in the Middle East

to proceed due to the deteriorating security situation
around the airport.
Despite all the challenges, the United Nations and
partners continue to reach millions of people in need
through all modalities. In the past month alone, the
United Nations and its partners delivered food aid to
over 4 million people; water, sanitation and hygiene
support to over 3.5 million; and medicines and supplies
for 717,000 treatments. The commitment and bravery
of the thousands of aid workers who deliver muchneeded aid at great personal risk — particularly Syrian
organizations, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and
volunteers, who are often the first responders on the
front lines — are deeply humbling.
I once again stress the need for the United Nations
to be able to use all modalities, across conflict lines
and across borders, in order to reach people in need
in Syria wherever they may be found. Resolutions
2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) have made a difference by
enabling the United Nations and partners to reach some
people in need who were largely inaccessible before.
Through cross-border deliveries, the United Nations
and partners have been able to regularly reach millions
of people. This complements the crucial work of
international non-governmental actors, who continue
to provide large-scale assistance across the country. We
remain committed to reaching all those in need, and we
need any and every route possible to do this.
The status quo in Syria simply cannot continue. We
have seen the devastating consequences of failing to act.
This failure has eroded confidence in the international
community. The people of Syria deserve more than the
discussions we are having or the aid we are providing.
They deserve an end to this senseless violence.
The recent international talks in Vienna provide
a glimmer of light that international diplomacy can
provide a solution to the conflict. We must take
advantage of this rare moment of diplomatic opportunity
to push for a negotiated political solution and create
the conditions for a nationwide ceasefire. At the same
time, this new diplomatic momentum should be used
to generate early dividends for the Syrian people. Most
immediately, I urge the Council and relevant Member
States to use their influence to press for an end to the
use of indiscriminate weapons and to take steps to
ensure unhindered humanitarian access to all people in
need throughout Syria.

4/25

16/11/2015

I sincerely hope that progress will be made and
that the incoming year will finally see an end to the
conflict in Syria. We cannot squander this moment or
momentum; all of us must stand up and play our part to
bring an end to this conflict for once and for all.
The President: I thank Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bangura.
Ms. Bangura: I would like to thank you, Madam,
for extending an invitation to me to brief the Security
Council. However, before beginning, I wish to express
my solidarity with the survivors and families of all those
who have lost loved ones in the horrific attacks in Paris,
Beirut, Tunis, Sharm el-Sheikh and elsewhere. These
depraved acts of terror must reinforce our collective
resolve.
In my previous briefings to the Council, I have
detailed the nature, trends and patterns of conflictrelated sexual violence in Syria. Women and girls in
the theatres of this conflict find themselves under
assault every day and at every point of their lives,
whether at border crossings or checkpoints, during
house searches, or in detention centres, in areas under
Government control or areas where the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and a plethora of armed
groups operate. They have been affected in a unique
and systematic manner as a result of numerous factors,
including the extraordinary scale of the displacement
and humanitarian situation so well described by my
colleagues Stephen O’Brien, the sophistication and
strategies of the key players, including extremist
groups, as well as the regional nature of the conflict
and the cross-border dimensions. Sexual violence has
been a characteristic of the Syrian conflict and has
been perpetrated by most of the belligerent parties as
a tactic of war.
I am pleased, therefore, that the Council has now also
expressed through resolution 2242 (2015) our evolving
understanding of how sexual violence is being used as
a tactic of terrorism to advance fundamental strategic
objectives of extremist groups in Syria and elsewhere.
It is critical that we unpack this concept further, and
in the process take the protection and empowerment
of women and girls from the periphery to the centre
of our global, regional and national counterterrorism
strategies.
Today, I would like to focus my remarks primarily
on how we can respond. Since returning from my

15-36761

16/11/2015

The situation in the Middle East

scoping visit to the region this May, I have focused
considerable energy on raising the level of awareness
and understanding of the sexual violence crimes that
are occurring. At the same time, we have been working
to formulate a response strategy.
Our response has to go beyond security and
military considerations. It must encompass legislative
and service delivery dimensions, and accountability
must be a central consideration. At the same time, we
have to deepen the political commitment of leaders,
particularly at the regional, national and local levels.
We must deepen the base of information and analysis.
Because of its cross-border dimensions, our strategy
also requires a concerted regional response, including
improved information-sharing across countries.
Addressing conflict-related sexual violence in Syria
and the region requires a unified, comprehensive and
multisectoral approach. The strategy that is being
developed under the auspices of my Office, the team
of experts and UN Action against Sexual Violence
in Conflict, has seven areas under which a range of
interventions will be required.
First, we must continue to mobilize political
commitment, support and resources. This political
commitment must come at all levels, starting in the
conflict-affected countries themselves. Unfortunately,
since my visit we have still not been able to agree on
specific commitments and measures with authorities
in Syria or Iraq. However, at the regional level, I am
pleased to report that we are concluding a framework of
cooperation with the League of Arab States that could
catalyse some of the critical legislative reforms and
protection policies that are required.
Secondly, as I have already emphasized, we must
ensure that the protection and empowerment of women
is consistently included as a central consideration in
all efforts to prevent violent extremism and counter
terrorism, including the Secretary-General’s plan of
action on preventing violent extremism.
Thirdly, we must undertake legislative and other
measures to enhance protection, early warning and
risk mitigation. This includes programmes to support
civil society, local communities and women’s groups,
which are the front line. Legislative frameworks have
to be strengthened to protect and mitigate risks for
refugees and internally displaced persons, a majority
of whom are women and girls, and to secure the status
of thousands of children, who risk becoming a stateless
generation.

S/PV.7560

Fourthly, we have to strengthen support for and
services to survivors of sexual violence. There is an
acute lack of health care and other critical services
for survivors within Syria as well as in neighbouring
countries, and these services should extend to livelihoodsupport and poverty-alleviation programmes.
Fifthly, no meaningful actions can be taken in
the absence of knowledge. Therefore, we must invest
in deepening information-gathering, analysis and
documentation on the issue of sexual violence as a basis
for advocacy and action at all levels.
Sixthly, we must be relentless in our pursuit
of accountability through the investigation and
prosecution of sexual violence crimes. Combating
impunity is a key aspect of deterrence and, ultimately,
prevention. This will primarily entail support for
national institutions. At the global and regional levels,
it will require new approaches and frameworks to
deal with the unprecedented jurisdictional and other
challenges associated with thousands of combatants
from more than 100 different countries.
Finally, we must live up to our frequent declarations
and ensure women’s participation in peace and mediation
processes and the explicit inclusion of conflict-related
sexual violence concerns in these discussions. Women
and girls are disproportionately affected, and they must
have a seat at the table. As women themselves have
stated, “Nothing about us without us”.
The strategy envisions targeted initiatives under
these seven priority areas. These initiatives are intended
to be catalytic in nature, filling critical gaps and
strengthening the overall response. In my capacity as
Chair of United Nations Action against Sexual Violence
in Conflict, which brings together 13 United Nations
entities, I will encourage the network to propose and
take the lead on specific initiatives, in accordance with
their respective mandates, expertise and comparative
advantages. The strategy should articulate a shared
vision of priorities, and, in so doing, enhance overall
coordination.
The political and financial support of the Council,
and that of other Member States and donors, will be
absolutely crucial. I look forward in the coming weeks
and months to sharing more details about the strategy
and will rely on the Council’s steadfast commitment.
Last week I was in Amman to attend a meeting
organized by the Office of the Special Adviser on
the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility to

15-367615/25

S/PV.7560

The situation in the Middle East

Protect, with 25 religious leaders and representatives
of faith-based organizations from the Middle East and
North Africa. The discussions reinforced my conviction
that the role of community, religious and traditional
leaders is critical to breaking the prevailing silence
around the issue of conflict-related sexual violence and
ensure that survivors are embraced by their families
and communities rather than stigmatized and shunned.
The role of religious and traditional leaders is
essential to develop and sustain a counter-narrative to
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other
extremist groups, which pervert the inherent message
of peace, tolerance and respect for women that is at
the heart of Islam. It is essential that we engage and
empower them as one of the crucial vanguards in this
battle. It will not be enough to defeat ISIL militarily;
we must also defeat the ideology it is propagating.
I would like to conclude by flagging one of our
greatest challenges of this agenda, for Syria and
the Middle East, and beyond. How do we enforce
compliance on the part of non-State actors, which are
the main perpetrators around the world? This will also
require new approaches and tools. Obviously, it will
not be possible to engage with terrorist groups such as
ISIL and other extremists of their kind. However, we
will need to make calculated and strategic decisions
regarding engagement with non-State actors, so as to
ensure that they know that the light of justice will shine
on them and that they must take specific measures to
prevent and punish sexual violence.
The President: I thank Ms. Bangura for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Zerrougui.
Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in French): Allow me at the
outset to offer my condolences to the representative
of France; the French people; the representative of
Lebanon, who is here with us today; the Lebanese
people; and all those who are the victims of extreme
violence. The recent horrific attacks that took place in
Paris and Beirut remind us in the most tragic fashion
that we all are vulnerable to violent extremism. Today
more than ever we must join forces and work together
to find solutions to the extended conflicts that fuel such
acts of terrorism.
(spoke in English)
I would like to thank the United Kingdom,
during its presidency of the Security Council, and the
Secretary of State for International Development for

6/25

16/11/2015

this opportunity to brief the Council on the situation of
children affected by armed conflict in Syria.
The conflict in Syria continues to have disastrous
humanitarian consequences for children, and I think
that Stephen already highlighted some of what is
happening. After five years of intensifying hostilities,
and in the absence of a political solution, the
fundamental principles of international humanitarian
and human rights law continue to be violated daily.
The increasing outflow of refugees and internal
displacement demonstrate the deteriorating situation.
Half of the Syrian population is now displaced, and half
of the displaced are children.
Children are paying a high price for the ongoing
conflict. They continue to be killed, maimed, recruited
and used, abducted and exploited by parties to conflict.
Their futures are jeopardized by attacks on schools.
Drawing upon information documented through the
Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism in 2015, my
briefing will focus on three of the six grave violations,
namely the killing and maiming of children, the
recruitment and use of children, and attacks on schools.
It will complement briefings by my colleagues.
Mr. O’Brien has already briefed the Council on
the civilian casualties of the conflict. The cumulative
death toll of children was estimated at 10,000 in 2014
and is expected to have increased significantly in 2015.
The majority of those children were killed or injured
as a result of indiscriminate attacks on civilian areas
perpetrated by all parties to the conflict, in violation of
international humanitarian law.
Aerial bombardments of civilian areas by Syrian
Government forces, including the use of barrel bombs
and successive airstrikes, have continued to cause a
significant proportion of verified child casualties in
2015. For example, in May a barrel bomb attack on a
school in Aleppo killed six children and injured 20.
The indiscriminate shelling of densely populated areas,
including mortar and rocket attacks, is another major
cause of child casualties.
For example, on 15 September, 19 children were
killed and another 85 injured by more than 100 rockets
and mortars fired by armed opposition groups into the
Salah al-Din area of Aleppo. On 26 September, another
19 children were killed and 21 injured by a mortar fired
from a Government position into a park in Homs.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has
committed brutal atrocities against children. While it
15-36761

16/11/2015

The situation in the Middle East

has been difficult to verify cases of grave violations
occurring in ISIL-controlled areas, the killing and
maiming of children by this group continue to be
reported. That includes recent horrific video footage
allegedly portraying the mass execution of 200 children.
It has also been reported that children recruited by ISIL
have been executed for trying to escape.
With the growing number of parties involved in the
conflict, the risk of grave violations against children
increases. It is reported that children have been killed
and maimed in air strikes conducted by international
forces. I reiterate that all the parties to the conflict
must abide by their obligations under international
humanitarian law, and especially the principles of
distinction, proportionality and precaution. The
ongoing use of methods and means of warfare that fail
to distinguish between civilians and combatants and
the use of indiscriminate weapons in populated areas
are a clear violation of those obligations.
A continuing feature of the conflict in Syria is
the widespread recruitment and use of children by
all non-State armed groups, including the Kurdish
People’s Protection Units, the Free Syrian Army and
Government-affiliated groups. ISIL and the Al-Nusra
Front have also recruited and used children to perpetrate
acts of extreme violence. Reports have been received
of armed groups targeting children as young as seven
years of age and forcibly recruiting children through
the coercion of families and abductions. ISIL allegedly
recruited up to 400 children in the first quarter of 2015,
and the United Nations has verified cases of the use by
ISIL of foreign children.
Indoctrination and military training play an
important role in the recruitment and use of children
by ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front. Children have received
military training in three ISIL centres: in Aleppo,
Deir ez-Zor and Raqqah. In addition, ISIL has opened
kindergartens for boys in Raqqah, and the Al-Nusra
Front has instructed communities in Idlib to send
boys aged from 8 to 12 to its education camps. Syrian
Government forces have arrested and detained children
for alleged association with armed groups. There are
verified cases of children who were subjected to torture
during detention and of children who died in custody.
I reiterate that children recruited and used by armed
groups are victims and should be treated as such.
At the end of September, over a quarter of all the
schools in Syria, about 6,000, were fully or partially
destroyed. The United Nations has verified attacks

S/PV.7560

on schools by Syrian government forces, ISIL, the
Al-Nusra Front and other non-State armed groups in
2015. In addition, the military use of schools by Syrian
government forces in Idlib has led to their targeting by
armed opposition groups.
Prior to the conflict, primary school enrolment was
almost universal in Syria. Now, the right to education
has been compromised by hostilities, displacement and
restrictions in ISIL-held areas. An estimated 2 million
internally displaced children and 700,000 refugee
children are not attending school. We are witnessing
a generation at risk of not receiving an education, with
serious long-term consequences for the future of those
children. We can mitigate those consequences if the
international community makes significant investments
in protecting education and in providing education in
emergencies.
Five years of conflict in Syria have taken an
immeasurable toll on the lives of children. I urge all
parties to respect their obligations under international
law, end grave violations against children and pursue
accountability for violations. To that end, it is critical
that every Member State with influence on the parties
to the conflict play a constructive role.
Since my first visit to Syria in 2012, I have
repeatedly stated that there is no military solution to
the conflict in Syria. Finally, there is now a broader
consensus that a political solution must be reached. The
acknowledgement of the linkage between a ceasefire
and a parallel political process by the International Syria
Support Group, meeting in Vienna this past weekend,
and the willingness of participants to encourage
confidence-building measures that contribute to a
viable political process and a nationwide ceasefire
are important and constructive developments. In that
context, I underscore that the issue of children has
proved to be a positive entry point in a number of peace
processes, and strengthening the protection of children
must be at the centre of any peace talks.
It is our collective responsibility to support a
political solution to the conflict, accompanied by
concrete commitments and actions to bring an end to
the conflict and suffering. I call on all of you to be
voices for the children in Syria and to take collective
action to allow them to live a life free from fear and
violence.
The President: I thank Ms. Zerrougui for her
briefing.

15-367617/25

S/PV.7560

The situation in the Middle East

I shall now make a statement in my national capacity
as Secretary of State for International Development of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland.
Let me thank Mr. Stephen O’Brien, Ms. Zainab
Bangura and Ms. Leila Zerrougui for their sobering
briefings.
The United Kingdom expresses its condolences in
relation to the terrorist attacks of recent days in Paris,
Beirut and elsewhere. They are a vivid reminder of the
horrific human toll taken by the Syrian and regional
crisis.
Like others in the Council today, I have met Syrian
refugees who have fled the bloodshed and violence
consuming their country for over four years now; their
tales are of experiences that no one should have to go
through. We must accept that these people have been
let down. The generosity of the countries bearing the
brunt of the refugees, such as Jordan, Lebanon and
Turkey, have not been matched by similar generosity on
the part of the whole international community. United
Nations appeals are 45 per cent funded. Overwhelming
suffering and loss have been matched by political
deadlocks and an inadequate financial response.
My message to the Council today is that for Syria,
for its people and for us all, time is now running out.
Time is running out for us to meet the most basic needs
of the Syrian people, whether they are inside Syria or
have fled the country. Time is running out for the whole
generation of Syria’s children who have been robbed
of a childhood, an education and a future. Time is
running out for the international community as we try
to cope with the overwhelming number of refugees who
have themselves run out of hope and are now looking
elsewhere to build a new life for themselves and their
families.
Since day one, Britain has worked hard to help
people on the ground and has been at the forefront
of the humanitarian response to the crisis, pledging
$1.7 billion to date. But the need is immense and
growing. Greater efforts are needed, not only to
meet people’s basic needs but to provide jobs and an
education for Syria’s children. That is why our Prime
Minister has just announced that the United Kingdom
will co-host a global conference on the Syrian crisis
in February 2016. The conference must be a turning
point. It must raise the resources and deliver the policy
changes that are needed.

8/25

16/11/2015

Let us not forget that our response to this crisis,
the actions we take or do not take on Syria, will define
how we respond to other protracted emergencies: the
challenge of educating whole generations of children
at risk of being left to conflict and, with forced
displacement likely to remain a major feature of the
global landscape, the challenge of supporting refugees
and the countries that host them.
But we recognize that humanitarian action alone
is not sufficient. Syria is not a natural disaster; it is a
man-made one. We all know what is causing the deaths
and suffering. The Al-Assad regime bears the primary
responsibilty. It is Al-Assad’s barrel bombs, but the
brutality of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is a
major factor as well. It is the targeting and killing of aid
workers. It is the deliberate disregard for international
humanitarian law, all too often dressed up in a false and
perverse argument of sovereignty.
A negotiated political transition is the sole way to
end the conflict in Syria and is key to alleviating the
humanitarian crisis. I am encouraged by the constructive
discussions in Vienna and the new momentum behind
the process working towards peace for the people of
Syria. But until that political settlement is reached, we
must recommit to ending the targeted and indiscriminate
attacks on civilians, particularly aerial attacks and
shelling; to protecting health facilities, schools and
essential infrastructure; to ensuring unimpeded access
for humanitarian organizations; to ending the use
of siege tactics and to preventing and responding to
gender-based violence. As is the case in all conflicts,
girls and women have been left the most vulnerable to
violence, abuse and exploitation.
As we meet today, there is a long list of things
that we will fail to agree on in relation to the Syrian
crisis, but help for those caught up in the crisis and
the ability of humanitarian aid to reach those in need
should not be on that list. Those are things that we
should be able to agree on. There can be no excuse
for flouting humanitarian law. There can be no excuse
for preventing humanitarian agencies from reaching
those in need. The Council must make that clear. We
agreed on resolution 2191 (2014) on allowing the United
Nations to use cross-border routes. That resolution
has been critical to helping us get aid to people who
otherwise would have none. It is essential that we renew
that resolution.
Syria is perhaps the defining conflict of our age,
not just for those in the region, but for all of us. It has
15-36761

16/11/2015

The situation in the Middle East

shown all too clearly where there are failures in our
humanitarian and political responses. And the World
Humanitarian Summit next year will be a vital moment
for us to commit to a new twenty-first century response
to protracted crises that brings together our development
and humanitarian work and human rights. In this age of
crisis, that Summit will be a vital moment to recommit
ourselves to our humanitarian values and law.
As Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon and the
International Committee of the Red Cross President
Peter Maurer have said, now is the moment to rally for
humankind. We must respond to that call for the sake
of Syria and for the wider world and future generations.
That is our shared responsibility and challenge. We
must meet it.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): New Zealand too
expresses its condolences for the recent loss of life in
Paris and Beirut, as well as in attacks in Ankara, Egypt,
Iraq and beyond.
We must do all we can to counter the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). That includes finding a
political resolution to the Syrian conflict, which is a
major driver of ISIL. The recent attacks show that the
human cost of the conflict reaches well beyond Syria.
Within Syria, however, it also continues to escalate.
Twenty-one months ago, the Council adopted resolution
2139 (2014) on Syria, which demanded that all parties
immediately cease and desist from all violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights
abuses. That call has not been heeded. A brutal and
lawless conflict continues.
Human rights violations and abuses can lead to
and fuel conflict. They underpin many of the conflicts
that come before the Council. That is especially
evident in Syria. A common feature of conflict is the
disproportional impact that it has on the most vulnerable.
That is true in Syria for women and for children. As we
have heard today, 2.7 million Syrian children have been
deprived of their right to education — some for four
years or more. The fact that more than half of all attacks
on schools worldwide over the past four years have
taken place in Syria says it all. As we have heard today
from other colleagues, children continue to be recruited
and indoctrinated by ISIL and non-State armed groups.

S/PV.7560

Women and girls inside Syria and those who have
fled the conflict are subjected to sexual and genderbased violence, sexual exploitation and harassment. The
desperate economic situation of families is exploited,
with young girls being coerced into early marriages.
ISIL must be singled out for its brutal campaign of
sexual violence. Sexual violence is not a women’s issue.
It is a weapon of war. It terrorizes individuals, and it
destabilizes families and communities. We need to
move beyond the narrative of women being victims of
conflict. They must be provided with the opportunity
to be powerful agents of change in transforming their
societies.
Syrian women have shown immense resilience and
strength. At the political level, Syrian women must
be included in policy dialogues about Syria’s future,
as called for by Special Envoy De Mistura last week
and echoed in the Chamber today. At the community
level, the views of women must be included in needs
assessments, programme design and the implementation
and evaluations of humanitarian and development
programmes.
Accountability
for
international
humanitarian law violations and human rights abuses
in Syria is not optional. It is essential for justice; it is
essential for healing.
New Zealand is working with Jordan and Spain to
renew resolution 2191 (2014), which has enabled crossborder access for humanitarian assistance seeking to
enter Syria. Resolution 2191 (2014) has enabled the
delivery of food assistance, non-food humanitarian
items and medical supplies for millions of people.
However, millions more remain hard to reach, including
those in besieged areas, who are intentionally denied
basic necessities as a cruel tactic of war.
New Zealand is concerned that cross-line access
continues to be obstructed, particularly by the Syrian
Government. Humanitarian access into ISIL-controlled
areas remains almost nonexistent. New Zealand
supports the efforts of Special Envoy De Mistura, but
he needs the support of the international community.
In that regard, New Zealand welcomes the ongoing
talks in Vienna. They are an important step towards a
political solution, affirming the benefits of pragmatism
and diplomacy.
We also welcome the agreement reached by the
International Syria Support Group to encourage
confidence-building measures by parties on the
ground, including better implementation of resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014), increased

15-367619/25

S/PV.7560

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian access and an end to the use of
indiscriminate weapons. Such measures will advance
the political process, which is the only real answer to
the humanitarian crisis. They will also protect civilians
in the short term. Their implementation is long overdue.
Finally, we welcome the strong role envisaged for
the Security Council by the Vienna process. We look
forward to working closely with Council members to
reinforce the progress made in Vienna and to engage on
questions emerging from the process. New Zealand is
encouraged to see momentum building towards finding
a political solution. It is shameful that it has taken
nearly five years, with well over a quarter of a million
people dead, and with 4.2 million people — almost the
exact population of New Zealand— fleeing Syria, to
get to where we are today.
We must commit to ensuring that now is the
beginning of the end of the conflict in Syria. In that
regard, we welcome the announcement by the United
Kingdom of a global Syria crisis conference early next
year.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke
in French): Before beginning my statement, I reiterate
my delegation’s solidarity with the French people and
Government during these days of mourning. More than
ever, they can count on Spain as a neighbour, an ally
and a friend.
(spoke in Spanish)
I would like to express my thanks to the President for
convening today’s meeting to consider the humanitarian
situation in Syria from various angles, all of which are
essential. I also thank Mr. O’Brien, Ms. Bangura and
Ms. Zerrougui for their briefings, which are cause for
concern and emotion but which should above all move
us to action. The situation of women and children in the
Syrian conflict constitutes the deepest circle of the hell
which that country has become.
As Ms. Zerrougui noted in her briefing, millions
of children have been affected by the war, and there
is growing reason to expect that they will be marked
for life after such a traumatic experience. While our
present task is the basic one of protecting their lives,
feeding them, caring for their health and educating
them, even in conflict zones, we must keep in mind
that many of them, perhaps the majority, will continue
to need all kinds of help for a long time to come. In
that regard, we emphasize once again the devastation of
the Syrian education system, where there are 2 million
10/25

16/11/2015

children out of school, with another 700,000 children
living as refugees in neighbouring countries. More than
5,000 schools have been destroyed or are being used
for purposes that have nothing to do with education,
in contravention of international humanitarian law
and the resolutions of this Council. It is crucial that
we do something about that, beginning by answering
the call for a Syria response plan, for which members
will recall that an amount of less than $224 million is
needed to prevent Syria from losing a whole generation
owing to war.
Without a doubt, one of the most pernicious effects
on Syrian children is the recruitment of children and
their use in combat by terrorist groups and other armed
actors. With the indoctrination of children by such
groups, there is the risk that a seed of hatred is being
sown that could easily proliferate in the future. The use
of sexual violence by all parties to the Syrian conflict
is also devastating. The use of such violence as a
terrorist tactic has been widely demonstrated and must
cease immediately. It is critical for the victims of such
violence to receive specialized medical attention, which
unfortunately is not always readily available. The role
of women in Syria should also be viewed from other
perspectives. Central among them should be women’s
full participation in an inclusive political process that
leads to a Syria at peace and, if we look ahead, a Syria
participating in all spheres of life — that new Syria we
all long to see.
I leave for the end, not because it is of less
importance — far from it — our response to the briefing
by Mr. O’Brien. In that regard, I take this opportunity
to reiterate our condemnation of the indiscriminate
attacks against the civilian population by all parties to
the conflict, including in particular the use of barrel
bombs. We urge the Council to rapidly adopt measures
in that regard. As my colleague from New Zealand said
before me, the Council will soon turn its attention to
renewing resolution 2191 (2014), concerning crossborder humanitarian assistance, whose efficacy has
been amply demonstrated since its entry into force. We
should not squander the opportunity that such renewal
provides of strengthening other aspects of humanitarian
aid, such as access to areas under siege and medical
neutrality.
Finally, I agree with most, if not all, of the other
speakers that our humanitarian efforts will be in vain
without the immediate launch of a political solution
that leads to a transitional inclusive Government with

15-36761

16/11/2015

The situation in the Middle East

full executive powers that perfectly reflects the Syrian
people and that has sufficient legitimacy to promote
political change in the country in line with the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/523, annex). We are, of course,
closely following the diplomatic process that began in
Vienna, and we welcome the road map adopted in that
capital on 14 November, which expresses our shared
determination to put an end to the massacre in Syria.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome Her Excellency the
Secretary of State for International Development of
the United Kingdom, and to express our thanks and
appreciation to the United Kingdom for convening this
meeting. Our thanks and appreciation also go to the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict for their comprehensive briefings.
We express our sincere condolences to the friendly
people of France and to the French Government. We
condemn in the strongest terms the terrorist attacks that
befell Paris. We stand shoulder to shoulder with France
and with all international efforts to combat terrorism.
We condemn all the terrorist attacks that took place in
Beirut, Ankara, Iraq and Egypt and in all fraternal and
friendly countries. We affirm our solidarity with them
in combating terrorism.
We are deeply saddened by the situation in our
fraternal neighbour, Syria. Over the past five years, the
humanitarian scene has been staggering. I will not offer
statistics or figures, but the deep suffering surpasses
the understanding of humankind and the civilized
world. Violations of the basic norms of international
humanitarian law and human rights law by the
conflicting parties in Syria have become a hallmark of
the conflict in that country. The indiscriminate bombing
of innocent civilians, including children, has become a
daily occurrence, alongside displacement, starvation,
the destruction of infrastructure, the bombing of schools
and health centres, hindering medical assistance and
lifesaving assistance, intimidation, the obliteration of
Syrian identity and the plunder of its historic artefacts.
The international community should explore every
possibility for improving humanitarian efforts in Syria.
We will cooperate with New Zealand and Spain to
renew resolution 2191 (2014), in order to ensure the
continuing delivery of humanitarian assistance, which
has saved millions of Syrians.

S/PV.7560

The international community should make
concerted, unified efforts to fight terrorist groups, in
particular the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
which still controls large areas of Syria, where it
continues to wreak havoc, especially through cowardly
actions such as those that took place recently in France,
Lebanon and Iraq. We are dealing with the world’s most
serious humanitarian asylum crisis since the end of the
Second World War. Jordan hosts the largest number of
refugees in the world, and the second largest number
of Syrian refugees, in proportion to our population.
Syrian citizens account for 1.5 million people living in
different parts of Jordan.
Nine per cent of Syrian refugees live in refugee
camps, which has put tremendous pressure on health
care, education, food security and employment. It
has also put tremendous pressure on Jordan’s public
treasury at a time when we are facing economic
challenges resulting from the situation in the region. We
are sharing both our resources and our infrastructure
with the refugees, and both are being exhausted by the
heavy burden that this entails.
The Kingdom of Jordan and its kind people
have opened their homes to refugees from all over
the region. We will continue to pursue this generous
approach under the direction of our Hashemite leaders.
However, it should be said that the countries hosting
Syrian refugees are beginning to feel that the world
is betraying them by not providing sufficient support,
and they require the assistance of the international
community. The countries hosting Syrian refugees are
experiencing a serious deterioration in their ability
to deliver basic services. They are also experiencing
setbacks in development at all levels. The international
community should coordinate and cooperate with
the Governments of host countries in order to secure
a reasonable future for those whose lives have been
shattered by these tragedies. It should buttress the
resilience of host countries, because it is in the
interests of the whole world to do so. We are grateful
to the United Nations Development Programme for
organizing the Resilience Development Forum, which
initiates a new era of support for Syrian refugees and a
new international partnership to that end.
We continue to advocate for the Security Council
to keep the Syrian refugee issue on its agenda and
in its deliberations owing to the seriousness of the
consequences of the Syrian crisis for the entire world. We
stress the importance of implementing the presidential

15-3676111/25

S/PV.7560

The situation in the Middle East

statement contained in document S/PRST/2015/10,
adopted in April this year, and a resolution should be
adopted to the same end. There is no military solution
to the crisis in Syria; rather, a comprehensive political
solution to the crisis must be found.
We welcome the meeting of the International Syria
Support Group in Vienna, as well as the joint ministerial
declaration. The large number of participants made the
Vienna meeting a historic event. However, there needs
to be a follow-up that will launch a political process
leading to a political transition and the realization of
the aspirations of the Syrian people.
A comprehensive political solution based on the
Geneva I consensus is the only way out of this crisis.
There is global agreement on that point. The solution
should meet the aspirations of all Syrians, lead to a new
political reality that enjoys their collective support,
enable us to defeat terrorism in the country and restore
stability and security there, inspire the voluntary return
of internally displaced persons and refugees to their
homes, and preserve the independence of Syria.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we should again like to express
our deep sympathy and condolences to the people and
the Government of France, to Paris, and to all countries,
all people, all cities that have fallen victim to these
horrible terrorist attacks, some of which may be facing
the terrorist threat on a daily basis. In expressing our
condolences, we would like to state loudly and clearly
our solidarity in the joint fight against terrorism.
We thank the Under-Secretary-General for
having presented the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/862). We most certainly pay tribute to all
the humanitarian workers, whether from the United
Nations or from other international organizations, who
are working in Syria and very often are risking their
lives to help those who need medical assistance, food
and housing.
Enormous humanitarian efforts are being
undertaken. Every month, over 4 million individuals
receive food assistance. The system for the delivery and
distribution of humanitarian assistance across borders
pursuant to resolution 2165 (2014) and under United
Nations oversight is working effectively. By the end of
October, over 207 convoys had crossed Syria’s borders
with Turkey and Jordan, which represents over 4,500
truckloads. A great deal is being done by the Syrian
Government to ensure the delivery of humanitarian

12/25

16/11/2015

consignments, not only in territory under its control,
where most of the internally displaced persons are
concentrated, but also in territory that is beyond its
control, as the report of the Secretary-General indicates.
Praise is also due to the very noble actions of the
people of Syria themselves, whether in the form of
the Red Crescent volunteers who are providing basic
necessities across front lines, or of the individuals who
are hosting refugees in their homes. It is entirely clear
that, regardless of the scope of the humanitarian efforts,
and regardless of how many convoys are sent across
borders or front lines, the problem will not be solved in
this way. Only by reaching a political settlement and,
in parallel, waging a determined fight against terrorism
will we achieve a real and viable improvement in the
situation.
The international community must unite its
efforts in its fight against the terrorist threat, from
which the people of Syria have already suffered for
five years now. It is a threat that recognizes no limits
to barbarism and pays no respect to geographical
borders. That is something we have seen time and time
again — in the tragedies in Beirut, Paris, Baghdad,
Ankara and other cities. The participants in the meeting
of the International Syria Support Group in Vienna
on 14 November condemned these terrorist acts.
Furthermore, they proposed a number of steps to move
the political process in Syria forward and underscored
the importance of ensuring humanitarian access to all
parts of the country.
What is especially unacceptable at the current,
very decisive stage in which political efforts are being
stepped up is the politicization of human rights and
humanitarian topics. Making specious observations in
this respect in an attempt to score political points is
simply immoral. We are outraged by various reports
that have alleged civilian deaths and the destruction
of civilian infrastructure as a result of missile and air
strikes by the Russian armed forces.
The operations of the Russian armed forces are
covered in daily briefings for Russian and non-Russian
journalists. During these briefings an objective
picture is drawn and attempts at disinformation are
exposed. For example, reporting on an airstrike on a
hospital in Sarmin on 20 October, the media claimed
and confirmed to have allegedly resulted in civilian
casualties. Incidentally, that was also referred to in
paragraph 7 of the Secretary-General’s report. The
media circulated photographs of a destroyed building.
15-36761

16/11/2015

The situation in the Middle East

However, on satellite pictures taken on 31 October, the
hospital in Sarmin is clearly whole and has not been
damaged. Once again, we reiterate that the use of only
information that is confirmed, verified and reliable is
one of the main criteria for ensuring the unbiased and
impartial nature of the United Nations system.
We note that the new report of the Secretary-General
has been drawn up in a more balanced way, insofar as it
does not contain any hasty assessments and unverified
data on possible civilian casualties. We regret that the
authors of the report did not have the courage to refute
the disinformation regarding the actions of the Russian
Aerospace Forces that was contained in the previous
report on the humanitarian situation.
Russia continues to provide the Syrian population
with humanitarian aid. Numerous flights of the Russian
Ministry for Emergency Situations are delivering basic
goods to Syria. Russia has donated 100,000 tons of
wheat to Damascus. We are also providing assistance
through United Nations organizations, including
through the World Food Programme and the United
Nations Development Programme.
The path to a sustainable political settlement and
effectively fighting terrorism lies through a combination
of international and regional efforts. There is growing
understanding of the need to create a comprehensive
anti-terrorist coalition under the aegis of the United
Nations. The recent terrorist attacks have clearly shown
that it is not only terrorism that cannot be justified in
any way, but what also cannot be justified any longer is
the passivity and the lack of unity in the fight against
this evil. We stand ready to continue joint work in that
field.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): Our hearts go out to
those who are mourning their loved ones after the latest
terrorist attacks.
I thank the presidency of the United Kingdom
for convening this Security Council briefing. I also
thank the briefers for their statements — reports of
unvarnished quality on the harrowing consequences
of the nearly five years of brutal war on the people of
Syria. As we consider the positive signals emerging
from Vienna, all those people have is more bloodshed
and displacement.
Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey are approaching a
dangerous saturation point as refugees continue to
spill out of Syria. While criminals, smugglers and

S/PV.7560

traffickers are profiting, gaining millions from tragedy,
refugees are literally dying to escape. According to the
Syrian Network for Human Rights, Government forces
dropped nearly 1,500 barrel bombs in October alone.
Indiscriminate attacks against, and abuse of, civilians
continue from all sides of the conflict. Starvation and
siege are used as a tool of war. Daesh butchers keep
committing gruesome atrocities — public executions,
stonings, beheadings and rapes. It is unthinkable that
in the twenty-first century slave markets are up and
running, with women and girls paraded and sold like
cattle.
Humanitarian access remains a huge problem, due to
insecurity, as well as artificial hurdles. Administrative
visa procedures continue to delay and limit the delivery
of assistance by United Nations agencies and their
partners, including humanitarian non-governmental
organizations. It is immoral and criminal to obstruct
humanitarian access. Every minute counts. Every day
means more lives lost.
All those acts constitute glaring violations of the
provisions contained in resolution 2139 (2014) and
subsequent resolutions. The Council’s inability to
enforce its own resolutions in the face of the biggest
humanitarian crisis of the twenty-first century
undercuts its relevance and credibility. The Council
should use all the tools at its disposal to ensure that the
parties to this conflict allow rapid, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access for United Nations humanitarian
agencies and their implementing partners, including
across conflict lines. We need to increase and expand
access to the millions of people living in all hard-toreach areas, also in view of the coming winter, which
will further aggravate the immense suffering of the
people in need.
The ongoing conflict has deprived the Syrian people
of even basic medical care. Physicians for Human Rights
documented 307 attacks on medical facilities and the
deaths of 670 medical personnel in Syria since the
start of the conflict in March 2011, with Syrian forces
responsible for 90 per cent of those attacks. Concerns
about the safety and security of humanitarian personnel
too remain high, with United Nations vehicles attacked
and humanitarian workers kidnapped and killed. We
condemn the continued attacks on health-care and
humanitarian facilities, transportation and personnel,
and we reiterate that they hold a special protected
status under international humanitarian law, which
must be respected in all circumstances. Furthermore,

15-3676113/25

S/PV.7560

The situation in the Middle East

16/11/2015

such attacks may constitute war crimes. They have to
be taken most seriously.

must do all within its power to make sure that those for
whom the peace is being built will see it alive.

Impunity runs rampant in Syria. A much-needed
referral of the country’s situation to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) was blocked by a veto last
year — one of the four vetos that have allowed
this crisis to deepen and expand by protecting the
perpetrators, not the victims. We support the recent
calls of the Secretary-General to refer Syria to the
ICC, and we urge the international community not to
let accountability become yet another victim of Syria’s
war. We commend the work done by the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic and human rights organizations to
register the atrocities and human rights violations in
Syria. We urge them to continue their important work
with a hope that one day, hopefully sooner than later,
the testimonies they collected will help to bring the
perpetrators to account.

Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): First of all, let me express
once again, on behalf of the Angolan delegation,
our sincere condolences to and solidarity with the
delegation of France on account of the attacks in Paris.
We strongly condemn those barbaric acts.

Syria remains one of the most dangerous places in
the world to be a child — and a veritable hell in which to
be born a girl. Seven and a half million Syrian children
have lost their parents, their homes and their schools
and suffered immense emotional and physical traumas.
According to the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, more than 140,000 Syrian children
are stateless. What future do they have — illiterate,
orphaned, malnourished and maimed? What future
does a country have where its entire next generation is a
lost generation? We applaud all those who shine a light
on the plight of Syria’s children and do their best to
provide them with protection, support and sustenance.
They too demand justice. Those children do not have
the luxury of waiting for Geneva or Vienna or any
other format to succeed. By then, many of them will
have succumbed, will have been exchanged for food,
recruited and ordered to kill, or will have succumbed
to the shelling, the aerial attacks and the barrel bombs.
The Council can and should at least act on the barrel
bombs to protect those children and the remaining
Syrian population.
To conclude, let me reiterate our long-standing
position that there is no military solution to the Syrian
conflict. The sides must choose the negotiation table
over violence and proceed on the basis of the 2012
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523, annex) building on
the glimmer of hope that Vienna now offers. But that
road will be long and full of hurdles. It requires time,
which the people of Syria do not have. This Council

14/25

We thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O’Brien, as well as
Ms. Leila Zerrougui and Ms. Zainab Bangura for their
comprehensive presentations on the humanitarian
situation and the challenge facing the Syrian population.
It is deeply troubling to bear witness to constant
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law by the parties to the conflict and to
the continued suffering of communities and individuals
inside Syria. The massive refugee crisis facing Syria’s
neighbours and now Europe is one of the consequences
on the international community’s inability to promote
and facilitate a political solution to this conflict.
Additionally, growing extremism, radicalization and
nationalism will truly leave a bitter legacy with longterm consequences that will affect the region and the
world as a whole.
We have a common responsibility to resolve this
crisis, and must therefore step up efforts to support the
talks being held in Vienna on a political settlement to
this irrational conflict. The countries participating in
the political process, including the permanent members
of the Security Council that have undisputed leverage
over the warring parties, bear a special responsibility
to work together to put resolute pressure on them to
end the violence. The Vienna talks represent a global
effort. We are pleased that an agreement has been
reached on holding talks between the Government and
the opposition in January and on ways to enforce a
ceasefire. We believe that establishing a ceasefire and
blocking the proliferation and supply of weapons and
logistical support for the rebel groups on the ground is
a top priority. Only then will the Syrian people feel a
genuine commitment on the part of the relevant actors
and stakeholders to reaching a comprehensive peace
process that responds to their basic aspiration to peace
and respite.
Resolutions 2139 (20145), 2165 (2014) and 2191
(2014) represent a determined effort by the Security
Council to address human rights issues underlying the

15-36761

16/11/2015

The situation in the Middle East

Syrian conflict and find ways to alleviate the people’s
suffering and despair under extremely stressful
conditions. However, at this point, we must forcefully
insist that the parties to the conflict show respect for
civilians’ right to access to basic necessities, including
shelter, food, water and medical care. The conflict
has been going on for far too long. Its irrational
proportions and disregard for human rights and
international humanitarian law are unacceptable. The
circumstances require us to urge all actors, including
the Syrian authorities and outside Powers, to cease
all hostilities and reach a political settlement to the
conflict. Moreover, we must ensure that the outcome
of the peace process and political transition holds the
perpetrators of atrocities and the worst violations of
human rights accountable. That is a prerequisite for a
true healing and reconciliation process among Syrians.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General
O’Brien
and
Special
Representatives Bangura and Zerrougui for their deeply
sobering briefings. Reflecting on their statements and
on the Secretary-General’s report on the humanitarian
situation in Syria (S/2015/862), it is disturbing to hear
yet again that the security situation has deteriorated
and that humanitarian access to those most in need has
not improved.
Before addressing some of the issues raised today, I
also want to say that our thoughts and prayers are with
all those affected by the attacks in Paris on Friday and
in Beirut on Thursday. We condemn such vile terrorist
attacks in the strongest terms. We must do everything
in our power to fight back against what can only be
considered as an assault on our common humanity.
As the Secretary-General and the representatives
here today have said time and time again, the only
solution there can be to the crisis in Syria, including
the dire humanitarian situation, is a political one,
through a Syrian-led political process based on the
Geneva communiqué of 2012 (S/2012/522, annex). Just
two days ago, we took a fundamentally important step
towards that goal in Vienna. More than 20 stakeholders,
including representatives of regional organizations and
United Nations Special Envoy de Mistura, convened
on Saturday, as members of the International Syria
Support Group, to discuss how to bring an end to the
Syrian conflict as quickly as possible.
The Group agreed to work to implement a
nationwide ceasefire in Syria, which would come into

S/PV.7560

effect as soon as the representatives of the Syrian
Government and the opposition have begun initial steps
towards a transition based on the Geneva communiqué.
A halt in the fighting is absolutely essential to our
efforts to address the humanitarian needs of Syrians
and to advance a political process to end the conflict.
For our part, it will be critical for the Council to support
that effort through a resolution on a United Nationsendorsed monitoring mission for such a ceasefire. As
discussed in Vienna, in both the ministerial group and
a working group, it is critical that all parties and the
international community as a whole work diligently
to ensure swift delivery of humanitarian assistance
throughout Syria, through unimpeded delivery
approvals and improved access over borders and across
conflict lines. As we look forward to the renewal of
resolution 2191 (2014), especially, we must do all we
can to ensure that assistance reaches those most in need
in Syria.
While there is renewed energy for achieving a
political solution, the situation on the ground continues
to be of significant concern. Civilians’ tragic suffering
from the persistent fighting and rabid violations of
international law has continued unabated. We are still
shocked by the continuing use of barrel bombs and
other destructive weapons in civilian areas, as well
as by the attacks on schools, hospitals and medical
personnel, arbitrary arrests and detentions, sexual and
gender-based violence, torture and disappearances.
The Syrian Network for Human Rights recorded 1,771
deaths in Syria just in the month of October, including
1,284 individuals who died at the hands of Government
forces, which are clearly still responsible for the
overwhelming majority of deaths in Syria. Furthermore,
despite its claim to the contrary, the regime’s ghastly
use of barrel bombs did not end last month. Syrian
documentation groups recorded its use of 1,438 barrel
bombs in October alone. In recent weeks, air strikes,
including some involving barrel bombs, intensified in
the opposition-held eastern part of Ghouta, resulting in
the destruction of medical centres, markets and other
public locations. On 30 October, according to relief
agencies, multiple air strikes on a public market in
Douma killed at least 70 people and injured more than
500 others.
Such brutal tactics must stop. We underscore
how important it is that Saturday’s Vienna statement
recalled resolution 2139 (2014), which includes the
demand that all parties cease any indiscriminate use of

15-3676115/25

S/PV.7560

The situation in the Middle East

weapons in populated areas, and welcome the Vienna
group’s commitment to press the parties on the issue. In
northern Syria, increased fighting, including Russian
military operations, has also had a significant impact
on the humanitarian situation. In Aleppo, Idlib and
Hama we have seen about 130,000 newly displaced
Syrians in October alone. As the Secretary-General has
said, attacks on health-care facilities, transports and
medical personnel have a devastating multiplier effect,
not only by killing civilians but also by degrading the
capacity to provide the care that people so desperately
need. Medical facilities and personnel continue to be
attacked, as Under-Secretary-General O’Brien noted.
Schools, too, continue to be attacked. More than
2 million children, one out of three, are not in school
in Syria. That too has a devastating multiplier effect.
If children cannot be protected and educated, Syria’s
future generations are at risk. As Ms. Bangura has
reported, in Syria and elsewhere, rape and sexual
violence continue to be used as an instrument of war.
That is a vile crime against humankind that affects
all walks of life in Syria — men, women, boys and
girls — and it must end. As Ms. Zerrougui has reported,
children are also suffering tremendously, as they are
being forcibly recruited to be used in the conflict as
child soldiers and, in some cases, as human shields by
the Government, Government-affiliated and non-State
armed groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) in particular. The United States
thanks the Special Representatives, Ms. Zerrougui and
Ms. Bangura, for ensuring that the Council remains
informed about the appalling acts taking place in Syria.
We welcome future briefings that can lead the Council
to make more informed decisions on Syria.
Human rights violations are also widespread,
as thoroughly documented by the United Nations
Commission of Inquiry, which briefed the Council just
last week. As the Commission reported, many victims
continue to be tortured. The Syrian Network for Human
Rights recorded that 104 individuals had been tortured
to death in October, including 99 who were tortured by
the regime. ISIL continues to rampantly abuse the basic
rights of Syrians. In Raqqah, ISIL arrested a married
couple, for example, for teaching mixed groups of
boys and girls. ISIL also continued to execute Syrians,
whether for perceived spying or for their sexual
orientation, and to kidnap, enslave and rape, including
girls as young as nine years old. Of course, the overall
situation in Syria remains deeply concerning.

16/25

16/11/2015

According to the recently released United Nations
humanitarian needs overview, those in need of urgent
humanitarian assistance now total 13.5 million
people — an increase of 1.2 million in just over 10
months. At least 8.7 million individuals are unable
to fully meet their food needs at present. Meanwhile,
4.5 million people inside Syria continue to live in hardto-reach areas, nearly half of which are ISIL-controlled.
The nearly 400,000 individuals in besieged areas
continue to survive in even more dire circumstances.
The United States is supporting the United Nations
and non-governmental organizations in their efforts
to prepare an active response for the upcoming winter
season, including the distribution of seasonally
appropriate relief supplies to more than 1 million
people in Syria. As noted in Vienna this past weekend,
the resolution of the refugee issue is also important to
the final settlement of the Syrian conflict. Yet more
needs to be done and soon.
The United Nations Syria assistance humanitarian
response plan remains only 45 per cent funded. We urge
all countries to consider increasing their contributions
as soon as possible and to begin considering significant
contributions for the 2016 international humanitarian
pledging conference, to be held in London in February.
While we pursue a ceasefire and a political solution, we
also need to continue to address the critical needs of
Syrians on the ground, and we must do so immediately.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the United Kingdom for its initiative to convene
today’s meeting and welcomes Justine Greening,
Secretary of State for International Development,
to preside over today’s meeting. I also wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General O’Brien and the two Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, Ms. Bangura
and Ms. Zerrougui, for their briefings.
China extends its condolences to France for the
series of terrorist attacks that took place in Paris and
condemns, in the strongest terms, those barbaric acts
of terror. We wish to extend our deep condolences and
sympathy to the bereaved families of the victims and
those injured.
Over the past five years, the armed conflict among
the various Syrian parties has become ever more
violent. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
and other terrorist organizations are running rampant,
bringing deep suffering to the Syrian people. The
international community should continue its work in

15-36761

16/11/2015

The situation in the Middle East

a coordinated manner in all three areas, namely, the
political process, counter-terrorism and easing the
humanitarian situation, so as to find a comprehensive
and lasting solution to the Syrian crisis.
Political settlement is the way to resolve the crisis.
There are key opportunities for a political solution at
the moment. Two meetings in Vienna, at the foreign
minister level, were successfully convened recently.
The participants at the meetings achieved important
consensus on a comprehensive ceasefire and on
initiating a political process to set up a Syrian transition
authority and hold general elections. The International
Syria Support Group was officially established, and
the political settlement has entered a new phase. The
key in the next phase is to ensure its implementation.
The parties concerned should divide labour among
themselves and coordinate efforts to initiate the process
of political transition, under the auspices of the United
Nations, and maintain the hard-won momentum.
Terrorism has become the most serious and
pressing security challenge faced by the international
community, which must attach great importance to the
impact terrorism has on the situation in Syria and on
the region. The Security Council has adopted a host
of resolutions on counter terrorism and on combating
ISIS and other terrorist forces and has reached broadbased consensus. The international community must
join hands, based on the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and other generally
recognized basic norms of international relations, to
further strengthen cooperation in counter terrorism.
We must pay particular attention to addressing both
the symptoms and the root causes, and there must be
no double standards. The leading role of the United
Nations must be brought into full play so as to form a
united front on counter terrorism.
China, too, has been a victim of terrorism.
Combating the East Turkestan terrorist forces, headed
by the East Turkestan Islamic Movement, must also
become an important component of the international
fight against terrorism. Actively carrying out
humanitarian assistance activities is crucial to easing
the situation for the Syrian people.
China wishes to emphasize the following three
points.
First, China hopes that the United Nations, guided
by the principles governing humanitarian assistance,
will strengthen its cooperation and engagement with

S/PV.7560

the Syrian Government and, based on the consent of
the country concerned, scale up its assistance efforts.
We call upon the various parties in Syria to put the
future of the country and of the people first and to
actively cooperate with the United Nations and other
humanitarian actors, on the basis of the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
Secondly, China calls upon the various parties to the
conflict in Syria, based on international humanitarian
law, to fully implement the relevant Security Council
resolutions, cease attacks, protect infrastructure,
medical facilities and personnel and honour, in their
actions, their obligations to protect civilians. To that
end, countries that have influence on the various parties
in Syria should do more.
Thirdly, China supports the international community,
based on the principle of shared responsibility, in its
efforts to scale up its support for Syria and neighbouring
countries, based on the specific needs of the countries
concerned, so as to ensure that aid reaches the people
who need it and that it is put to effective use. We call
upon donors to make pledges at the Syria humanitarian
assistance response plan, so as to alleviate financial
shortfalls. China has been helping to ease the situation
in Syria, and we have provided over ¥230 million in
aid to the Syrian people and to refugees outside Syria.
Not long ago, China decided to provide ¥100 million to
Syria, Jordan and Lebanon. We will continue to do all
we can to provide help, based on developments and the
actual needs on the ground.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
welcome and pay tribute to you, Madam President. We
thank Mr. Stephen O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his briefing. We also congratulate
him for the work he is doing as head of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. We
also thank the Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, for their briefings.
At the outset, allow me, on behalf of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, to express our deepest
condolences to the people and Government of France
for the recent brutal terrorist attacks on civilians. We
offer our sympathy to the families of the victims of
these criminal actions, which have shocked the world

15-3676117/25

S/PV.7560

The situation in the Middle East

16/11/2015

with their brutality and cruelty. May the French people
hear our expressions of solidarity and support at this
dreadful moment.

against humanitarian personnel and the facilities in
which they do their noble work. Humanitarian agencies
cannot be military targets in any circumstances.

We also repudiate the terrorist attacks in Lebanon
and Turkey, which caused great loss of human life, as
well as those taking place every day in Iraq and Syria,
which continue to suffer the brutal terrorist activities
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) and
other violent non-State actors. Venezuela condemns the
ongoing violence perpetrated by ISIS in Syria and Iraq,
in which civilians — and children in particular — are
the main victims of the cruelty of that terrorist group.
These sad events teach us that terrorism knows no
borders and remains a threat to international peace and
security.

We appreciate the level of cooperation achieved
between the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and the Syrian authorities in resolving pending
issues on the humanitarian agenda, as reflected in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/862). We hope that
this relationship continues to be strengthened with
a view to facilitating the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to alleviate the pressing needs of the
population affected by war.

If the international community fails to act
decisively to stop the financing, training and arming
of those groups, as well as their use and incitement to
undermine Governments, Europe and the rest of the
world will continue to suffer the consequences of these
entities’ terrorist activities that have already struck the
Middle East and North Africa. In that regard, Venezuela
reiterates its categorical condemnation of terrorism in
all its manifestations and violent extremism, whatever
its motives and wherever it is perpetrated. Terrorists
cannot be divided into the categories of good and bad.
Any solution of the humanitarian crisis in the
Middle East must address the root causes of conflicts.
In this regard, so long as outside interference is
promoted through support for terrorist groups and the
maintenance of foreign occupation and its policies
repressive, we will continue to see the flow of refugees
and internally displaced people fleeing war to save
their own lives. The situations in Palestine, Iraq and
Syria are emblematic of this tragic reality in the
Middle East. In that context, our country expresses its
deepest concern about the humanitarian situation in the
conflict in Syria. Five years after the start of hostilities,
the Syrian people have paid a very high price for the
incursion of terrorism into their country, which has
unleashed a veritable humanitarian catastrophe.
We acknowledge the noble efforts deployed by
humanitarian agencies in Syria, working in adverse
conditions created by the same conflict that has
engulfed the country and its people in extremely dire
circumstances, in which the actions of the terrorist
entities ISIS, the Al-Nusra Front, the Army of Conquest
and associated groups have made their assistance work
even more dangerous. We therefore condemn the attacks
18/25

There are, however, some positive elements
contained in the report of the Secretary-General, such as
the agreements reached in Zabadani that have resulted
in a ceasefire thanks to effective United Nations action.
Another is the report that some 70 per cent of fighters
in Qudsaya, Rif Dimashq, have surrendered their
weapons in a clear attempt to launch reconciliation
talks, which offers a glimmer of hope in a process that
must be entrenched. Finally, the national vaccination
campaign, launched in cooperation with the Syrian
Ministry of Health to immunize over 2.3 million
children nationwide, with the exception of Raqqah, is
an encouraging sign within the overall tragedy.
The areas controlled by ISIS pose a real challenge
to humanitarian organizations, as reflected in the
report. The World Food Programme is unable to
deliver assistance to more than 700,000 people in need
of food. This constitutes an obstacle to humanitarian
organizations. Similarly, we remain alarmed by the
ongoing use of explosive devices and car bombs by
ISIS, with their high toll in civilian casualties. Such
attacks, together with the kidnappings and summary
executions perpetrated by that terrorist organization,
are only one part of its extensive record of violations of
international law.
We also reject the deliberate attacks on schools
carried out by that terrorist group in Syria, especially
in Aleppo, which violate international humanitarian
and international human rights law. These illegal
actions constitute a litany of war crimes and crimes
against humanity whose perpetrators must be brought
to justice. In this context, we are highly conscious of
the fact that the report does not refer directly to military
operations involving the Al-Nusra Front during the
reporting period. Regrettably, such lack of clarity in
the information provided does not cotnribute to a full
understanding of what is happening on the ground.
15-36761

16/11/2015

The situation in the Middle East

Moreover, we reject the use by militias associated
with the Jaish al-Islam, also known as the Army of
Conquest, of civilians from ethnic minorities as human
shields. These actions should be unequivocally rejected
by the international community because they violate
human dignity. In that regard, we hope that organizations
such as these will be added as soon as possible to the
list maintained by the Committee pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities. It is time to end
their activities as non-State actors.
We condemn the use by non-State actors and ISIS
of basic services as weapons of war. The withholding
of water and electricity to the civilian population must
cease. These actions violate international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. Likewise, we
condemn the continued destruction of the cultural
heritage of Syria, such as the razing of Palmyra, as
a result of the totalitarian vision of ISIS, which is
determined to eliminate all historical vestiges of the
past that do not jibe with its dogmatic and extremist
view of religion and history.
We wish to speak out in defence of Syrian children,
who have been subjected to bloody, premeditated
violence by terrorist groups and non-State actors. We
denounce the ongoing crimes committed against Syrian
children by terrorist organizations, and we urge the
international community to mobilize in their defence.
We highly appreciate the fact that, in the search
for a negotiated political solution to the conflict, the
Vienna consultations have considered the participation
of the Syrian Government, which is a major player in
the search for a settlement. It is foolish to claim and
insist otherwise and only condemns the Syrian people
to further suffering and a labyrinth of uncertainty that
foments violence and despair. Such a biased perspective
on the settlement of this conflict has only delayed a
solution and strengthened terrorism.
We reiterate our support for the efforts of the
Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura — who
enjoys our full support — to achieve a peaceful political
solution to the conflict, with the full participation
of all parties involved, including the Government
of President Bashar Al-Assad. We await the results
of the negotiations in Vienna and the immediate
implementation of a ceasefire to help alleviate the
humanitarian situation. As an elected member of the
Security Council, Venezuela expects to enjoy access
to all agreements and commitments undertaken by

S/PV.7560

the parties in Vienna so that it can contribute with the
required unanimity to the Council’s actions.
In conclusion, we advocate a negotiated, peaceful
solution to this terrible crisis. Foreign interference
in Syria must cease. The Syrian people have paid the
highest price in defending their territorial integrity
and sovereignty from terrorism. The international
community must act to end the violence and re-establish
peace. Sadly, Syria has become a laboratory of horror
and death. History will judge the perpetrators of these
atrocities.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Madam President, I
thank you for having convened this important meeting
and for presiding over it. Like earlier speakers, I wish to
convey our deepest condolences to the delegation and
the people of France in connection with the appalling
and repulsive terrorist attacks that took place in Paris
last Friday. We stand in solidarity with France in this
time of grief. In the same sentiment, our condolences
are also extended to Lebanon, Tunisia and Egypt.
I thank Mr. O’Brien, Ms. Bangura and Ms. Zerrougui
for their respective contributions to this meeting, all of
which have underscored the desperate situation and
the need for urgent action in Syria. Alongside other
Council members, Malaysia is following the outcome
of the most recent talks in Vienna, and we note the
announced road map towards a peaceful settlement of
the conflict in Syria. My delegation stands ready to
engage and looks forward to substantive deliberations
by the Council on this matter.
Inasmuch as political will played a large part
in securing agreement in Vienna, we remain deeply
concerned by the astounding toll taken by the Syrian
conflict to date: more than 250,000 people dead, over
1 million injured, more than 7.6 million displaced and
roughly 13.5 million in need of humanitarian assistance,
including more than 5.6 million children. Average life
expectancy has been shortened by almost 13 years.
School attendance is at less than 50 per cent, and three
out of four Syrians now live in poverty.
The parties to the conflict remain indifferent to
the pain and suffering inflicted on the Syrian people.
Acts of impunity continue unabated. We would remind
all parties to the conflict of their obligations to adhere
to and respect international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
The Syrian conflict also continues to be characterized
by indiscriminate attacks and the deliberate targeting of

15-3676119/25

S/PV.7560

The situation in the Middle East

civilians and civilian infrastructure. The use of barrel
bombs and toxic chemicals by the parties to the conflict
is particularly abhorrent.
Malaysia remains deeply concerned by continued
reports of acts of sexual violence against women, girls
and children committed by parties to the conflict.
Women and girls not only face rape and sexual abuse;
they are also sold as sex slaves and forced into marriage
to foreign fighters. It is disgraceful that children are
stripped of their innocence and deprived of protection.
The recruitment and use of children is becoming
increasingly commonplace. Reports that children are
being used for forced labour, as sex slaves and even
as human shields are deeply disturbing. The siege-andstarve strategy, aimed at ensuring the submission
and surrender of whole populations, adds a further
disconcerting dimension to the Syrian conflict. It is
appalling that in the twenty-first century such a method
has been employed as a strategy of war by the parties
to the conflict. The fact that even schools and hospitals
have been deliberately targeted is a reflection of the
absolute disrespect, disregard and contempt that the
parties to the conflict have for the values of humanity.
In the face of such misery and desperation, we
are heartened by the steadfast commitment of the
various United Nations agencies and partners in
providing much-needed humanitarian aid and support
to the civilian population in Syria, and we commend
their efforts. In this regard, we deeply regret the fact
that cross-line access continues to face security and
administrative obstacles. We are further concerned that
access to populations in hard-to-reach and besieged
areas remains critical. The Syrian Government must
do more to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
assistance.
On our part, my Government is currently taking
steps to honour its commitment to take in 3,000 Syrian
refugees. We call on the international community to do
as much as possible to help the Syrian people in their
time of need.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Madam President, we
welcome you to the Security Council and thank you
for having convened today’s meeting. We also want
to thank Under-Secretary General O’Brien, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zerrougui
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bangura for their soul-stirring briefings. We express

20/25

16/11/2015

our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his latest
monthly report on the subject (S/2015/862).
We also want to join other delegations in expressing
our very deep condolences to the people of France and
Lebanon on the horrific, despicable attacks on their
population by the Islamic State in Iraq and Sham.
The briefings we have heard today and the report
of the Secretary-General clearly indicate that the
humanitarian situation in Syria remains dire. The
conflict continues to take a heavy toll on the civilian
population. Non-combatants, especially women
and children, face grave hardship, with hundreds
of thousands trapped in besieged areas. It is deeply
troubling that international humanitarian law continues
to be violated with impunity by the parties to the
conflict. Over the past month, hundreds of civilians
have been killed, injured or maimed in direct or
indiscriminate attacks on populated areas. The warring
parties must refrain from actions that jeopardize the
safety and security of civilians.
We must emphasize that the deliberate targeting
of civilians constitutes a war crime and that those
responsible for such acts are war criminals who
must be brought to justice. We take positive note of
the commitments made by the Government of Syria
to refrain from the indiscriminate use of weapons.
We condemn the deliberate targeting of civilian
infrastructure, which is causing cuts to electricity
and water supplies. This is compounding the already
difficult humanitarian situation in Syria. We also
condemn attacks on health-care facilities and medical
personnel, as well as the denial of care to those in need.
These are clear violations of international humanitarian
law.
It is regrettable that the delivery of humanitarian
assistance remains extremely challenging owing
to active conflict, insecurity and administrative
bottlenecks. There is a need for humanitarian actors to
be allowed to perform their duties without hindrance.
The parties must facilitate rapid and unimpeded
humanitarian access to affected people throughout the
country.
We want to pay tribute to the United Nations
humanitarian agencies and their partners for their
unrelenting efforts to reach millions of people in
need of aid, despite the challenges in the operating
environment. We recognize that the United Nations
Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism is fulfilling

15-36761

16/11/2015

The situation in the Middle East

its mandate by ensuring the strictly humanitarian
nature of United Nations humanitarian shipments. We
commend the Governments of Jordan and Turkey for
their sustained cooperation with the Mechanism.
As clearly indicated this afternoon by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zerrougui
in her briefing, the plight of children affected by the
Syrian conflict is deeply disturbing. The recruitment
and use of children in combat has become commonplace
in Syria. We are particularly concerned about the cases
of abduction, killing and maiming of children, as well
as attacks on schools. We underscore the need for the
international community to act in concert in order to
shield Syrian children from the disastrous consequences
of war.
Sexual violence in the Syrian conflict is also a
matter of great concern. As succinctly stated by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bangura,
displaced women and girls are at risk of various forms
of sexual exploitation, including sexual enslavement,
mass rape and forced marriage. We condemn these
heinous acts in the strongest terms. This state of affairs
underscores the urgent need for more to be done to
protect women and girls, and Ms. Bangura’s sevenpoint strategy of what can be done is worth exploring.
We must all admit that the cause-and-effect
relationship between the humanitarian situation and
the conflict in Syria is what we must explore further.
The sustainable solution to the humanitarian crisis in
Syria lies in ending the conflict, and the path to ending
the conflict is that of dialogue and negotiation. After
five years of fighting, it should be clear to the parties
that there can be no military solution. We encourage the
warring parties to sheathe their swords, lay down their
arms and pursue a negotiated solution.
The recent meetings in Vienna involving an
expanded group of international stakeholders have
provided a much needed impetus to decide for peace in
Syria. We believe that the sustenance of that initiative
will provide an opportunity to develop a framework
for peace along the key principles of the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). We support without
reservation those efforts, and we hope that they will
lead to lasting peace and the restoration of stability in
Syria.
Mr. Gombo Tchouli (Chad) (spoke in French): We
thank you, Madam President, for presiding over this
meeting.

S/PV.7560

Before I begin, allow me to add my voice to
those of previous speakers to pay heartfelt tribute to
the Government and the people of France for their
steadfastness in the light of the barbaric acts of terrorism
that took place recently. We condemn those horrendous
acts. We would also like to extend our condolences to
Lebanon and the Lebanese people, who have also fallen
victim to terrorism.
I wish to convey my gratitude to Mr. Stephen
O’Brien, Ms. Zainab Bangura and Ms. Leila Zerrougui
for their briefings.
For nearly five years now, violent fighting on an
almost daily basis has marked the lives of the Syrian
people. The daily horrendous statistics of the wounded,
internally displaced persons, refugees and destruction
plunge Syrians deeper into despair. The humanitarian
situation in the country continues to deteriorate, despite
the huge efforts undertaken by United Nations staff, to
whom we pay tribute for their courage and dedication.
We condemn all attacks committed against innocent
civilians, as well as on the basic vital infrastructure
of the country, and ask all parties to immediately lift
all obstacles hindering access to humanitarian aid for
the civilian population in areas of combat, including
in besieged zones. We would like to reiterate our call
upon all the parties to the conflict to put an end to the
violence, and we wish to underscore their obligation to
respect international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, as well as all the relevant provisions
of resolution 2139 (2014). It should be remembered that
the systematic refusal to provide humanitarian access
to the civilian population, depriving them of the basic
necessities they require for their survival, such as water
and medicine, constitutes a serious violation of human
dignity and a flagrant violation of the most basic
principles of international humanitarian law.
Security Council meetings on Syria succeed one
another without any improvement in the situation
experienced by the long-suffering Syrian people. It is
high time for the Security Council to consider firmer,
more robust and concrete measures to put an end to
the human tragedy being experienced by Syria. The
unending war, with unspeakable consequences, has led
to a complete contempt for international humanitarian
law and has diminished the credibility of the Security
Council, and its role to that of a powerless observer.
We urge the donor community to respond to the
various calls and appeals for humanitarian financing,

15-3676121/25

S/PV.7560

The situation in the Middle East

which would enable United Nations staff and their
partners to provide the necessary assistance to the
civilian population in need, both within as well as
outside Syria. The arrival of winter will expose the
civilian population to very difficult living conditions.
For that reason, we require special mobilization by the
entire international community.
As we have always said, humanitarian action,
whatever its scale, cannot in itself be considered a
substitute for a political solution. That is why we must
intensify our efforts aimed at helping the parties to find
a negotiated solution to the conflict, such that it can put
an end to the suffering of the Syrian people and restore
an inclusive political transition. From that perspective,
it behooves States possessing any influence with the
various parties to spare no effort to prompt them to
commit themselves in good faith to direct negotiations
to implement the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex).
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the presence of the Secretary of State for
International Development of the United Kingdom,
Ms. Justine Greening. We are also grateful for
the briefings by the Deputy Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Stephen O’Brien; the
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura; and the Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui.
We extend our condolences and solidarity to the
families of the victims, the people and the Government
of France, as well as to the people and the Government
of Lebanon. We also extend our condolences to all
countries and regions that suffer daily from the scourge
of terrorism. Any act of terrorism is criminal and
unjustifiable, and the perpetrators, organizers and
backers must be brought to justice for their crimes.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/862) is just one of several alerts that the situation
in Syria has become untenable. The conflict breaks
down the basic conditions for the identity, security and
dignity of Syrian society. It is impossible to remain
indifferent, faced with the enormous vulnerability
and the effects of the crisis on the civilian population,
which cannot access essential basic elements needed
for their survival. All parties are aware of the grave
consequences of those acts, which must not be shielded

22/25

16/11/2015

by impunity. Those responsible must be brought to
justice.
We reiterate the need to promote mechanisms to
protect the civilian population, such as the reopening
of humanitarian corridors to facilitate access for aid for
the population found in the internally displaced persons
camps, and especially in areas where it is difficult to gain
access. It is imperative to generate conditions needed to
ensure respect for international humanitarian law and
to effectively implement the humanitarian resolutions
calling on the parties to refrain from ongoing attacks
on medical facilities, schools and basic infrastructure.
The briefing that we have just heard from Special
Representative Bangura simply confirms the gravity
of the situation of sexual and gender violence in the
Syrian conflict, in which such violence is being used
not only as a tactic of war, but also as a terror tactic. It is
essential that the United Nations system recommend and
implement measures based on the situation observed on
the ground. We must fully implement resolution 2106
(2013) and insist on zero tolerance for sexual violence.
We are also concerned about the devastating
consequences of the ongoing attacks on children and
about their limited access to education, among other
fundamental rights. We cannot, as Ms. Zerrougui
pointed out, allow a generation to be lost, and we
have a responsibility as the Security Council when it
comes to that tragedy. It is essential to implement the
Oslo Safe Schools Declaration, the Lucens Guidelines
for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military
Use during Armed Conflict and resolution 2143 (2014),
on protecting schools from military use during armed
conflict.
I would like to conclude by reiterating that
a political solution is the only path to respond to
humanitarian needs. The recent talks in Vienna of
the International Syria Support Group and the joint
statements of 30 October and of 14 November are a
reason for hope. We appreciate the fact that concrete
goals have been sought in the humanitarian plan. A
ceasefire is essential.
It is also crucial that the political process be led
by the Syrians themselves, as enshrined in the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). However, a political
solution will continue to be far off as long as the conflict
is militarized. We therefore categorically call for an end
to the supply and flow of weapons to all parties.

15-36761

16/11/2015

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French):
Allow me to start by thanking all the speakers for
their briefings — Mr. O’Brien, Ms. Zerrougui and
Ms. Bangura. They remind us, with their untiring
work, how many civilians, women and children, suffer
directly in Syria.
I would also like to warmly thank all those
who extended to my country their sympathy and
solidarity following the horrible attacks committed
on 13 November. On that day, France was struck at its
heart in Paris and in Saint-Denis by terrorist attacks
that were masterminded and planned in Syria. The toll,
as the Council knows, was heavy — at least 129 dead,
over 300 injured and many people who, right now as
we speak, are still hanging on between life and death.
France has received a great many gestures of solidarity
and friendship from the world over. Those gestures and
messages touch us deeply and illustrate the unanimous
support of the international community for my country.
France was not the only one to be lethally attacked
Friday evening; at least 19 different nationalities were
affected. Our thoughts are with the families of the
victims, both in France and throughout the world. Our
thoughts also go to all the families who have been
affected in recent months by a terrorism that knows no
colour or religion: Lebanon, Turkey, Denmark, Kuwait,
Saudi Arabia, Libya, Tunisia, Egypt and still other
countries.
I speak to the Council as the representative of
a country that is still standing, united and more
determined than ever. It is determined to combat
terrorism relentlessly and with respect for the law.
Liberty, equality, fraternity — the motto of the French
Republic — has never had more meaning. France is a
free country and an independent country. It is pluralistic
and strong in its diversity. That is the France that was
struck on 13 November.
The enemy is known, namely, Daesh. That
organization feeds on ethnic and religious divisions in
the region and is reinforced by hatred and the rejection
of the other. It oppresses and murders entire populations
in the Middle East on a daily basis and is methodically
and systematically destroying the unique cultural
wealth of the region, which is the common heritage of
humankind.
Faced with that situation, we must be guided by
two complementary objectives. First, there is a need
for a resolute and determined fight against terrorism

S/PV.7560

and Daesh. The entire international community must
be united in that fight. As the President of the Republic
said this morning, France will convene a meeting of
the Security Council to adopt a draft resolution aimed
at combating terrorism. President Hollande also called
for togetherness, within the framework of a great and
unique international coalition to combine our strength
and our means to destroy Daesh, which is our common
enemy. We must put an end to those who destroy in
such a determined, methodological, professional and
tenacious way.
With regard to the search for a political solution in
Syria, that is more necessary than ever. Syria has become
the largest factory of terrorists that the world has ever
known. The members of the Security Council and the
countries of the region must unite to urgently implement
a political transition in Syria in which Bashar Al-Assad
is not part of the solution. There is an urgent need to
achieve concrete progress in the humanitarian field and
to demand respect for international humanitarian law,
whether it be humanitarian access or the cessation of
all indiscriminate attacks against civilians. In Vienna,
France made a number of concrete proposals on that
subject aimed at alleviating the suffering of the civilian
population at a time when the situation on the ground,
which is already alarming, is further deteriorating. As
has been stated by others, the resolutions adopted by
the Council must be implemented without delay.
It is crucial that we stand united, once again, to
address those two goals.
The refugee crisis is one of the most direct
consequences of the humanitarian catastrophe. If
the current situation goes on, it will create a highly
destabilizing situation. It is more important than ever
to assist the countries along Syria’s border, which have
welcomed the greatest number of Syrian refugees. I
wish to pay tribute to them.
In addition to the countries of the region, Europe is
on the front line. The inhabitants of Iraq and Syria, in
particular in territories controlled by Daesh, are fleeing
because they are being tortured. Welcoming them with
dignity is a moral obligation for Europe out of respect
for the fundamental freedoms and the principles of law
that are fundamental for Europe.
Despite the tragic events and the attempts at
destabilization, France will never renounce what it is,
namely, a free country. It will never renounce its values.
We will overcome this trial. We, the international

15-3676123/25

S/PV.7560

The situation in the Middle East

community, must stand united and defend together
these universal principles. France’s determination is
absolute.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The way certain Security Council members
address the situation in Syria reminds me of a quote that
some say is from Shakespeare — “There is an elephant
in the room” — meaning that there is a huge, visible
problem that cannot be overlooked. Certain members
in this Chamber pretend that the problem does not
exist, and they choose not address it or seek a solution
to it. That is precisely how certain Security Council
members addressed the situation in Syria when their
decision-makers ignored the main scourge destabilizing
Syria, the region and the entire world. That scourge is
the main reason for the humanitarian tragedy besetting
several areas in Syria and for the suffering of Syrian
women and children and for the transformation of
entire segments of the Syrian population into internally
displaced persons and refugees. That scourge is the
transborder Takfiri terrorism funded by well-known
States, chief among which is Saudi Arabia, which is the
bloodline that provides the source of life to terrorism.
The scourge of terrorism was unleashed from its
Wahhabi nest. It has savagely and indiscriminately
struck at Damascus, Baghdad, Beirut, Kuwait, the
Sinai, Abuja, Mali, Tunisia, Libya, Algeria, Sydney,
Boston, Paris and other locations.
While we condemn in the strongest terms the
terrorist acts in Paris and express our condolences to
the families of the victims, we recall that in this very
Chamber there are members who prevented the Security
Council nine times from issuing a mere press statement
condemning similar attacks that targeted innocent
civilians in Damascus, Aleppo and other Syrian cities.
It stands to reason that what we have seen in those cities
did not arise in a vacuum or happen by chance. It is the
predictable outcome of an attempt by certain parties to
ignore this issue and of the failure to address it with
the seriousness it deserves. It is a certain outcome of
the exploitation by certain parties who blackmail the
Syrian Government.
We have said from the beginning that those who
exploit and justify terrorism or remain silent will suffer
it themselves, because it is a transborder phenomenon.
But our words fell on deaf ears. Certain States succeeded

24/25

16/11/2015

in drawing terrorism into the political arena through
the front door, using rhetorical manoeuvres, dividing
terrorists into “acceptable” and “unacceptable” groups
and referring to certain terrorists as a “moderate
opposition”, all the while disregarding the consequences
of such a course. People do not realize that a political
problem with the Syrian Government is a negotiable
issue. But by resorting to sanctions, by financing
terrorism and by refusing to take these issues up with
the Syrian Government and army in order to combat
this transborder crime, they are committing a crime as
much against their own people as against the Syrian
people.
In Syria we are fighting filthy terrorist groups on
behalf of the whole world. Every time the Syrian army
kills a foreign terrorist, dozens of innocent potential
victims are protected. Otherwise, that terrorist returns
home and does the same thing. Those who distort that
reality are accomplices in the scourge of terrorism and
partners in the bloodshed of the victims.
We would recall that among the perpetrators
of many attacks in several cities around the world,
including the recent bloody attacks in Paris, were
thousands of Europeans whose entry to Syria was
facilitated as jihadists after they were brainwashed by
fatwahs funded by well-known Gulf States. There is a
late awakening to the seriousness of terrorism that led
the President of a permanent Security Council member
to amend the Constitution of his country to face the
Takfiri terrorism.
Acts should accompany words with regard to
combating terrorism in Syria, which is funded by
40 States and by the illegal trade in oil, along with the
illegal trade in artefacts across our borders with Turkey.
That requires serious political will to implement the
relevant Security Council resolutions on combating
terrorism, chief among them resolutions 2170 (2014),
2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015), which are underscored
in the second Vienna communiqué. It also requires
collective efforts under a single front against terrorism,
excluding political opportunists or amateurs.
Time and again, we have expressed our readiness to
cooperate with any State that is serious about combating
terrorism. That is precisely what has happened through
the joint Syrian-Russian military anti-terrorist action,
as well as the intelligence cooperation among Syria,
Iran, Iraq and Russia. That has led to practical results
in the field, namely, a retreat by terrorist groups from

15-36761

16/11/2015

The situation in the Middle East

many areas, which led to the secure, safe, voluntary
return of 1 million Syrian internally displaced persons
to their homes.
Seriously and effectively combating terrorism will
contribute to the success of a political solution to the
crisis in Syria. From the outset, the Syrian Government
has expressed its readiness to contribute to any serious
efforts to achieve a political solution. That is why
we cooperated with Mr. Kofi Annan and accepted
his six-point plan. We have also cooperated with
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi. We contributed to the second
Geneva Conference on Syria. And we cooperated with
Mr. De Mistura and accepted his proposal on Aleppo
and agreed to participate in his suggested four working
groups.
Our political message today, following the
conclusion of the meeting in Vienna, is that the Syrian
Government stands ready to contribute to any sincere
effort to achieve a political solution in which Syrians
decide their own future and choices through dialogue
among Syrians under Syrian leadership, without external
intervention, in a manner that ensures the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Syria, as has
been asserted by the several resolutions adopted by the
Council and the two Vienna communiqués.
Unfortunately, the recent report (S/2015/862) of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) is politicized
and biased and includes many gaps and much erroneous

S/PV.7560

information. We have addressed two identical letters to
the President of the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral on that issue. But I would like here to address
a serious issue in that report: it is based on unreliable
sources whose connections are well known, which
misleads Council members.
With regard to the allegation that the Syrian
Government is using indiscriminate weapons, I assert
that the Syrian army does not, has not and will not
use any indiscriminate weapons. It acts in accordance
with international law, within the context of combating
terrorism. Those who are killing civilians are those who
are using them as human shields in many areas of Syria.
Our deliberations and ongoing statementss on the
dangers of terrorism and the importance of combating
it should not be misunderstood as indicating that we
do not recognize the seriousness of the humanitarian
situation in Syria, in particular the situation of our
children and women. But that should not come at the
expense of the crux of the problem and should not be
politicized or subjected to double standards. We are
in discussion with Mr. O’Brien, Ms. Zerroughi and
Ms. Bangura. We have organized field missions to Syria
in order to address any outstanding issues. I welcome
Mr. O’Brien’s visit to Syria next month.
We stand ready to cooperate with well-intentioned
members of the Security Council in order to improve
the situation in Syria.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

15-3676125/25
