United Nations

A/RES/58/164

General Assembly

Distr.: General
4 March 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 117 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2003
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/58/508/Add.1 and Corr.1)]

58/164. Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment
The General Assembly,
Recalling article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 article 7 of
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 2 the Declaration on the
Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment 3 and its resolution 39/46 of
10 December 1984, by which it adopted and opened for signature, ratification and
accession the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment,
Recalling also that freedom from torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment is a non-derogable right that must be protected
under all circumstances, including in times of internal or international disturbance
or armed conflict, and that the prohibition of torture is explicitly affirmed in all
relevant international instruments,
Recalling further all previous resolutions or decisions on torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Commission on Human Rights, in particular
Assembly resolution 57/200 of 18 December 2002 and Commission resolution
2003/32 of 23 April 2003, 4
Recalling the recommendation contained in the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on
25 June 1993 5 that high priority should be given to providing the necessary
resources to assist victims of torture and effective remedies for their physical,
psychological and social rehabilitation, inter alia, through additional contributions
to the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture,
_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
Resolution 3452 (XXX), annex.
4
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 3 (E/2003/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
5
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
2

03 50442

A/RES/58/164

Noting with satisfaction the existence of a considerable international network
of centres for the rehabilitation of victims of torture, which plays an important role
in providing assistance to victims of torture, and the collaboration of the Fund with
the centres,
Commending the persistent efforts by non-governmental organizations to
combat torture and to alleviate the suffering of victims of torture,
Mindful of its proclamation, in its resolution 52/149 of 12 December 1997, of
26 June as the United Nations International Day in Support of Victims of Torture,
1.
Condemns all forms of torture, including through intimidation, as
described in article 1 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
Urges all Governments to promote the full implementation of the Vienna
2.
Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human
Rights on 25 June 1993,5 and stresses in particular that all allegations of torture or
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment should be promptly and
impartially examined by the competent national authority, that those who encourage,
order, tolerate or perpetrate acts of torture must be held responsible and severely
punished, including the officials in charge of the place of detention where the
prohibited act is found to have been committed, and that national legal systems
should ensure that the victims of such acts obtain redress, are awarded fair and
adequate compensation and receive appropriate social and medical rehabilitation,
and encourages the development of rehabilitation centres for victims of torture;
Takes note of the Principles on the Effective Investigation and
3.
Documentation of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment annexed to its resolution 55/89 of 4 December 2000 as a useful tool in
efforts to combat torture;
Urges Governments to take effective measures to provide redress and to
4.
prevent torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
including their gender-based manifestations;
Stresses that, under article 4 of the Convention, torture must be made an
5.
offence under domestic criminal law, and emphasizes that acts of torture are serious
violations of international humanitarian law and that the perpetrators are liable to
prosecution and punishment;
Notes with appreciation that one hundred and thirty-four States have
6.
become parties to the Convention, and urges all States that have not yet done so to
become parties to the Convention as a matter of priority;
Invites all States ratifying or acceding to the Convention and those States
7.
that are parties to the Convention and have not yet done so to consider joining the
States parties that have already made the declarations provided for in articles 21 and
22 of the Convention and to consider the possibility of withdrawing their
reservations to article 20;
Urges all States parties to the Convention to notify the Secretary-General
8.
of their acceptance of the amendments to articles 17 and 18 of the Convention as
soon as possible;
Urges States parties to comply strictly with their obligations under the
9.
Convention, including, in view of the high number of reports not submitted, their
obligation to submit reports in accordance with article 19 of the Convention, and
2

A/RES/58/164

invites States parties to incorporate a gender perspective and information concerning
children and juveniles when submitting reports to the Committee against Torture;
10. Emphasizes the obligation of States parties under article 10 of the
Convention to ensure education and training for personnel who may be involved in
the custody, interrogation or treatment of any individual subjected to any form of
arrest, detention or imprisonment;
11. Stresses, in this context, that States must not punish personnel referred to
in paragraph 10 above for not obeying orders to commit or conceal acts amounting
to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
12. Calls upon States parties to consider signing and ratifying the Optional
Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 57/199
of 18 December 2002, which provides further measures for use in the fight against
and the prevention of torture, and notes in this context that ratifications by twenty
States parties are required for the Optional Protocol to enter into force, and that
twenty-one States have already signed the Protocol and two States have ratified it;
13. Calls upon all Governments to take appropriate effective legislative,
administrative, judicial or other measures to prevent and prohibit the production,
trade, export and use of equipment that is specifically designed to inflict torture or
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment;
14. Welcomes the work of the Committee against Torture and the report of
the Committee, 6 submitted in accordance with article 24 of the Convention;
15. Calls upon the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in
conformity with his mandate established in General Assembly resolution 48/141 of
20 December 1993, to continue to provide, at the request of Governments, advisory
services for the preparation of national reports to the Committee and for the
prevention of torture, as well as technical assistance in the development, production
and distribution of teaching material for this purpose;
16. Urges States parties to take fully into account the conclusions and
recommendations made by the Committee after its consideration of their reports;
17. Notes with appreciation the interim report of the Special Rapporteur of
the Commission on Human Rights on the question of torture, 7 describing the overall
trends and developments with regard to his mandate, and encourages the Special
Rapporteur to continue to include in his recommendations proposals on the
prevention and investigation of torture;
18. Invites the Special Rapporteur to continue to examine questions of
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment directed
against women, and conditions conducive to such torture, and to make appropriate
recommendations for the prevention and redress of gender-specific forms of torture,
including rape or any other form of sexual violence, and to exchange views with the
Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on violence against
women, its causes and consequences, with the aim of enhancing further their
effectiveness and mutual cooperation;

_______________
6
7

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 44 (A/58/44).
See A/58/120.

3

A/RES/58/164

19. Also invites the Special Rapporteur to continue to consider questions
relating to the torture of children and conditions conducive to such torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and to make appropriate
recommendations for the prevention of such torture;
20. Calls upon all Governments to cooperate with and assist the Special
Rapporteur in the performance of his task, to supply all necessary information
requested by the Special Rapporteur, to respond appropriately and expeditiously to
his urgent appeals and to give serious consideration to requests by the Special
Rapporteur to visit their countries, and urges them to enter into a constructive
dialogue with the Special Rapporteur in following up his recommendations;
21. Reiterates the need for the Special Rapporteur to be able to respond
effectively, in particular to urgent appeals, to credible and reliable information that
comes before him, and invites the Special Rapporteur to continue to seek the views
and comments of all concerned, in particular Member States;
22. Requests the Special Rapporteur to continue to consider including in his
report information on the follow-up by Governments to his recommendations, visits
and communications, including progress made and problems encountered;
23. Stresses the need for the continued regular exchange of views among the
Committee against Torture, the Special Rapporteur and other relevant United
Nations mechanisms and bodies, as well as for the pursuance of cooperation with
relevant United Nations programmes, notably the United Nations Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice Programme, with a view to enhancing further their
effectiveness and cooperation on issues relating to torture, inter alia, by improving
their coordination;
24. Expresses its gratitude and appreciation to the Governments,
organizations and individuals that have already contributed to the United Nations
Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture; 8
25. Stresses the importance of the work of the Board of Trustees of the Fund,
and appeals to all Governments and organizations to contribute annually to the
Fund, preferably by 1 March before the annual meeting of the Board, if possible
with a substantial increase in the level of contributions, so that consideration may be
given to the ever-increasing demand for assistance;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to all Governments the
appeals of the General Assembly for contributions to the Fund and to continue to
include the Fund on an annual basis among the programmes for which funds are
pledged at the United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities;
27. Also requests the Secretary-General to assist the Board of Trustees of the
Fund in its appeal for contributions and in its efforts to make better known the
existence of the Fund and the financial means currently available to it, as well as in
its assessment of the global need for international funding of rehabilitation services
for victims of torture and, in this effort, to make use of all existing possibilities,
including the preparation, production and dissemination of information materials;
28. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure, within the overall
budgetary framework of the United Nations, the provision of adequate staff and
facilities for the bodies and mechanisms involved in combating torture and assisting
_______________
8

4

See A/58/284.

A/RES/58/164

victims of torture, commensurate with the strong support expressed by Member
States for combating torture and assisting victims of torture;
29. Invites donor countries and recipient countries to consider including in
their bilateral programmes and projects relating to the training of armed forces,
security forces, prison and police personnel and health-care personnel matters
relating to the protection of human rights and the prevention of torture, while
bearing in mind a gender perspective;
30. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the Commission on Human
Rights at its sixtieth session and to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session a
report on the status of the Convention and a report on the operations of the Fund;
31. Calls upon all Governments, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and other United Nations bodies and agencies, as
well as relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, to
commemorate, on 26 June, the United Nations International Day in Support of
Victims of Torture;
32. Decides to consider at its fifty-ninth session the reports of the
Secretary-General, including the report on the United Nations Voluntary Fund for
Victims of Torture, the report of the Committee against Torture and the interim
report of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the
question of torture.
77th plenary meeting
22 December 2003

5
