A /71/PV.85

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

85th plenary meeting

Thursday, 1 June 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 32
Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their
implications for international peace, security
and development
(a) Report of the Secretary-General (A/71/899)
(b) Draft resolution (A/71/L.71)
The President: In connection with this item,
the Assembly has before it a report of the SecretaryGeneral circulated in document A/71/899 and a draft
resolution entitled “Status of internally displaced
persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the
Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia”, issued as
document A/71/L.71.
I now give the floor to the representative of Georgia
to introduce draft resolution A/71/L.71.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Over the past year, one
person per second was forced to flee from conflict,
violence and disaster. We have 65 million displaced
people around the globe today, a record high number.
Among them are up to 400,000 internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and refugees from my country, Georgia,
uprooted in several waves of ethnic cleansing from
Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia,
currently under foreign occupation. They have been
living in protracted displacement for more than 20 years,
and despite the time difference with Georgia — it is
almost midnight there — they are watching us closely
right now.

I would like to share with the Assembly a message
I received from an IDP from Abkhazia, 21-yearold Tamar, in which she describes her feelings about
displacement, which I believe are shared by all displaced
persons. She writes:
“I have a home: the one I have not been given a
chance to live in, the one I have not been given a
chance to explore, the one I love. I have a house,
the one I currently live in, merely a roof over my
head. While someone may have a house, they may
not have a home where they feel free and accepted.
Our only hope is to return home, even if the house
is no longer standing”.
Today I take the floor to address the Assembly on
behalf of my Government and in the name of forcibly
displaced individuals like Tamar to introduce and solicit
support for the draft resolution contained in document
A/71/L.71, entitled “Status of internally displaced
persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and
the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia”, under
agenda item 32, entitled “Protracted conflicts in the
GUAM area and their implications for international
peace, security and development”.
The Organization unanimously recognizes the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement as the key
international framework for the protection of internally
displaced persons. Through this draft resolution,
we would like to once again galvanize international
support to reaffirm those very rights for the displaced
population in Georgia, the overwhelming majority of
which — 88.3 per cent of respondents — indicated

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-15444 (E)

*1715444*

A/71/PV.85

the wish, in the intentions survey carried out by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), to return voluntarily to their area
of origin. In other words, we call for the application of
universally acknowledged principles to the case of the
displaced population in Georgia.
The draft resolution before the Assembly is based
on three fundamental principles: securing the rights of
the displaced, including the right to safe and dignified
return, as well as property rights; the unacceptability
of forced demographic changes; and the need for
unimpeded humanitarian access. Furthermore, the
resolution emphasizes the importance of the Geneva
international discussions mandated by the six-point
ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008 and calls upon
all participants to be more active in producing tangible
results. For that very reason, both the draft resolution
and the subsequent report of the Secretary-General
serve as reference points in the Geneva international
discussions and complement the work being done on
humanitarian issues.
The security and human rights situation in the
occupied territories is being exacerbated by the
continued installation of razor-wire fences and so-called
border signs, kidnappings and arbitrary detentions,
seizure of property, and restrictions on free movement
and residence as well as on access to education in
one’s language, all based on ethnic origin. The closure
of the entry and exit points across the occupation
line by the regime in control in the Abkhazia region
severely restricts the freedom of movement of the local
population and creates additional impediments to the
return of IDPs and refugees to their homes.
On 9 April 2017, a so-called referendum was held
in the Tskhinvali region to rename it the “Republic
of South Ossetia-the State of Alania”, mirroring the
Republic of North Ossetia-Alania, in the Russian
Federation. The so-called treaties on integration with
the Russian Federation and the subsequent creation of
a joint group of armed forces, as well as the merging
of law-enforcement and investigative bodies, reflect a
policy of factual annexation of Georgia’s regions and
demonstrate the need for an adequate, immediate and
consolidated international reaction.
Despite the continuous call for access to the
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
as well as the Special Rapporteur on the human rights
2/8

01/06/2017

of internally displaced persons, have been repeatedly
denied access to these regions by the regimes in control.
In response, the Human Rights Council expressed
serious concerns over the continuous violations and
the humanitarian situation in the occupied regions of
Georgia, and on 24 March it adopted resolution 34/37,
sponsored by 43 States. In the complete absence of
basic safeguards to monitor the situation on the ground,
the resolution calls for immediate access by the Office
of the High Commissioner and other international and
regional human rights mechanisms to the occupied
territories, while expressing concern over the fact that
internally displaced persons and refugees from these
regions continue to be deprived of their right of return
to their places of origin in safety and with dignity.
Pending their return, the Government of Georgia
is making every effort to alleviate the burden of and
ensure decent conditions for the displaced population,
in accordance with the national strategy and its relevant
action plan. At the end of 2015, with the support of the
UNHCR/Ministry for Refugees and Accommodation
joint project, the Livelihood Action Plan 2016-2017 was
adopted, which provides opportunities for IDPs and their
host communities to fulfil their potential by gaining
financial independence from the State and becoming
self-reliant. In parallel, the Government is pursuing
durable housing projects for the displaced population
through housing construction, the procurement of
apartments and individual houses and the privatization
of property.
Despite the current artificial barriers, we also
continue to respond to the concerns of our compatriots
living in the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions — ethnic
Abkhaz and Ossetians — who are an integral part of
our common history and future. We believe that one
day we will all live together in peace and prosperity,
with families united and communities returned to their
native soil.
The pledge to leave no one behind has been a
powerful message of recent frameworks initiated by
the international community: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the Sendai Framework on
Disaster Risk Reduction and the Paris Agreement on
climate change. As a joint commitment, it is important
to catalyse progress on addressing the needs of IDPs
worldwide. The 2016 World Humanitarian Summit,
in Istanbul, and the Agenda for Humanity, along with
the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants,
17-15444

01/06/2017

A/71/PV.85

increased international focus on the need to prevent
and reduce forced displacement by addressing its
root causes. The priority attached by the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. António Guterres, to preventing conflict
and sustaining peace has been further encouraging the
deployment of renewed efforts so as to capitalize on the
momentum created during the past few years.

and support. The protracted nature of the conflicts in
the GUAM area is one of the most serious challenges
that our nations are facing. While in some countries
displacement is an ongoing crisis, in the GUAM area
displacement is already a generational issue that needs
to be addressed regardless of the political settlement of
the conflicts.

When one person is arbitrarily expelled from his or
her domicile, we call it a crime; but when hundreds of
thousands, or even millions, are forcibly displaced and
are not allowed to go back to their homes, we call it a
humanitarian crisis. In fact, we should call it no less
than a “mass crime”. The rights of the displaced should
be acknowledged, reaffirmed and protected regardless
of political processes. In paragraph 43 of his report
A/71/899, the Secretary-General is also explicit in that:

Ensuring the safe and dignified return of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees in the GUAM
area, as the principal way of achieving durable solutions
for the forcibly displaced persons, is an overarching
goal of our countries. We believe that political issues
cannot be used for preventing or conditioning the
exercise of the right of return to places of origin, as
well as the enjoyment of property rights.

“The individual’s right to return, in the case of
an internally displaced person, derives from his
or her right to freedom of movement as stipulated
in international human rights instruments. It is
essential to recognize that return is both a human
right and a humanitarian issue and therefore
cannot be directly linked to political questions
or the conclusion of peace agreements. It must
be addressed irrespective of any solution to the
underlying conflict.”
One cannot argue against this humanitarian cause.
Each and every member State concerned with the
current humanitarian catastrophe in the world must
take a responsible decision when the issue is raised in
the General Assembly. Therefore, I once again urge
members to vote “yes” on draft resolution A/71/L.71 so
as to recognize and safeguard the rights of the displaced
population from Abkhazia, Georgia, and Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, Georgia.
Members’ conscious and sustained vote in favour
of this draft resolution is a vote in support of the
principles of humanity and of international law, to
which we all subscribe.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Organization for Democracy
and Economic Development — GUAM and its member
States: Georgia, Azerbaijan, the Republic of Moldova
and my own country, Ukraine.
Millions of people in the GUAM countries have
been affected by armed conflicts, disrupting their
lives and leaving them in need of protection, assistance

The World Humanitarian Summit held in May
2016 and the New York Declaration adopted at the
United Nations Summit for Refugees and Migrants in
September 2016 reaffirmed our joint commitments to
leave no one behind, while upholding the norms that
safeguard humankind.
Draft resolution A/71/L.71 addresses the plight of
hundreds of thousands of IDPs and refugees forcibly
displaced from the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions of
Georgia as a result of the conflict and several waves of
displacement in early 1990s and in 2008. The protracted
nature of the conflicts not only increases the number
of those expelled from their homes, but also adds to
their suffering. As a humanitarian draft resolution,
the text focuses solely on the humanitarian aspects of
the displacement and calls for respect of the right of
return, property rights and humanitarian access to the
affected regions of Georgia. Notably, the overwhelming
majority of Georgian IDPs are willing to return to their
homes, as reflected in the 2015 survey of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
according to which 88.3 per cent of its respondents
indicated their willingness to return to their homes
voluntarily, in safety and with dignity.
We believe that the General Assembly is best placed
to send a powerful message to the affected persons, as
well as to the participants in the Geneva international
discussions — an important platform to discuss and
facilitate the return process. We regret that, since the
adoption of resolution 70/290, at the seventieth session,
none of its clauses has been implemented, as underlined
in the Secretary-General’s report A/71/899.

17-154443/8

A/71/PV.85

We condemn all actions against basic human rights
and freedoms in respect of internally displaced persons
and refugees, in violation of the relevant obligations
under international law. In this light, we are seriously
concerned by the recent developments in the occupied
territories of Georgia, including the holding of the socalled referendum on 9 April 2017 in the Tskhinvali
region to rename the region the Republic of South
Ossetia, State of Alania, as well as the systematic closure
of the checkpoints along the occupation line with the
Abkhazia region to impose further severe restrictions
on the free movement of the local population. Such
developments create additional impediments to the
return of IDPs and refugees to their homes.
In the complete absence of basic safeguards
to monitor the situation in the occupied regions,
unimpeded access by humanitarian actors and human
rights monitoring bodies to these territories is of
paramount importance. In this context, we recall
the adoption for the first time by the Human Rights
Council, during its March 2017 session, of the resolution
on cooperation with Georgia, in which the Council
expresses serious concern over the human rights and
humanitarian situation in the occupied regions of
Georgia — Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, calls for immediate access by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner and other
international and regional human rights mechanisms
to the occupied territories, and also expresses concern
over the fact that internally displaced persons and
refugees from these regions are unable to exercise their
right of return to their places of origin in safety and
with dignity.
The GUAM member States reiterate their
unwavering support for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Georgia within its internationally
recognized borders.
In conclusion, we consider support for draft
resolution A/71/L.71 as a sign of solidarity with all
forcibly displaced persons around the world, as well
as of the reaffirmation of the commitment of the
international community to the fundamental right
of return and the right to property and humanitarian
access. Therefore, as in previous years, we will vote in
favour of the draft resolution and encourage others to
join us in supporting this noble cause.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Baltic and Nordic States:
4/8

01/06/2017

Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Latvia, Norway,
Sweden and my own country, Lithuania. Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic, Ireland and Poland align themselves
with this statement.
With the global number of refugees and displaced
persons reaching tens of millions of persons, including
hundreds of thousands in Georgia, the urgency to
address the needs and plight of those affected is more
urgent than ever. The World Humanitarian Summit
and the United Nations Summit for Refugees and
Migrants held in 2016 have once again highlighted
the crippling effects that protracted conflicts and
continued displacement have on affected persons and
communities, with serious repercussions at the regional
and international levels. Therefore, we fully support the
Secretary-General’s call for renewed efforts to prevent
internal displacement, address its root causes and
support affected communities.
Draft resolution A/71/L.71 commits us all to
continuing to work for protection for and assistance
to those who have been forcibly displaced from the
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia regions
of Georgia.
We remain concerned about the human rights
situation on the ground. New restrictions on the freedom
of movement and access to health care and education
in the native language by the de facto authorities
remains a cause of continuous concern. Regrettably,
no international human rights monitoring mechanisms
have been granted access to assess the situation in these
regions. We share the Secretary-General’s call on the
de facto authorities controlling the territories of the
Georgian regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali to ensure
the unhindered access and operation of international
organizations working on humanitarian and human
rights protection issues.
We take this opportunity to reaffirm our strong
support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Georgia within its internationally recognized borders.
We remain seriously concerned by the decision
of the de facto authorities in the Georgian regions of
Tskhinvali and Abkhazia to conduct the so-called
elections earlier this year. Let me recall that we do
not recognize the constitutional and legal framework
within which these illegitimate elections have taken
place. We do not recognize the so-called referendum
on amending the name of the Georgian region of
Tskhinvali, which was held on 9 April. These illegal
17-15444

01/06/2017

actions violate Georgia’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity and greatly undermine the ongoing efforts to
find a peaceful resolution to the conflict.
To conclude, we are pleased to see a growing
awareness of the international community regarding
the need to address internal displacement, including
pressing humanitarian issues faced by the forcibly
displaced persons and refugees from the Georgian
regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali. In this context,
we welcome the adoption of the resolution on the
cooperation with Georgia at the thirty-fourth session
of the Human Rights Council. The need to find lasting
solutions consistent with international human rights law
and humanitarian law in these regions persists. Given
the negative realities on the ground and the need for
United Nations continuous engagement, as in previous
years we shall vote in favour of the draft resolution and
call on others to support it.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/71/L.71.
Before giving the floor for explanations of vote
before the voting, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Boucher (Canada): Canada is pleased to
once again support the draft resolution on the status
of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees
from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region in
South Ossetia, Georgia (A/71/L.71). Today’s important
draft resolution is designed to remind the international
community of the pressing issue of protracted
displacement. In Georgia, hundreds of thousands of
people in Abkhazia and South Ossetia remain displaced
owing to circumstances beyond their control. Year after
year, they suffer from the hardship of displacement,
waiting for the day when they will finally be able to
return home.
Canada’s support for the draft resolution sends a
clear message: we stand in solidarity with millions of
IDPs and refugees around the world. We call on the
international community to ensure that those forcibly
displaced are able to exercise their fundamental rights,
and to strengthen efforts to establish durable peace in
order to facilitate the voluntary, safe and unhindered
return of all IDPs and refugees to their homes.

A/71/PV.85

(spoke in French)
In this context, we underline the importance of the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement as a way
forward on ensuring the international community can
fulfil its responsibility to protect vulnerable displaced
persons. Canada, without reservation, will continue to
support Georgia’s territorial integrity and sovereignty
within its internationally recognized borders. We are
encouraged by Georgia’s sustained efforts in promoting
immediate, full, sustained and unimpeded access for
humanitarian assistance to internally displaced persons
and refugees in all conflict-affected areas in Georgia.
Canada invites all member States to join in
sustained efforts to alleviate the suffering of all people
affected by conflict and to unite in order to strengthen
efforts to establish durable peace. Supporting the draft
resolution will bring us one step closer to reaching
that goal.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): For the tenth time, the Georgian delegation has
submitted for consideration by the General Assembly a
draft resolution on the problem of internally displaced
persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the
Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia (A/71/L.71).
Despite the active campaign of the authors to promote
their approaches to this topic during all these years, the
proposed projects have never enjoyed the support of the
majority of member States. That is quite understandable.
It is obvious to us that their discussion and adoption
will not not help those who, as a result of armed clashes,
have lost their homes and livelihoods and were forced to
leave their places of permanent residence. That clearly
demonstrates that the purpose of the draft resolution
is purely political. Behind their actions is not genuine
concern for the people of Georgia, but rather an attempt
to speculate on the fate of those victims of the aggressive
policy of the Georgian authorities, culminating in an
armed attack on the Tskhinvali region of South Ossetia,
in August 2008.
With its reckless actions, Tbilisi has actually
alienated the peoples of Abkhazia and South Ossetia,
who have proclaimed independence. In promoting
the draft resolution and declaring its humanitarian
orientation, its authors are in fact seeking to challenge
those realities. Ignoring the real needs of people
who are in a situation of forced displacement, they
continue their line, which, in practice, leads to the
impossibility of a substantive discussion on the issue

17-154445/8

A/71/PV.85

by the parties within the framework of the Geneva
discussions. Equally dangerous is the fact that it causes
serious damage to the work in that format as a whole.
It undermines the concept of the ongoing negotiations,
which, provided that there is goodwill and interest of
the participants, can achieve results.
Preference is again given not to a substantive
dialogue with Sukhum and Tskhinval, but rather to
slinging accusations against them in forums where
they are not represented and, accordingly, can not bring
their point of view on what is happening. They cannot,
for example, respond to allegations of restrictions on
freedom of movement or directly share information
with delegations about the fact that thousands of people
cross the borders of Abkhazia and South Ossetia with
Georgia every day. Additionally, they cannot talk about
the steps they have taken to improve the mechanism of
cross-border movement and develop the corresponding
infrastructure. They also cannot talk about the measures
that they have taken to simplify border management for
the local population.
In such conditions, we have once again circulated
as relevant documents of the General Assembly the
corresponding information prepared by the authorities
of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. We hope that it will be
taken into account by delegations in determining their
positions on the draft resolution under consideration.
We remain convinced that the use of the issue for
political purposes, all while bypassing the Geneva
discussions, is fraught with the complications of the
situation in the region, the slippage of solving numerous
humanitarian issues and the undermining of the process
of building trust between those in Abkhazia, South
Ossetia and Georgia, which is absolutely necessary if we
really want to improve the situation of displaced people.
In the light of the foregoing, the delegation of the
Russian Federation requests a vote on draft resolution
A/71/L.71. Russia will vote against the document.
We call on other delegations not to support the
draft resolution.
Mr. Shearman (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom supports the important draft resolution on
the status of internally displaced persons and refugees
from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/
South Ossetia, Georgia (A/71/L.71).
The draft resolution reaffirms the unalienable rights
of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees to
6/8

01/06/2017

return to their homes in a safe and dignified manner,
regardless of their ethnic origin. It is a humanitarian
and human rights issue and it should not be linked to
wider political processes. There are more than 250,000
registered internally displaced persons in Georgia.
Many live in difficult and vulnerable conditions. It
is important for the General Assembly to send the
message that it has not forgotten those people and that
it will continue continue to call for their return home. It
is all the more important to do so with every year that
goes by.
The United Kingdom welcomes the Government
of Georgia’s work to help improve the situation of
IDPs and welcomes regular reports documenting
the human rights situation in Abkhazia and South
Ossetia by both the Government of Georgia and the
Georgian ombudsmen. It is important that national and
international legislation be effectively implemented to
aid efforts to help and protect the lives of internally
displaced persons.
We remain deeply concerned by the broader
political and human rights situation in Abkhazia and
South Ossetia, particularly with Russia in effective
control of 20 per cent of Georgia’s sovereign territory.
Recent developments, including the reduction of
Abkhazian administrative boundary line crossing
points from six to just two, has had a damaging impact
on civilian livelihoods, freedom of movement and
educational opportunities.
The absorption of South Ossetian troops into
the Russian Army, the referendum in South Ossetia
on changing the name of the region, the so-called
presidential elections in South Ossetia and the so-called
parliamentary elections in Abkhazia constitute grave
setbacks to efforts to make progress. We call on the
Russian Federation to grant immediate and unrestricted
access to the regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
Finally, we hope that all parties will use the Geneva
discussions as the forum to discuss and make progress
on humanitarian issues. The United Kingdom is pleased
to support the important draft resolution. We will vote
in favour, and we will urge all other Member States to
give the draft resolution the backing that it deserves.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/71/L.71, entitled “Status of internally
17-15444

01/06/2017

displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia,
Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia,
Georgia”.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Belgium, Belize,
Bulgaria, Canada, Central African Republic,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Spain, Sweden, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Yemen
Against:
Armenia, Belarus, Burundi, Cuba, Lao People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Nauru,
Nicaragua,
Philippines, Russian Federation, South Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Chile, China, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Guinea, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan,
Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Mali, Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore,
Sri Lanka, Suriname, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia,

A/71/PV.85

Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Zambia
The draft resolution was adopted by 80 votes to 14,
with 61 abstentions (resolution 71/290).
[Subsequently, the delegations of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and the Sudan informed
the Secretariat that they had intended to vote
against; the delegations of the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan informed
the Secretariat that they had intended to abstain.]
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): As
in previous years, Chile has abstained in the voting on
the text adopted today because it believes that it may
prejudge or influence the consideration of issues that
should be settled through the relevant negotiations
in Geneva. Chile supports the quest for a peaceful,
consensus-based solution reached either through
talks in Geneva or another forum that ensures that the
process will be impartial, in particular to prevent the
politicization of purely humanitarian situations or the
multilateralization of issues subject to mediation. In
that regard, we urge the parties to redouble their efforts
in their quest for a solution to the conflict.
Ms. Young (Belize), Vice-President, took the Chair.
Mr. Mayer Napoleão (Brazil): Brazil has consistently
abstained in the voting on the draft resolution
concerning internally displaced persons and refugees
from Abkhazia and South Ossetia, as we believe that
the text may prejudge or influence the consideration of
sensitive issues that should be resolved by the relevant
negotiations in Geneva. We urge all actors to seek
lasting solutions to the situation of internally displaced
persons and refugees, to create favourable, political
conditions for their return and to dispel fears about the
resumption of conflict.
Brazil recognizes the territorial integrity of
Georgia and expects that the dispute between Georgia
and the Russian Federation can resolved peacefully
and through dialogue in the shortest term. We urge all
parties concerned to pursue further cooperation and
adopt confidence-building measures, including in the
framework of the Geneva process.

17-154447/8

A/71/PV.85

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
The representative of Georgia has asked for the
floor to make a statement.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): I should like to thank
all delegations that acted on conscience and on the
principles that the Assembly stands for.

8/8

01/06/2017

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 32?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

17-15444
