A/RES/76/3

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
28 October 2021

Seventy-sixth session
Agenda item 30
Space as a driver of sustainable development

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 25 October 2021
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/76/L.3 and A/76/L.3/Add.1)]

76/3.

The “Space2030” Agenda: space as a driver of
sustainable development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 73/6 of 26 October 2018,
Adopts the following document:

The “Space2030” Agenda: space as a driver of
sustainable development
Part A. Agenda
I.

Introduction
1.
The United Nations has been at the centre of international cooperation in space
activities since the beginning of the space age. The Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space came into being as a result of the recognition by the General Assembly,
in its resolution 1348 (XIII) of 13 December 1958, of the importance of using outer
space for peaceful purposes and of the need to promote international cooperation in
the conduct of space activities; in its resolution 1472 A (XIV) of 1959, the Assembly
permanently established the Committee.
2.
Owing to its unique mandate and position at the centre of international
cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space, and the global governance of outer
space activities, 1 consistent with international law, the Committee played a key role
in the organization of the first three United Nations conferences on the exploration
and peaceful uses of outer space, held in 1968, 1982 and 1999.

__________________
1

21-15518 (E)

See A/AC.105/1137.

291021

*2115518*

The “Space2030” Agenda: space as a driver of
sustainable development

A/RES/76/3

3.
Fifty years after the first United Nations Conference on the Exploration and
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE), States Members of the United Nations
and representatives of the international space community gathered in Vienn a on
20 and 21 June 2018 for the high-level segment of the fiftieth anniversary of the first
United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
(UNISPACE+50) to reflect on more than 50 years of achievement in space exploration
and use and to strengthen global cooperation in outer space and the use of outer space
for sustainable development.
4.
The General Assembly, in its resolution 73/6 of 26 October 2018, noted with
appreciation that the preparatory process and the high-level segment of
UNISPACE+50 had resulted in documents aimed at articulating a comprehensive,
inclusive and strategically oriented vision on strengthening international cooperation
in the exploration and peaceful uses of outer space, in which space was seen as a
major driver of and contributor to the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals for the benefit of all countries.
5.
In that regard, the General Assembly invited the Committee to continue to
develop, on the basis of the results of the UNISPACE+50 process, a “Space2030”
Agenda and implementation plan and to provide the General Assembly with the
outcome of its work for consideration by the Assembly at its seventy -fifth session, in
2020.
6.
The “Space2030” Agenda and implementation plan is submitted by the
Committee to the General Assembly as a forward-looking strategy for reaffirming and
strengthening the contribution of space activities and space tools to the achievement
of global agendas, 2 addressing long-term sustainable development concerns of
humankind. It also contributes to charting the future contribution of the Committee
to the framework for the global governance of outer space activities, consistent with
international law.
II.

Strategic vision
7.
We, the States Members of the United Nations, acknowledge that the exploration
and peaceful uses of outer space have enriched our collective knowledge and
revolutionized life on Earth. Space science and technology are now intrinsic to our
daily lives and bring an abundance of unique and fundamental benefits to Earth. As
the space community moves forward with its space exploration endeavours, space
will continue to serve as a source of inspiration and innovation and to provide
applications for the benefit of humankind.
8.
We emphasize that space tools are highly relevant for the attainment of the
global development agendas, in particular the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and its goals and targets, either directly, as enablers and drivers of
sustainable development, or indirectly, by providing essential data for the indicators
used to monitor the progress towards achieving the 2030 Agenda and the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 and the commitments by States
parties to the Paris Agreement. The fulfilment of these global agendas requires
improved access to space-based data and applications and space infrastructure, taking
into account the particular needs of developing countries.
9.
We acknowledge the distinguished historical record of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and its Legal Subcommittee and Scientific and
Technical Subcommittee in the establishment and further development of the
international legal regime governing outer space activities. Under that regime, outer

__________________
2

2/10

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015–2030 and the Paris Agreement.
21-15518

The “Space2030” Agenda: space as a driver of
sustainable development

A/RES/76/3

space activities of States, international intergovernmental organizations and
non-governmental entities are flourishing, and as a result, space science and
technology and their applications are contributing immeasurably to economic growth
and improvements in the quality of life worldwide.
10. We reaffirm the unique role of the Committee, and its subcommittees, supported
by the Office for Outer Space Affairs, as unique platforms for international
cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes, for the
global governance of outer space activities, consistent with international law, for
developing international space law, for fostering dialogue among spacefaring and
emerging space nations, and for promoting the increased involvement of all countries
in space activities, including through capacity-building initiatives.
11. We underscore the importance of the Outer Space Treaty as the cornerstone of
the international legal regime governing outer space activities. It con tains the
fundamental principles of international space law and will continue to provide an
indispensable framework for the conduct of outer space activities. The
universalization and effective implementation of the Outer Space Treaty should be
promoted.
12. We encourage the Committee to continue to coordinate efforts to strengthen the
implementation of the United Nations treaties and principles on outer space and to
complement existing international space law, when appropriate, to respond to
emerging issues. The Committee and its subcommittees should continue to
demonstrate their relevance and address current and emerging challenges and
opportunities, such as the long-term sustainability of outer space activities.
13. We commit to addressing changes in the undertaking of outer space activities at
a time when new technologies have emerged and when an increasing number of
participants, representing both governmental agencies and non-governmental entities,
including industry and the private sector, are becoming involved in ventures to
explore and use space and carry out space activities. In that regard, we commit to
ensuring that the Committee, and its subcommittees, supported by the Office for Outer
Space Affairs, continue, as appropriate, to respond to such ch anges, in their role as
unique platforms for international cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space.
14. We commit to strengthening international cooperation, for which the Committee
continues to provide a unique platform in the exploration and peac eful uses of outer
space and the global governance of outer space activities, consistent with international
law, taking into account the particular needs of developing countries. We also
recognize the common interest of all humankind in the progress of the exploration
and use of outer space for peaceful purposes, and take note of General Assembly
resolutions 51/122 of 13 December 1996 and 73/6 of 26 October 2018 and the
contribution that their implementation will make to the “Space2030” Agenda.
15. We aim to promote equal opportunities in the space sector by encouraging, in
particular, young people and women to consider careers in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics.
16. We also aim to leverage to a greater extent new, innovative technologies, such
as space technologies and their applications, to contribute to improved delivery of the
mandates of the United Nations as a whole.
17. We emphasize that the seven thematic priorities developed by the Committee in
the context of UNISPACE+50 constitute a comprehensive approach to addressing key
areas and collectively serve to determine the core objectives of the future work of the
Committee and its subcommittees and the Office for Outer Space Affairs in the areas
of global partnership in space exploration and innovation (thematic priority 1), current

21-15518

3/10

The “Space2030” Agenda: space as a driver of
sustainable development

A/RES/76/3

and future perspectives of the legal regime of outer space and global governance
(thematic priority 2), enhanced information exchange on space objects and events
(thematic priority 3), an international framework for space weather services (thematic
priority 4), strengthened space cooperation for global health (thematic priority 5),
international cooperation towards low-emission and resilient societies (thematic
priority 6) and capacity-building for the twenty-first century (thematic priority 7). 3
18. We also emphasize that, in fulfilling the “Space2030” Agenda and
implementation plan, importance is attached to global partnerships and strengthened
cooperation among Member States, United Nations entities, intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, industry and private sector entities, to ensure that,
through joint efforts and by taking advantage of the practical experiences and
contributions of different stakeholders, the benefits of space will be brought to
everyone, everywhere.
III.

Objectives
19. We, the States Members of the United Nations, commit to pursuing, based on
the above strategic vision, the following objectives. The actions described under each
overarching objective could be taken by Member States to realize those objectives.
The four overarching objectives are structured around the four pillars of space
economy, space society, space accessibility and space diplomacy. Those four pillars
are complementary and mutually reinforcing.
Overarching objective 1: Enhance space-derived economic benefits and
strengthen the role of the space sector as a major driver of sustainable development
1.1. Raise awareness of the importance of space science and technology and their
applications for the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
1.2. Facilitate and promote the integration of the space sector with other sectors,
including energy, public health, the environment, climate change, the management of
resources and information and communication technology, as well as the developmen t
of multi-stakeholder partnerships leading to innovative space-based solutions for
social and economic development that can be integrated into mechanisms for
implementing the Sustainable Development Goals.
1.3. Address issues arising from commercial activities in outer space, including with
a view to enabling space activities to better support the achievement of global
development agendas and to ensuring the long-term sustainability of outer space
activities.
1.4. Promote the development of the space industry, with a particular focus on small
and medium-sized enterprises, with a view to increasing investment in the space
sector and creating high-quality jobs, and promote the spin-off benefits of space
technologies to the non-space sector.
1.5. Enable space activities for all, based on international law, by promoting an
international framework that facilitates equal access to space for all, including
non-spacefaring nations, and encourages safety and innovation.
1.6. Promote the use of space-based solutions in global efforts to ensure sustainable
forest and ocean economies.
1.7. Strengthen the contribution of space technologies and their applications to
sustainable fisheries management, agriculture, food safety and security, and nutrition.

__________________
3

4/10

General Assembly resolution 73/6, twenty-fourth preambular paragraph.
21-15518

The “Space2030” Agenda: space as a driver of
sustainable development

A/RES/76/3

1.8. Promote and facilitate collaboration and partnership between the private and
public sectors, academic institutions and research and development centres in the field
of the utilization of space for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, as well
as in the area of the long-term sustainability of outer space activities.
Overarching objective 2: Harness the potential of space to solve everyday
challenges and leverage space-related innovation to improve the quality of life
2.1. Support space science and research, as outer space provides a unique perspective
for scientists to observe and study the Earth and the universe.
2.2. Promote the use of space technologies and their applications to enhance
scientific knowledge of the natural environment, including oceans and seas,
mountainous regions, water cycles and resources, forestry, biodiversity,
desertification and land degradation, as well as urbanization, with a view to
contributing to the preservation of the natural environment, sustainable resource
management and the protection of ecosystems.
2.3. Strengthen the use of integrated space applications to facilitate the observation
of the climate and the assessment of disaster risks, improve early warning disaster
systems and provide data for the indicators used to track progress in the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Sendai
Framework and commitments by States parties to the Paris Agreement.
2.4. Advance the role of space technologies in highlighting, analysing and
addressing climate change and facilitating the transition to low-emission societies,
and promote international collaboration in that regard, in line with existing and
recognized international mechanisms and organizations.
2.5. Promote the use of space-based technologies in all phases of the disaster
management cycle, applicable to both natural and man-made disasters, including
prevention, mitigation, preparedness, response, recovery, reconstruction and
rehabilitation; monitor and assess elements such as exposure, hazards, disast er risk
and damage in different regions of the world; and promote the sharing of disaster
monitoring data.
2.6. Strengthen space-related cooperation in support of global health; improve the
use and application of space medicine, science and technology, inn ovations in the
global health domain, cooperation and the sharing of information and tools to improve
the timeliness and effectiveness of public health and health -care interventions; and
enhance capacity-building in space medicine, science and technology.
2.7. Strengthen the use of space technologies and their applications to support the
development of socially and environmentally sustainable human settlements and
infrastructure, both urban and rural; improve livelihoods; study urbanization and
migration patterns; and monitor cultural heritage sites and contribute to their
preservation.
2.8. Promote space open data policies and the sharing of data.
Overarching objective 3: Improve access to space for all and ensure that all
countries can benefit socioeconomically from space science and technology
applications and space-based data, information and products, thereby
supporting the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
3.1. Leverage the potential of space to inspire youth, increase the involvemen t of
young people in the space sector, support national and international initiatives that
inspire the interest of young people in space activities, from elementary school

21-15518

5/10

A/RES/76/3

The “Space2030” Agenda: space as a driver of
sustainable development

onwards, and strengthen their engagement in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics subjects.
3.2. Enhance space exploration as a long-term driver of innovation and strengthen
international cooperation in that regard.
3.3. Promote exploration beyond low Earth orbit, as the scientific, technological,
economic and inspirational contributions of those missions will benefit humanity.
3.4. Enhance capacity-building, education and training in space science and
applications, in particular for developing countries.
3.5. Increase knowledge of outer space, including through enhanced access to
astronomical and space science data, for the benefit of humankind .
3.6. Promote and support the use of space technologies to enhance worldwide access
to data and broadband technologies, giving special attention to developing countries
and areas with less-developed infrastructure.
3.7. Promote inclusiveness and gender equality in space activities, including by
strengthening the participation of women in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics education.
3.8. Increase awareness of the risks of adverse space weather and mitigate those
risks, in order to ensure increased global resilience against space weather effects, and
improve the international coordination of space weather-related activities, including
outreach, communication and capacity-building, as well as the establishment of an
international mechanism to promote increased high-level coordination in relation to
space weather and increased global resilience against space weather effects.
3.9. Strengthen international cooperation and preparedness to respond to the threat
posed by near-Earth objects.
3.10. Strongly encourage States to strengthen international, multilateral and bilateral
cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes, including
by addressing challenges and obstacles, in particular those that hinder such
cooperation, and in this regard urge States to effectively respond to such challenges
and obstacles that impede the implementation of the “Space2030” Agenda.
Overarching objective 4: Build partnerships and strengthen international
cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space and in the global governance of
outer space activities
4.1. Strengthen the role and activities of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space and its subcommittees, supported by the Office for Outer Space Affairs,
as a unique platform for international cooperation in the exploration and use of outer
space for peaceful purposes.
4.2. Promote the implementation by States parties of the United Nations treaties on
outer space, as well as the implementation of related principles and General Assembly
resolutions, and encourage the Committee and its subsidiary bodies, supported by the
Office for Outer Space Affairs, to continue to coordinate efforts in that regard and to
complement and develop international law related to outer space, as appropriate, to
respond to emerging issues.
4.3. Strengthen capacity-building and technical assistance, including that provided
by the Office for Outer Space Affairs, for Member States, in particular in the field of
international space law and policy.
4.4. Enhance existing registration practices and information exchange and
acknowledge the role of the Office for Outer Space Affairs in maintaining the United
6/10

21-15518

The “Space2030” Agenda: space as a driver of
sustainable development

A/RES/76/3

Nations Register of Objects Launched into Outer Space to increase transparency and
improve the efficiency of the registration mechanism and the timeliness and
consistency of the registration of objects, including by providing technical assistance
to Member States in this regard.
4.5. Ensure the long-term sustainability of outer space activities and the preservation
of the outer space environment for peaceful uses, including through the
implementation on a voluntary basis of the adopted preamble and the guidelines for
the long-term sustainability of outer space activities and the sharing of experiences in
implementing the guidelines, and address new challenges, risks and threats posed to
the long-term sustainability of outer space activities.
4.6. Enhance the safety of outer space operations as a contribution to the long -term
sustainability of outer space activities.
4.7. Promote international cooperation and exchange information and best practices,
within the framework of the Committee, on the supervision of space activities of
non-governmental entities, consistent with international law, with a view to enhancing
the safety and long-term sustainability of outer space activities while facilitating the
development of the space industry.
4.8. Enhance, within the framework of the Committee, the exchange of information
on space objects and events, as well as the discussion on the prediction and prevention
of potential collisions.
4.9. Strengthen the coordination and interrelationship between the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and its subcommittees, with the assistance of the Office
for Outer Space Affairs as the secretariat.
4.10. Encourage strengthened cooperation between the United Nations entities
dealing with space, in line with the United Nations system -wide efforts to increase
coherency and deliver as one, on interdisciplinary and cross-sectoral space-related
matters, in order to promote international cooperation in the peaceful explorat ion and
use of outer space and in the utilization of space science and technology for
sustainable development.
Part B. Implementation plan
20. Each Member State will implement the “Space2030” Agenda on a voluntary
basis.
I.

Partnerships
21. In fulfilling the “Space2030” Agenda and its implementation plan, importance
is attached to strengthened partnerships and cooperation among Member States,
United Nations entities, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
industry and private sector entities.
22. The Office for Outer Space Affairs serves as a conduit for promoting and
facilitating the use of space-based solutions, including in the implementation of the
“Space2030” Agenda, and should continue, within its mandate, functions and exist ing
resources to pursue partnerships, including with research institutions, academia,
industry and the private sector, to provide broader opportunities to access space for
purposes of science, innovation, research and development, education and capacity building. In that regard, the Office should implement activities to promote the use of
space-based applications and technologies to support Member States in meeting the
objectives of the global development agendas.

21-15518

7/10

The “Space2030” Agenda: space as a driver of
sustainable development

A/RES/76/3

23. In view of implementing the “Space2030” Agenda, the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and the Office for Outer Space Affairs should continue
to fulfil their respective mandates and to cooperate and coordinate with other relevant
entities within the United Nations system, including t hrough the Inter-Agency
Meeting on Outer Space Activities (UN-Space).
II.

Tools
24. In implementing the “Space2030” Agenda, Member States could contribute to
and benefit from a number of international and regional mechanisms, programmes,
projects and platforms that are already in place or are being developed, such as the
following:
(a) The seven thematic priorities in the context of UNISPACE+50, undertaken
in the agendas and work of the Committee and its subcommittees, and the Office for
Outer Space Affairs, in the areas of global partnership in space exploration and
innovation, current and future perspectives of the legal regime of outer space and
global governance, enhanced information exchange on space objects and events, an
international framework for space weather services, strengthened space cooperation
for global health, international cooperation for low -emission and resilient societies
and capacity-building for the twenty-first century; 4
(b) The United Nations Platform for Space-based Information for Disaster
Management and Emergency Response (UN-SPIDER), 5 a programme of the Office
for Outer Space Affairs that provides Member States with access to space -based data
and services for disaster-risk reduction and emergency response, and through the
UN-SPIDER knowledge portal, enables access to space-based resources in all phases
of the disaster management cycle;
(c) The regional centres for space science and technology education, affiliated
to the United Nations, 6 including the alliance of the regional centres. The regional
centres are designed to enhance capacity-building, education and training in space
science and applications, as well as space law and policy, in particular for developing
countries;
(d) The Charter on Cooperation to Achieve the Coordinated Use of Space
Facilities in the Event of Natural or Technological Disasters (also called the
International Charter on Space and Major Disasters), as a worldwide collaboration
among space agencies and space system operators, through which satellite-derived
information and products are made available to support disaster response efforts;
(e) The Recovery Observatory of the Committee on Earth Observation
Satellites, as a means to increase the contribution of satellite data to recovery from
natural disasters;
(f) The international Space Climate Observatory, whose main goal is to study
and monitor the impacts of climate change, especially at local scales, using satellite based Earth-observation tools in combination with field data and models, thus
providing a tool for decision-making on preparedness, adaptation and resilience to
climate change and its impacts, in particular at the local level;
(g) The World Meteorological Organization Integrated Global Observing
System, which provides observation data useful for weather analyses, forecasts,

__________________

Related documents include A/AC.105/1168, A/AC.105/1169, A/AC.105/1170, A/AC.105/1171,
A/AC.105/1172, A/AC.105/1173 and A/AC.105/1174; see also para. 17 above.
5
See General Assembly resolution 61/110.
6
See General Assembly resolution 73/91, para. 24.
4

8/10

21-15518

The “Space2030” Agenda: space as a driver of
sustainable development

A/RES/76/3

advisories and warnings, as well as for climate monitoring and environmental
activities;
(h) The International Committee on Global Navigation Satellite Systems, 7
which promotes voluntary cooperation on matters of mutual interest related to civil
satellite-based positioning, navigation, timing and value-added services, and
encourages and facilitates compatibility, interoperability and transparency between
all the satellite navigation systems;
(i) The International Asteroid Warning Network (IAWN) and the Space
Mission Planning Advisory Group (SMPAG), 8 which are designed to strengthen
preparedness for the threat of potential impacts of near-Earth objects through
international cooperation and information-sharing.
25. In addition, several tools and initiatives have been and are being developed by
the Office for Outer Space Affairs, as part of the capacity-building for the twenty-first
century, and in cooperation with its partners, including:
(a) Access to Space for All initiative, 9 aimed at broadening access to space in
support of the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals through triangular
cooperation between spacefaring nations, the United Nations and non -spacefaring or
emerging spacefaring nations, with the involvement of the private sector;
(b) The Open Universe initiative, in order to enhance access to astronomical
and space science data; 10
(c) The space solutions compendium, as a tool for supporting Member States
in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, linking space
solutions with Sustainable Development Goals and targets; 11
(d) The Space for Women project, aimed at broadening the possibilities for
women to pursue space-related education and careers;
(e) The “Space law for new space actors” project, as part of capacity-building
and advisory services in response to the needs and requirements of policymakers and
legislators in governmental and regulatory authorities of countries that are either
entering the space sector for the first time or that are embarking upon new phases of
space activities;
(f) The Space4Water portal, as a platform for interdisciplinary knowledge
exchange on space technologies and water-related topics;
(g) Space for Youth, to advance Youth 2030: The United Nations Strategy on
Youth, the United Nations-wide initiative in the area of space-related activities and
projects;
(h) The “Space solutions for the Pacific” project, aimed at offering a range of
programmatic services to Pacific island States to enhance their ability to meet
Sustainable Development Goals, including in the areas of climate change, illegal
fishing, telecommunications, global health and disaster risk reduction;
(i) The World Space Forums on space as a driver for socioeconomic
sustainable development aimed at strengthening partnerships and continuous dialogue
among the global community on a broad range of space matters and at raising
__________________

See General Assembly resolution 59/2, para. 11.
See General Assembly resolution 70/82, para. 9.
9
See A/72/20, para. 326.
10
See A/AC.105/1175.
11
See A/AC.105/1174.
7
8

21-15518

9/10

The “Space2030” Agenda: space as a driver of
sustainable development

A/RES/76/3

awareness and supporting the implementation of the “Space2030” Agenda through
the broad involvement of all relevant space actors.
26. The above lists are not exhaustive, and new initiatives could be developed,
including with a view to assisting Member States in implementing the “Space2030”
Agenda.
III.

Resources
27. Member States are invited to actively undertake bilateral, multilateral, regional
and broader international space cooperation in various forms, including capacity building, the sharing of information and infrastructure and the development of joint
projects, and, as appropriate, to integrate space cooperation with economic and
development cooperation, in order to promote the fulfilment of the “Space2030”
Agenda and its implementation plan.
28. Member States and other donors are invited to provide voluntary extrabudgetary
resources to the Office for Outer Space Affairs to advance the implementation of the
“Space2030” Agenda, in accordance with the rules and procedures of the United
Nations.
29. The Secretary-General is urged to consider the sufficiency of resources provided
to the Office for Outer Space Affairs in its role as secretariat to the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and its subcommittees, and to ensure that the Office
can fully and effectively implement its mandate, including capacity-building
activities for Member States in the field of space science and technology and their
applications, as well as in space law and policy, taking into account the “Space2030”
Agenda and implementation plan.

IV.

Review of progress
30. The Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space should include an item on
its agenda for each session allowing for an exchange among States members of the
Committee and its permanent observers on their experiences in implementing the
“Space2030” Agenda. In 2025, the Committee should carry out a midterm review of
progress made in implementing the “Space2030” Agenda. In 2030, the Committee
should carry out a final review of the implementation of the “Space 2030” Agenda and
report to the General Assembly on the results.
21st plenary meeting
25 October 2021

10/10

21-15518
