A/62/PV.86

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-second session

86

th plenary meeting
Friday, 14 March 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kerim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 132 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/62/657/Add.4)
The President: Before turning to the item on our
agenda, I would like to invite the attention of the
General Assembly to document A/62/657/Add.4, in
which the Secretary-General informs the President of
the General Assembly that, since the issuance of his
communication contained in documents A/62/657 and
Add.1 through 3, the Dominican Republic has made
the necessary payment to reduce its arrears below the
amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter. May I
take it that the General Assembly duly takes note of the
information contained in this document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 20
The situation in the occupied territories
of Azerbaijan
Draft resolution (A/62/L.42)
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan to introduce draft
resolution A/62/L.42.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): The conflict in and
around the Nagorno-Karabakh region of Azerbaijan has
a long history. Karabakh — both its mountainous and
lowland parts, which are economically and politically

linked with each other — has always been one of the
historical provinces of Azerbaijan. In antiquity and the
early Middle Ages, the region was a part of a State
known as Caucasian Albania, which existed between
the fourth century B.C. and eighth century in the
territory of present-day Azerbaijan. In 313, Christianity
was proclaimed as a State religion in Albania.
In the eighth century, the population of
Azerbaijan, including the majority of Albanians, was
converted to Islam. The Albanians, inhabiting the
mountainous part of Karabakh, retained their own
religion. From the ninth to nineteenth centuries,
Karabakh was a part of different States ruled by the
local Azerbaijani dynasties. The treaty of 14 May 1805
signed by the Azerbaijani khan, Ibrahim Khalil of
Karabakh, brought Karabakh under Russian rule.
Thereafter, Armenians were massively settled in
the mountainous part of Karabakh, where at a later
stage they assimilated the indigenous Albanians, whose
Orthodox Patriarchy was abolished by the Russian
authorities in 1836 and its property transferred to the
Armenian Gregorian Church. The descendants of the
Albanians continue to live in other regions of
Azerbaijan.
In 1918, Azerbaijan proclaimed independence
and, guided by the principle of good neighbourliness,
handed over the Azerbaijani Iravan — Yerevan —
province to the Republic of Armenia. Nevertheless, the
newly established Armenian Government raised claims
to other Azerbaijani territories, including Nagorno-

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-27294 (E)

*0827294*

A/62/PV.86

Karabakh. In 1919 the Armenian assembly formally
accepted Azerbaijani rule over that territory.
During Soviet times, the Nagorno-Karabakh
region of Azerbaijan enjoyed political, economic and
cultural autonomy and developed faster than
Azerbaijan and Armenia as a whole.
The present-day stage of the ArmenianAzerbaijani conflict dates back to the end of 1987. In
the repression carried out in Armenia, 220 Azerbaijanis
were killed, 1,154 were wounded and about 250,000
were expelled. That was the latest wave of deportation
of Azerbaijanis, who for centuries have resided in the
territory presently called Armenia.
In early 1988, the Armenian Government
instigated a secessionist movement in the NagornoKarabakh region. In 1989, the parliament of Armenia,
in total contradiction to the Constitution of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, adopted a decree entitled
“On re-unification of the Armenian SSR and NagornoKarabakh”.
These actions continued when Armenia, with the
support of foreign troops and with direct participation
of international mercenaries and terrorist groups,
unleashed a full-scale military operation, leading to the
occupation of the Nagorno-Karabakh region of
Azerbaijan and seven adjacent districts. The
occupation was accompanied by the policy of ethnic
cleansing, and as a result more than one million
Azerbaijanis became refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs).
Responding to the occupation of the Azerbaijani
territories and alarmed by the severe humanitarian
catastrophe resulting from the expulsion of more than
1 million refugees and IDPs, the Security Council in
1993 adopted four resolutions — 822 (1993), 853
(1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993) — demanding the
immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal of
the occupying forces from the occupied territories of
Azerbaijan and the creation of the necessary conditions
for the return of IDPs to their homes in security and
dignity. Those provisions have still not been
implemented.
Negotiations under the auspices of the Minsk
Group of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) started in 1992. At the
OSCE Lisbon Summit in 1996, the Co-Chairs of the
Minsk Group and the OSCE Chairman-in-Office

2

recommended the following principles as the basis for
the settlement of the conflict: the territorial integrity of
Armenia and Azerbaijan, the highest degree of self-rule
for Nagorno-Karabakh within Azerbaijan, and
guaranteed security for Nagorno-Karabakh and its
whole population. Armenia was the only one out of 54
OSCE participating States that did not accept those
principles.
Moreover, Armenia tries to consolidate the
occupation through illegal activities in the occupied
territories of Azerbaijan. Armenia has launched an
outrageous policy of exploiting natural resources in the
occupied territories, in particular the gold mines in the
Kalbajar district, aiming to engage overseas companies
in the illegal business. In addition, Armenia falsifies
the history and misappropriates the cultural and
architectural heritage of all occupied territories.
Religious
and
historical
monuments,
ancient
manuscripts and other cultural properties have been
destroyed, re-fashioned, plundered and removed.
Furthermore, Armenia
has
launched
an
outrageous policy of massive illegal settlement of
Armenian populations in the occupied territories,
which is another blatant violation of international law.
As an expression of its serious concern about the
massive settlement in the occupied territories, the item
entitled “The situation in the occupied territories of
Azerbaijan” was included in the agenda of the General
Assembly. As a result of the consideration of this item
at the 60th plenary meeting of the Assembly’s fiftyninth session, on 23 November 2004, the first-ever
OSCE fact-finding mission was dispatched to the
occupied territories of Azerbaijan, from 31 January
through 6 February 2005.
The fact-finding mission confirmed the facts of
the Armenian settlement of the occupied territories.
The Co-Chairs of the OSCE Minsk Group requested
that any further settlement of the occupied territories of
Azerbaijan be discouraged and urged that there be no
changes in the demographic structure of the region,
which would make difficult any further efforts to
achieve a negotiated settlement of the conflict in and
around the Nagorno-Karabakh region of the Republic
of Azerbaijan. The fact-finding mission became
feasible thanks to the General Assembly’s just and
right approach to the grave concern articulated by
Azerbaijan.

08-27294

A/62/PV.86

However, another dangerous development
occurred in the occupied territories. In 2006, there
were massive fires in the eastern part of the occupied
territories. With a view to taking comprehensive
measures to suppress the fires, eliminate the impact of
this environmental disaster and rehabilitate the fireaffected territories of Azerbaijan, our delegation,
during intensive consultations, acting in the spirit of
compromise, demonstrated maximum flexibility to
accommodate every concern. As a result, on
7 September 2006 the General Assembly adopted
resolution 60/285 without a vote
Based on that resolution, the OSCE led an
environmental assessment mission from 2 to
13 October 2006 to the fire-affected territories in and
around the Nagorno-Karabakh region of Azerbaijan.
The mission confirmed the fact of fires, the lack of
proper fire-fighting equipment on both sides and the
need for international assistance and proposed short-,
medium- and long-term initiatives. However, those
proposals, which, besides their ultimate goals were
aimed at establishing confidence, have never been
implemented in the occupied territories.
The most dangerous development in the occupied
territories occurred on 4 March 2008, when the
Armenian occupying forces grossly violated the
ceasefire regime, leading to 5 casualties from the
Azerbaijani side and 27 from the Armenian side. That
provocation by Armenia is clearly intended to divert
the attention of its citizens from the tense situation in
the country. The use of force has unfortunately become
the traditional method of both foreign and domestic
policy of Armenia.
Azerbaijan has always conducted negotiations in
good faith, whereas Armenia uses the negotiations as a
cover for its illegal activities in the occupied
territories. Contrary to the goals of negotiations,
Armenia demonstrates its unchanged “fait accompli”
policy through continued military occupation.
During his presidential campaign in the city of
Mehry on 24 January, the newly elected President of
Armenia, Serj Sarkisian, declared, among the basic
principles of the resolution of the Armenia-Azerbaijan
conflict, that Karabakh cannot be a part of Azerbaijan
and Karabakh should be connected with Armenia. He
stated that “out of these principles, we will not discuss
the regulation of the conflict”. That position of the

08-27294

Armenian leadership should ring another alarm about
the real intentions of the Government of Armenia.
The talks are founded on the clear stance of the
full restoration of Azerbaijan’s territorial integrity and
sovereignty, which are indisputable and non-negotiable
from both the legal and political points of view and
which deserve support in the framework of the
negotiations as well as during the action on the draft
resolution.
In the final stage of the settlement, we envisage a
peaceful and prosperous region, in which the
Azerbaijani and Armenian populations of NagornoKarabakh would live in friendship and security within
the Republic of Azerbaijan. To arrive at that point, we
need to eliminate the consequences of the conflict: the
occupying forces should leave all occupied territories,
internally displaced people return to their places of
origin, and transport and communication links be
restored.
In spite of the negotiations that have continued
for over a decade, the conflict is not settled, and this
situation causes profound anxiety, frustration and
disappointment on our part. The consideration of this
agenda item at this plenary meeting of the General
Assembly absolutely does not mean that we intend to
change the format of the negotiations on the settlement
of the conflict. The main reason for the discussion of
the item and for taking action on the draft resolution is
to reconfirm the basic principles of the settlement of
the conflict; to express support for the mediators and to
encourage them to intensify efforts aimed at a peaceful
settlement of the conflict in accordance with the norms
and principles of international law, in particular those
related to sovereignty and territorial integrity; and to
give additional impetus to the peace process in order to
prevent any possible impasse or stagnation in the
negotiations. The international community should send
a clear message that the acquisition of the territory of a
sovereign State by force and the situation resulting
from it will never be recognized as legal.
We hear a lot of advice stating that an agreement
suitable to both parties must be negotiated. We would
very much welcome a solution that would suit both
parties. However, in order to achieve it, the parties
must share the same ground, the same basis in the
negotiations. Azerbaijan adheres to the norms and
principles of international law and intends to negotiate
on that very basis.

3

A/62/PV.86

International law has determined a common
denominator in the resolution of conflicts such as the
one in and around the Nagorno-Karabakh region of
Azerbaijan. That denominator is the principle of
respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity and the
inadmissibility of unilateral secession from a State.
Self-determination must not violate territorial integrity
and must not be considered as an invitation to
separation. Unfortunately, we cannot draw the same
conclusions from the actions by Armenia, which is
trying to solidify the results of aggression and ethnic
cleansing.
On the other hand, we do not see any prospects
for continuing negotiations in an environment of legal
uncertainty, in which so-called accomplished facts and
circumstances are proposed as reference points. We are
gravely concerned and alarmed at the lack of clear
proposals from the Co-Chairs of the Minsk Group with
regard to the resolution of vital issues regarding the
liberation of all of the occupied territories and the
return of the Azerbaijani population to NagornoKarabakh, which are indispensable steps in the
restoration of the territorial integrity of Azerbaijan.
The Co-Chairs have no right to deviate from the
principle of territorial integrity for the sake of their
notorious neutrality.
Speaking of neutrality, that position is widely
used when it comes to this issue. But this neutrality is
not a position but a lack of one. Rather, it is an attempt
to hide a complete political will to take a position that
would not mean taking the side of one party or the
other, but taking the side of international law. There
cannot be neutrality when the norms of international
law are violated. Neutrality under such conditions
means total disregard for those norms.
We have never made and could never make it our
task to elaborate a draft resolution acceptable to
Armenia, which does not demonstrate even a whisper
of readiness to abandon illegitimate and meaningless
territorial claims to Azerbaijan. We based our draft on
the norms and principles of international law and in
accordance with the concept of the settlement that has
repeatedly been supported by the Co-Chairs of the
Minsk Group and that provides for the return of the
population to their land and a determination of the
legal status of the Nagorno-Karabakh region within
Azerbaijan, with direct and equal participation of the
Azerbaijani and Armenian communities residing there.

4

We cannot accept the proposition that the draft
resolution will lead to a deterioration in ArmenianAzerbaijani relations, simply because it is impossible
for something that does not exist to deteriorate.
The argument that the draft resolution is
unilateral and untimely cannot be accepted either. It is
not and it cannot be so, because it was prepared in
accordance with international law and, as such, is
impartial. This draft resolution was prompted by the
prevailing circumstances on both the regional and
international levels, which have heightened our
concern regarding the status of the settlement process.
Therefore, the draft resolution is apropos and timely.
The draft resolution will play an important role in
awakening Armenia, which still retains impunity and
has become accustomed to this permissive
environment. It is aimed at persuading Armenia
towards the will and position of the international
community. It would be counter-productive for
Member States to reject support for the draft
resolution; that would be interpreted in Yerevan as a
sign that it can continue its destructive policy.
Azerbaijan values the position of the international
community, which has unequivocally supported the
territorial integrity of Azerbaijan. Azerbaijan strongly
believes that at this crucial juncture in the United
Nations reform process, the General Assembly, as the
chief deliberative, policymaking and representative
organ of the United Nations, will again prove its
relevance and validity in dealing with any question
relating to the maintenance of international peace and
security and will articulate its position and address the
issue of concern.
The consideration of the item is not only about
voting for the draft resolution. It is not even about
expressing political support for Azerbaijan’s concerns.
It is about boosting the principles and norms of
international law. It is about supporting all Member
States whose sovereignty and territorial integrity may
be in danger at any time at this crucial and difficult
period in international relations.
By supporting the draft resolution, Member
States will confirm in deed their stated position with
regard to adhering to the norms and principles of
international law as the basis of the world order and
inter-State relations. By taking this step, Member
States will show their due respect for the foundations
of and basis for friendly relations among States.

08-27294

A/62/PV.86

Today, approximately one million Azerbaijani
refugees are desperately waiting for the position of the
United Nations. I urge Member States, before taking
action on the draft resolution, to think of the tens of
thousands of refugees who have lived for more than a
decade in tents under the open air. They are deprived of
fresh water and hot food. Women give birth in
passenger cars. A whole generation is growing up in
the refugee camps. Infants are deprived of cradles, and
women are deprived of maternity. These people, living
in miserable conditions, are deprived of routine human
happiness. Think of them before taking action.
Ms. Štiglic (Slovenia): The European Union
recognizes the right of Member States to bring issues
to the attention of the General Assembly for
consideration, subject to the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations and the rules and procedures of
the General Assembly.
However, the European Union believes that the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Minsk Group should retain the lead in settling
the Nagorny Karabakh conflict. The EU fully supports
the efforts of the OSCE Minsk Group towards a
peaceful, just and lasting settlement. The EU reiterates
its support for all the principles, without exception,
established within the Minsk Group and values the
views of the Group’s Co-Chairs.
The settlement of the Nagorny Karabakh issue is
an important element of the European Neighbourhood
Policy of the European Union and features prominently
in the related action plans. In that context, we remain
ready to support all steps which contribute to a
peaceful resolution of the conflict.
The European Union calls on the parties
concerned to avoid any actions that could lead to
heightened tensions and undermine the ongoing
mediation efforts.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): The
political-level representatives of France, the Russian
Federation and the United States, as Co-Chairs of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Minsk Group dealing with the Nagorny
Karabakh conflict, jointly proposed a set of basic
principles for the peaceful settlement of the Nagorny
Karabakh conflict to the sides in November 2007 on
the margins of the OSCE Ministerial Council in
Madrid. Those basic principles are founded on the
provisions of the Helsinki Final Act of the Conference

08-27294

on Security and Cooperation in Europe, including those
related to refraining from the threat or use of force, the
territorial integrity of States and the equal rights and
self-determination of peoples. The proposal transmitted
to the sides in Madrid comprises a balanced package of
principles that are currently under negotiation. The
sides have agreed that no single element is agreed until
all elements are agreed by the parties.
Unfortunately, the draft resolution before us
today selectively propagates only certain of those
principles, to the exclusion of others, without
considering the Co-Chairs’ proposal in its balanced
entirety. Because of this selective approach, the three
OSCE Minsk Group Co-Chair countries must oppose
this unilateral draft resolution. They reiterate that a
peaceful, equitable and lasting settlement of the
Nagorny Karabakh conflict will require unavoidable
compromises among the parties that reflect the
principles of territorial integrity, non-use of force and
equal rights of peoples, as well as other principles of
international law.
While the three Minsk Group Co-Chair countries
will vote against this unilateral draft resolution, which
threatens to undermine the peace process, they reaffirm
their support for the territorial integrity of Azerbaijan
and thus do not recognize the independence of
Nagorny Karabakh. At a time when serious clashes
with loss of life have occurred along the line of
contact, both sides must refrain from unilateral and
maximalist actions either at the negotiating table or in
the field.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): As just
stated by the representative of the United States of
America on behalf of the Co-Chairs of the Minsk
Group, France, along with the other two Co-Chairs,
will vote against the draft resolution that has been
unilaterally presented by Azerbaijan. Our country
would reaffirm at the same time our full support for the
Common Position of the European Union on the
question of the Nagorny Karabakh conflict, as
presented by Slovenia.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the States members of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC).
We appreciate the convening of this meeting of
the General Assembly to consider the situation in the
occupied territories of Azerbaijan. This issue is a
matter of international concern. It is on the agenda of

5

A/62/PV.86

this Assembly. The conflict in and around the Nagorny
Karabakh region of Azerbaijan also remains on the
agenda of the Security Council, whose resolutions 822
(1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993),
unfortunately, remain unimplemented to date, posing a
continued threat to peace and stability in the region.
Those resolutions reaffirmed the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Azerbaijan and other States of
the region, reaffirmed the inviolability of international
borders and the inadmissibility of the use of force for
the acquisition of territory, and accordingly demanded
the withdrawal of all occupying forces from the
occupied territories of Azerbaijan.
The conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan has
been the focus of diplomatic and other efforts to reach
a peaceful settlement. That includes the peace process
within the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) framework, which has set out three
principles of settlement, namely, the territorial integrity
of Armenia and Azerbaijan, the highest degree of selfrule of the Nagorny Karabakh region within
Azerbaijan, and guaranteed security for the region and
its entire population.
The OIC has a long-standing, principled and firm
position vis-à-vis the aggression of the Republic of
Armenia against the Republic of Azerbaijan. That
position, based on the principles and objectives of the
Charter of the United Nations and on our full support
for the just stance of the Republic of Azerbaijan, is
articulated in the relevant declarations, communiqués
and resolutions of the OIC at the summit and
ministerial levels.
The 34th session of Islamic Conference of
Foreign Ministers, held in May 2007 in Islamabad, and
the OIC Annual Coordination Meeting of the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs, held in October 2007 in New York,
reiterated their condemnation of the continuing
aggression by Armenia against the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Azerbaijan, which constitutes a
blatant violation of the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. The ministers
called for the immediate, complete and unconditional
withdrawal of the Armenian forces from all the
occupied territories of Azerbaijan. They called for a
peaceful resolution of the conflict on the basis of
respect for territorial integrity and the inviolability of
internationally recognized borders.

6

The OIC also supported the efforts of the
Government of Azerbaijan to remove the obstacles to
the peace process, such as the illegal transfer of settlers
of Armenian nationality to the occupied territories,
practices of artificial geographic, cultural and
demographic alterations and unlawful economic
activity and exploitation of natural resources in the
occupied territories of Azerbaijan. The OIC demanded
that Armenia stop those activities and the continued
destruction of Azerbaijan’s cultural and historical
heritage, including Islamic monuments. The OIC is
also deeply distressed over the plight of the more than
one million Azerbaijani displaced persons and refugees
from the occupied territories and calls for conditions to
be created enabling their return to their homes in
safety, honour and dignity.
The OIC has clearly stated that a fait accompli
cannot serve as a basis for a settlement. We are
therefore deeply concerned over the efforts by Armenia
to consolidate the status quo of occupation, including,
in particular, its policy of continuing the illegal
settlement of Armenian populations in the occupied
territories, which undermines and prejudices a
negotiated settlement. Also of serious concern were the
massive fires that started in June 2006 in the occupied
territories, to which the General Assembly responded
by adopting resolution 60/285 on 7 September 2006
without a vote.
In the context of a pacific settlement of the
conflict, the OIC supports the activities of the OSCE
Minsk Group and bilateral consultations held between
the parties. We expect the parties to negotiate in good
faith, and we welcome the commitment of Azerbaijan
in that regard for a peaceful resolution. The time, effort
and resources devoted to this issue in over a decade of
negotiations should not be allowed to go to waste. To
uphold the prospects for peace, the international
community must continue to support the peace process
and steer the negotiations clear of impediments and a
possible stalemate.
The draft resolution contained in document
A/62/L.42 reflects the previously mentioned principles,
objectives and positions. It is consistent with the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations on this issue,
as well as the position of the OIC. It therefore has the
full support of the OIC. We hope that this discussion
and the adoption of the draft resolution will contribute
to supporting and intensifying the international
mediation efforts aimed at achieving a peaceful and

08-27294

A/62/PV.86

lasting settlement of the conflict in accordance with the
norms and principles of international law.
I would like to conclude by reiterating the full
support and complete solidarity of the OIC for the
efforts undertaken by the Government and the people
of Azerbaijan to defend their country and to achieve
the restoration of the complete sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Butagira (Uganda): Uganda aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Pakistan on behalf of the New York group of States
members of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference.
Uganda is a firm believer in peaceful settlement
of disputes between States, as well as a fervent
supporter of the principles of the inviolability of the
sovereignty of States and respect for territorial borders
in accordance with the principles and tenets of the
Charter of the United Nations. Any departure from
those principles must be well grounded in international
law. We do not see any justifiable departure in the
present case. Azerbaijan has been a victim. Uganda
therefore supports this draft resolution, which is also in
line with resolutions of the Security Council. Uganda
will vote yes.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): Today’s discussion once
again focuses the attention of the international
community on the problem of protracted conflicts in
the territories of Azerbaijan, the Republic of Moldova
and Georgia. Those conflicts continue to be major
impediments to the democratic and economic
development of those States. We are confident that the
consideration of those issues is within the purview of
the General Assembly and the Security Council. It is
crucially important that the international community
continue to take practical steps to help to settle the
protracted conflicts in the countries to which I have
referred, based on the unconditional recognition of the
territorial integrity of those States.
We believe that each of those conflicts has its
own history and nature. Mechanisms to settle them
could therefore be different. But they must be firmly
based on the unambiguous priority of adhering to
human rights. In that regard, Ukraine strongly rejects
attempts to connect the case of Kosovo to the conflicts
in the territories of Azerbaijan, the Republic of
Moldova and Georgia.

08-27294

Ukraine consistently supports the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe’s Minsk Group
with regard to settling the Nagorny Karabakh conflict.
We note that the potential of the Minsk process has not
been exhausted. We call upon Azerbaijan and Armenia
to demonstrate their flexibility and not to undermine
the possibilities for settling the Nagorny Karabakh
conflict.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China is very concerned about the question of Nagorny
Karabakh. China respects and supports the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Azerbaijan. China supports
the efforts of the international community to promote
the peaceful settlement of the question of Nagorny
Karabakh. The situation in Nagorny Karabakh is
complex and sensitive. It not only bears directly on the
relations between Azerbaijan and Armenia, but also
affects the peace and stability of the entire Caucasus
region.
China has always advocated the settlement of
disputes between countries on the basis of direct
negotiations. China hopes that the two countries will
continue negotiations in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
within the process of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe’s Minsk Group, in order to find
a mutually acceptable settlement plan. China supports
Russia, the United States of America and France — the
Co-Chairs of the Minsk Group — in their continuing
efforts to play a constructive role. China also hopes
that those three countries will make further efforts to
reconcile the positions of the two countries concerned
and bring the parties together for an earnest and indepth dialogue, with a view to building up mutual
confidence in resolving the dispute in order that a
breakthrough can be made in the negotiations.
Peace, stability and development in Azerbaijan
and Armenia and the entire Caucasus region are in the
interest of all parties. We hope that the parties
concerned will continue to exercise restraint and
refrain from actions that might further complicate the
situation and aggravate tensions.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): Turkey has already aligned
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of Pakistan on behalf of the group of States members
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference. I shall
therefore try to be brief and just mention a few basic

7

A/62/PV.86

points that guided us in taking a position on the draft
resolution before us.
First, given the strong views on both sides, we
looked carefully into whether the General Assembly is
the appropriate forum to discuss the issue at hand. Yes,
indeed, there is an ongoing peace process within the
framework of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe’s Minsk Group, and we noted
the concerns that the United Nations track might cause
a deviation. But let us also not forget that the
foundations of this process were actually grounded in
the very ideals and principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations. We therefore fail to understand
how the United Nations, the primary guarantor of
global peace and stability, can now derail a process that
it helped to come into being in the first place. On the
contrary, it could give a new boost and energy to the
Minsk process. We therefore urge everyone to view
this draft resolution as a means to that end, and thus
turn it into an opportunity rather than a distraction. We
certainly see it that way, and hope that all parties
involved will remain committed to the success of the
peace efforts under way within the framework of the
Minsk Group.
Secondly, we have considered the timing of the
draft resolution and whether it would have been better
to introduce it earlier or later. In that context, I listened
carefully to those who argued that the recent plan
proposed by the Co-Chairs of the Minsk Group is yet
to be taken up by the parties and that this draft
resolution might blur their assessment by introducing a
new element to the equation. With due respect, I beg to
differ. If this is indeed a critical time in the Minsk
process that promises a breakthrough — and we
certainly want to believe so — then there cannot be a
better occasion to extend our support by firmly stating
our commitment to the early and peaceful settlement of
this conflict — which, incidentally, has lasted for more
than 16 years.
Finally, we evaluated the substance of the draft
resolution and checked whether it includes enough of
the main principles and parameters identified as the
basis for the settlement of the conflict. There again, we
believe that the draft resolution sufficiently addresses
the core of the predicament at hand. After all, the
problem we are discussing today is essentially a
problem of occupation. Indeed, close to 20 per cent of
Azerbaijani territory is still under occupation. There
can therefore be nothing wrong in calling for the

8

territorial integrity of that country or the return of the
internally displaced people. Of course, as with any
other draft resolution, the text might have benefited
from certain editorial amendments, but overall it does
not include any element that could be conceived
detrimental to the settlement of the conflict.
As a neighbour to both sides to the conflict,
Turkey is particularly interested in helping achieve a
peaceful settlement of this long-standing conflict in
accordance with the norms and principles of
international law. We therefore firmly support any
initiative that contributes to that ultimate goal. That is
why, as a member of the Minsk Group, we are deeply
committed to the early success of that process, which
should remain the sole format for the peace
negotiations. That is also why we would like to see
today’s adoption of the draft resolution serve to
re-energize and strengthen that indispensable process.
Mr. Martirosyan (Armenia): First of all, I would
like to thank Ambassador Wolff, the representative of
the United States, for the statement he delivered on
behalf of the Co-Chairs of the Minsk Group. Along
with the Co-Chairs, Armenia will also vote against this
draft resolution. We do so for a number of reasons.
First, it is unprecedented for a draft resolution to
be brought to the floor for a vote without any
consultations among the parties concerned. Without
such discussion and deliberation this draft resolution
cannot be implemented. The way that this draft
resolution reached the floor therefore cynically ignores
the fundamental principles of this and every other
international organization.
That leads me to my second point, namely, that
the purpose of the drafters was never to encourage or
facilitate discussion. This draft simply represents a way
for Azerbaijan to get a piece of paper where its wishful
and unrealistic outcomes are listed. If the intention
truly were to contribute to the success of the ongoing
negotiations, Azerbaijan would be putting its energy
and seriousness into the existing negotiating format of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Minsk Group, rather than trying to
move the issue into this forum.
After Azerbaijan militarized this conflict, 20
years ago, there was a full-scale war between that
country and the Armenians of Nagorno Karabakh.
There were thousands of dead and nearly 1 million
refugees, as well as lost territory on both sides. Today,

08-27294

A/62/PV.86

there is a self-maintaining ceasefire and negotiations
under the auspices of the OSCE Minsk Group. Despite
that and other attempts by Azerbaijan to divert the
peace process, those negotiations are indeed moving
forward. There is now a negotiating document on the
table that addresses all fundamental issues — the
future status of Nagorno Karabakh being foremost
among them. The last version of the document was
presented to the sides by France, Russia and the United
States just four months ago at the OSCE ministerial
meeting held in Madrid. Yet, Azerbaijan risks
sabotaging this process by presenting a draft resolution
that ignores agreed arrangements and existing realities.
This draft resolution is counterproductive. It calls
for the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of
armed forces. If the security and peace of the region is
really a concern for Azerbaijan, I wonder about the
security vacuum that will be created afterward. Who
will be responsible for the security of the people of
Nagorno Karabakh, whose lives and existence today
depend on a fragile ceasefire that, in the absence of
international cover, is safeguarded by those very armed
forces?
The draft resolution calls for self-governance
within Azerbaijan. That became impossible 20 years
ago, and it is not possible today. Does anyone really
believe that there can be a return to a situation where
the security of the Armenian minority was clearly
endangered? In various ethnic conflicts around the
world, the international community has demonstrated
that it understands that. The Government of Azerbaijan
forfeited its right to govern people it considered its
citizens when it unleashed a war against them 20 years
ago. The Ambassador of Uganda was absolutely right
when he said that Azerbaijan was a victim. Yes,
Azerbaijan is a victim, but of its own policy.
Armenians will never return to the previous situation.
The draft resolution asks for a commitment by the
parties to humanitarian law. What about a commitment
to the non-use of force, the peaceful resolution of
disputes and all other provisions of the Helsinki Final
Act?
The draft resolution talks about territories and
refugees. How are those consequences of the conflict
to be resolved if the original cause of the conflict is not
addressed? Refugees and territories are problems
created by an Azerbaijan that unleashed a savage war
against people it claims as its sovereign citizens. Only

08-27294

when the initial cause is resolved will the fate of its
territories and ours and its refugees and ours be put
right.
I feel compelled to make some comments with
regard to the statement delivered by the representative
of Pakistan on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC). I do not need to say that Armenians
have had a long and deep relationship with the
members of the OIC — and with some of them even
warmer than with our neighbour Azerbaijan. That so
many respected members of that organization are today
being misinformed and misled by Azerbaijan is truly
vexing. If the members of that organization believe that
it is their duty to stand with Azerbaijan on this draft
resolution, that is their decision. However, it is my
responsibility to set the record straight for those who
will judge this draft resolution on its merits. Since we
are diplomats, I will use only the words “flawed” and
“misleading” to describe the statement made on behalf
of the OIC.
Let me read from the negotiating document as it
was presented to us in Madrid by no less than the
Foreign Ministers of France and Russia and the United
States Deputy Secretary of State.
The document begins as follows:
“Referring to the provisions of the
declaration on principles guiding relations
between OIC participating States of the Final Act
of the Helsinki Conference, in particular to
article II, on refraining from the threat or the use
of force, and article IV, relating to the territorial
integrity of States, and to article VIII, relating to
the equal rights and self-determination of
peoples”.
That is how the document begins.
The third page of the document is based on three
basic provisions: the plebiscite, to be conducted by the
people of Nagorny Karabakh to determine their own
status; the elimination of all consequences of the
conflict, including return of all refugees and territories;
and, last but not least, the security provisions to
guarantee full implementation of the agreement. Those
fundamental principles have been agreed upon, and it
is only the details and the modalities that still need to
be negotiated.
What is clear is that there is a process that
acknowledges that the final resolution must be arrived

9

A/62/PV.86

at by agreement of all sides, and not by an arbitrary
resolution that simply represents the desires of a single
side.

Against:
Angola, Armenia, France, India, Russian
Federation, United States of America, Vanuatu.

I would also like to make some comments on the
statement delivered by the representative of the
Ukraine. I did not understand whether Kosovo has
anything to do with this resolution. Armenia is
intrigued by Kosovo, we have an interest in it, and
Kosovo has demonstrated that the principle of selfdetermination is still valid in the twenty-first century.
But I want to assure all the Member States of this
Organization that Armenia has never exploited the case
of Kosovo as a precedent. Furthermore, we have made
it clear that we are ready to work on a document that
would stipulate that each conflict is different, that each
conflict requires separate consideration and resolution,
and that in the end Armenia is not looking to Kosovo
as a precedent.

Abstaining:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Australia,
Austria,
Bahamas,
Barbados, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina,
Botswana,
Brazil,
Bulgaria,
Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Congo, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Finland,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Saint Lucia, Samoa,
San Marino, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Zambia.

This draft resolution is a wasted attempt to
predetermine the outcome of the peace talks. That is
not how responsible members of the international
community are expected to conduct the difficult but
rewarding mission of bringing peace and stability to
our peoples, our regions and our world.
The Co-Chairs — the fair-minded and responsible
mediators in this conflict — have found that this
resolution does not help the peace talks. I ask the
Assembly not to support Armenia, but to follow their
lead. I ask that members not support this resolution.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item. The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/62/L.42, entitled “The
situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Colombia,
Comoros, Djibouti, Gambia, Georgia, Indonesia,
Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malaysia,
Maldives,
Moldova,
Morocco,
Myanmar, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Somalia, Sudan, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan,
Yemen.

10

Draft resolution A/62/L.42 was adopted by 39
votes to 7, with 100 abstentions (resolution
62/243).
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Islamic
Republic of Iran advised the Secretariat that it
had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: Before giving the floor to the
speakers in explanation of vote after the vote, I remind
delegations that explanation of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): My delegation has
voted for the draft resolution on the situation in the
occupied territories of Azerbaijan, A/62/L.42. We did
so on the ground that the draft resolution reaffirms the
principles and objectives of the United Nations Charter
in addressing the conflict in and around Nagorno

08-27294

A/62/PV.86

Karabakh. It supports peaceful settlement of the
conflict and underlines the principles of respect for
territorial integrity and the inviolability of the
internationally recognized borders of Member States.
It is our sincere hope that the adoption of this
resolution will contribute to supporting and
intensifying efforts to achieve a peaceful and lasting
settlement of the conflict, one acceptable to both sides
and in accordance with the norms and principles of
international law.
In that regard, we continue to support the
international mediation efforts in the framework of the
OSCE Minsk Group, as well as bilateral consultations
held between the parties. We urge both parties to
remove obstacles to the peace process.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We abstained on this
resolution because South Africa supports the efforts of
the OSCE Minsk Group towards the settlement of the
dispute between Azerbaijan and Armenia, specifically
the Basic Principles for the Peaceful Settlement of the
Nagorno Karabakh Conflict.
As a member of the United Nations, the
Non-Aligned Movement and the African Union, South
Africa affirms the territorial integrity of all States.
My delegation has taken note with concern of the
latest developments in the region, specifically the
outbreak of violence between the two sides on 4 March
2008. We urge the parties to return to negotiations
based on the norms and principles of international law.
Mr. Belkheir (Libya Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): Everyone knows that the draft resolution fully
supports the concept of national sovereignty and
territorial integrity, which compels us to support
countries that are partially or wholly under the yoke of
occupation and to stand fully on the side of supporting
the right of refugees to return. This position is but an
expression of my country’s principled position in
support of the basic principles of justice.
We had hoped that the parties concerned could
have arrived at an agreement and established relations
based on the principle of good-neighbourliness, so as
to achieve prosperity and development. However, after
the international community was asked to pronounce
itself on this item, we supported the precedents of
international law and the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.

08-27294

My country calls on all parties to respect the will
of the international community and the principles of
national sovereignty, territorial integrity and the
protection of civilians — regardless of the results of
the vote on the resolution. We also call on the two
parties to overcome all obstacles and challenges
through direct negotiations, as well as to respect the
principles of international law and humanitarian norms.
The President: We have thus heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
A representative has requested the floor in
exercise of the right of reply. May I remind members
that statements in the exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to
five minutes for the second intervention, and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Azerbaijan.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): In exercising my
right of reply, I would like to state the following.
I would like to emphasize the utmost importance
of the resolution that the General Assembly has
adopted despite the efforts of some Member States.
The resolution demonstrates that the international
community firmly stands for a settlement of the
conflict on the basis of the territorial integrity of
Azerbaijan. The resolution is timely and constructive,
as it stands for a balance based on the norms and
principles of international law. It provides the
population of the Nagorno-Karabakh region with the
possibility of self-rule within the territorial integrity of
the State of which it is a part. It reaffirms the rights of
the displaced population to return to their places of
origin. It demands the withdrawal of occupying forces
from all occupied territories of Azerbaijan. It supports
the mediation efforts carried out on the basis of the
norms and principles of international law.
The resolution makes it clear for Armenia and
those behind it that the settlement of the conflict can be
achieved only on the basis of the territorial integrity of
the Republic of Azerbaijan. Until the Armenian side
realizes that, a settlement cannot be achieved. The
Armenian side and those who support it must
understand that negotiations may be continued only on
the basis of the norms and principles of international
law.

11

A/62/PV.86

The resolution provides a clear perspective to
define the status of the Nagorno-Karabakh region at the
level envisaged by international law, namely, at the
level of self-governance within the territorial integrity
of the State. It also indicated unambiguously that that
required the return of the displaced Azerbaijani
population to the Nagorno-Karabakh region.
As long as Armenia continues to dictate its will
based on a fait accompli and tries to wrest NagornoKarabakh from Azerbaijan based on the result of the
ethnic cleansing of the Azerbaijani population, it will
not achieve peace with Azerbaijan. The status of the
Nagorno-Karabakh region cannot be the subject of
negotiations on the basis of a fait accompli. Status shall
be defined only through a legal and democratic
process, with the participation of the entire population
of the region within Azerbaijan. That requires the
creation of objective conditions, such as freeing all
territories under occupation, their rehabilitation and the
return of populations forcibly expelled from their
places of origin.
We are surprised and express our deep resentment
about the position taken by the Co-Chair countries,
which voted against the resolution, as the text was
carefully drafted on the basis of the concept of the
settlement they have repeatedly encouraged us to

pursue. The Co-Chairs referred to the draft paper on
the basic principles prepared by them, which allegedly
constitutes the basis for the settlement. Azerbaijan
must say that that draft contains largely disagreements
and unsettled issues, rather than clarity. Those priority
issues are of the utmost importance.
We took note of the Co-Chairs’ support for the
territorial integrity of Azerbaijan. We would like to
believe that they will adhere to their statement. We also
express the hope that the Co-Chairs, in working on the
draft on basic principles, will take due note of the
position of the international community as expressed in
the resolution that has just been adopted and prescribed
by international law, which should serve as the basis
for their activities.
We would like to stress that Azerbaijan will
continue to be guided, in working on the draft of basic
principles, by the principles set out in the resolution
that has just been adopted.
We would like to express our gratitude to those
countries that voted in favour of our resolution and
demonstrated principled and friendly support for
Azerbaijan. We will never forget that.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
20.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

12

08-27294
