S/2016/350

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 April 2016
Original: English

Letter dated 12 April 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 2245 (2015), and
specifically to its paragraph 14, in which the Council welcomed the intention of
Member States to provide uniformed personnel, as well as government -provided
personnel, to the United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS) in support of
the delivery of its mandated tasks and looked forward to further details on their
deployment.
Further to that resolution, the Government of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland has approached the Secretariat and made known its
readiness to deploy a national contingent of up to 70 military personnel to support
UNSOS. The contingent will consist of military engineers, military medical trainers,
staff officers, military information analysts, combat vehicle engineers and
logisticians with expertise in ammunition and vehicle management. They will
strengthen the delivery by UNSOS of its mandate to support the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the United Nations Assistance Miss ion in Somalia
and the Somali national army on joint operations with AMISOM.
The contingent will deploy in three phases. Eight personnel will deploy in
April 2016, a further 35 between August and November 2016 and a final additional
25 personnel at a subsequent date to be confirmed on the basis of the evolution of
needs on the ground.
During the first phase, the contingent will be based at and operate within
Mogadishu International Airport. During the second phase, a small number of
technical experts will be temporarily deployed to Kismaayo and Baidoa to deliver
training in combat engineering capabilities. In the third phase, the same temporary
deployment arrangements are envisaged to apply in other sectors, depending on the
evolving security situation.
The contingent will be largely self-sustained and the contribution of personnel,
equipment and services will be formalized under a standard memorandum of
understanding with troop-contributing countries. The members of the contingent
will carry personal weapons for the purposes of self-defence only.
The contingent will form part of UNSOS and operate under the authority of
the head of UNSOS who, in turn, reports to my Special Representative for Somalia
and, through him, to the Security Council, in accordanc e with Council resolution
2245 (2015).

16-06264 (E)

180416

*1606264*

S/2016/350

The Government of Somalia has, through a letter from its President dated
7 April 2016, expressed its consent to the deployment of the contingent in support
of UNSOS.
The agreement between the United Nations and the host Government
concerning the status of UNSOM applies mutatis mutandis to UNSOS. It will be
necessary to negotiate and conclude a protocol of amendment to that agreement in
order to extend the necessary legal protection to the members of the contingent an d
to the United Kingdom as the contributing State.
Pending the conclusion and entry into force of that protocol, it is to be
understood that the provisions of the United Nations model status -of-forces
agreement (A/45/594, annex) that apply to, and in respect of, the military personnel
of national contingents assigned to the military component of a United Nations
operation and to the property, funds and assets of the States contributing those
contingents shall apply provisionally to, and in respect of, the military personnel of
the contingent of the United Kingdom and to the property, funds and assets of the
United Kingdom as the State contributing the contingent.
I wish to take this opportunity to express my appre ciation for the contribution
provided by the United Kingdom to the United Nations in this regard.
I should be grateful if you would confirm that the above arrangements are
acceptable to the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2/2

16-06264
