300

Genentl Assembly- Fortietb Session

organizations demonstrated through accountable management practices,
l. Welcomes the continuing efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to improve the status of women in the Secretariat
and, in particular, the action programme and work plans
set out in the report of the Secretary-General on the
improvement of the status of women in the Secretariat, 75
and his providing ali necessary assistance for the effective
carrying out of ali these tasks;
2. Takes note of the Secretary-General's decision to
reappoint during the biennium 1986-1987, on a temporary
basis, a Co-ordinator for the Improvement of the Status of
Women in the Secretariat of the United Nations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary
measures to increase the number of women in posts subject to geographical distribution with a view to achieving,
to the extent possible, an overall participation rate of 30
per cent of the total by 1990, without prejudice to the principie of equitable geographical distribution of posts;
4. Reiterates that the functions of the Co-ordinator
should not duplicate those ofthe Office of Personnel Services and stresses that the latter Office shall continue to
exercise overall responsibility and implement ali directives
of the General Assembly and policies of the SecretaryGeneral on personnel matters, including the implementation of ali policies on the improvement of the status of
women in the Secretariat, in particular the action programme and work plans set out in the report of the Secretary-General; 75
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session on the progress
made in implementing the action programme and relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly;
6. Reiterates its request to Member States to continue
to support the efforts of the United Nations and the specialized agencies and related organizations to increase the
proportion of women in the Professional category and
above by, ínter alía, nominating more women candidates.
122nd plenary meeting
18 December 1985

e
RESPECT FOR THE PRIVILEGES ANO IMMUNITIES OF
OFFICIALS OF THE UNITEO NATIONS ANO THE SPECIALIZEO AGENCIES ANO RELATEO ORGANIZA TIONS

The General Assembly,
Recalling Articles 100 and 105 of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions, in particular resolution 39/244 of 18 December 1984,
Reiterating the obligation of the staff in the conduct of
their duties to observe fully the laws and regulations of
Member States,
l. Takes note with concern of the report submitted to
the General Assembly by the Secretary-General on behalf
of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination; 76
2. Deplores the increasing number of cases involving
the abduction and detention of United Nations officials,
75 A/C.S/40/30, sects. lll.B and IV.
76 A/C.5/40/25.
11 Oflicia/ Records of rhe General Assembly. Fortierh Session. Supp/emenr
No. 34(A/40/34).

experts and military personnel by armed groups and individuals;
3. Ca/Is upon ali Member States that currently have
United Nations officials under arrest or detention to
review these cases and to co-ordinate efforts with the Secretary-General to resolve each case with ali due speed;
4. Ca/Is upon the staff of the United Nations and the
specialized agencies and related organizations to comply
with the obligations resulting from the Staff Regulations
and Rules of the United Nations, in particular regulation
1.8, and from the equivalent provisions governing the staff
of the other agencies;
5. Ca/Is upon the Secretary-General, as chief administrative officer of the United Nations, to continue personally to act as the focal point in promoting and ensuring the
observance of the privileges and immunities of officials of
the United Nations and the specialized agencies and
related organizations, and to take ali necessary measures to
implement the mandates of the General Assembly as
reflected in paragraphs 7 and 8 of resolution 39/244.
J22nd p/enary meeting

/8 December 1985

40/259. Joint Inspection Unit
The General Assembly,
Taking noteofthe report ofthe Joint Inspection Unit on
its activities during the period 1 July 1984 to 30 June
1985, 77 the work programme of the Unit for 1985 78 and
the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the recommendations of the Unit, 7Q
Reca/ling its resolution 39/242 of 18 December 1984,
Convinced that the reports presented by the Joint
Inspection Unit should receive adequate attention,
Reca/lingfurther the role of the Joint Inspection Unit as
contained in article 5 of its statute, 80
l. Emphasizes that, in carrying out its function, the
Joint Inspection Unit shall fully respect the mandates, resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly and of the
legislative organs of the other participating organizations;
2. Requests the Joint Inspection Unit, in accordance
with its statute, to include in its reports on organizations,
whenever appropriate, an evaluation of the programrnes
and activities of the organizations;
3. Requests the Joint Inspection Unit, in presenting its
reports, to observe the established procedures as provided
for in article 11. paragraph 2, of its statute;
4. Decides that each report submitted by the Joint
Inspection Unit during the year, along with the comments
of the Secretary-General, will be considered under the
appropriate agenda ítem of the General Assembly;
5. Invites United Nations organs, after considering
reports of the Joint Inspection Unit and the related comments of the Secretary-General, to submit to the General
Assembly the results of their review;
6. Invites the Joint Inspection Unit to evaluate the
results of its activities and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its forty-second session.
122nd plenarv meeting
/8 Decemher 1985
78 A/40/137.

79 A/40/655 and Corr. l.
~ºResolution 31/192, anneA.
