S/PV.8842

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8842nd meeting

Wednesday, 25 August 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Tirumurti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Lipand
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Estigneeva
Ms. Prince
Mr. Ladeb
Ms. Farrey
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Thirty-first report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of paragraph 4
of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2021/689)
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2576 (2021) (S/2021/700)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-23393 (E)
*2123393*

S/PV.8842

The situation concerning Iraq

If you, Mr. President, allow me, I will dedicate most
of today’s briefing to Iraq’s all-important elections on
10 October. The clock is ticking, with 46 days left until
Iraq goes to the polls.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

I would like to start by emphasizing that the
Independent High Electoral Commission (IHEC)
is working diligently towards election day, in line
with the electoral law and in accordance with the
pre-approved timelines.

The situation concerning Iraq
Thirty-first report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of paragraph 4 of
Security Council resolution 2107 (2013)
(S/2021/689)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution
2576 (2021) (S/2021/700)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/689, which contains the thirtyfirst report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013),
and document S/2021/700, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2576 (2020).
I now give the floor to Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert.
Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert: To be back in the Security
Council Chamber, after one and half years, feels, I
must admit, like a particular privilege and honour. I
truly hope that this progressive return to normalcy, or
something approaching it, will soon be within reach
for all.
However, for the time being, we must be
realistic — the pandemic is far from over, taking its
daily toll of cases, including in Iraq, and claiming
even more lives when tragedy strikes, as it did with
yet another devastating fire in the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) ward of a hospital in Nasiriyah last month.
2/19

25/08/2021

In recent months, the IHEC has reached several
complex milestones. The United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) has, of course, provided,
and continues to provide, technical assistance wherever
it can. It is worth noting that five times as many United
Nations personnel are currently engaged as were in the
2018 elections.
As the Council may have gleaned from our monthly
public reports, candidate lists have been finalized; a
ballot lottery was conducted for all 83 constituencies;
ballot printing is ongoing, with all ballot papers
expected in country by mid-September; the polling
and
results-management
information-technology
(IT) systems are being reviewed by an independent
audit firm; two out of the three planned polling day
simulations have been conducted, with the most recent
simulation, open to political parties and the media,
on 23 August and the final simulation scheduled for
September; the recruitment of polling staff is ongoing,
and the training of electoral staff has also begun; and
the IHEC’s outreach strategy was launched on 6 June
and covers key thematic areas, including the new
electoral system, the role of the IHEC, the distribution
of biometric cards, the counting process and the
announcement of results and integrity measures, as
well as specific awareness messages targeting, inter
alia, women, youth, people with disabilities, internally
displaced persons and returnees.
I wish to commend the IHEC not only for its
dedication but also for its transformation. Iraq’s
authorities and parties would do well to publicly
acknowledge the IHEC’s achievements so far, and the
same goes for its independence. Casting doubt about
the IHEC’s ability to operate risks further eroding
voter confidence.
In parallel, preparations for United Nations
monitoring are moving rapidly. Most members of the
preparatory team have been contracted and are being
deployed to Baghdad as we speak. They will soon
21-23393

25/08/2021

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV. 8842

be followed by the regional teams, expected to be
on the ground in the first week of September. Those
regional teams will pave the way for the arrival of
short-term experts.

but accepted perceptions. Regrettably, misinformation
about IHEC, protesters, Government officials, political
rivals and even the United Nations is abundant and
wide-ranging.

Concurrently, and in line with its renewed mandate,
UNAMI is stepping up its strategic communication
efforts aimed at informing the Iraqi voters about election
preparations and related United Nations activities,
sharing facts and figures, tackling misinformation and
managing public expectations.

UNAMI is working tirelessly to provide IHEC and
others with considerable technical support, spending
millions of taxpayers’ money for additional experts
on the ground. And yet some have taken it upon
themselves to baselessly claim that we were somehow
calling for a postponement of these elections, which is,
frankly, absurd. So let me be clear — if misinformation
overtakes reality, it is not only an enormous energy
drain for those working hard for the greater good of
Iraq, it is also risky business.

We are often asked if the October elections will be
different from the elections in 2018. That is a sensible
question, as the lack of trust in the public authorities
and institutions is long-standing and widespread.
In response, I can only point to the facts. The
fact is that the IHEC is applying lessons learned from
previous elections. The fact is that significant changes
to improve the electoral processes and preparations for
election day are being made, including an independent
IT audit, new voter verification devices, numerous
measures to tackle the misuse of electronic voting cards
and displaying election results in real-time during
transmission, tabulation and announcement. In other
words, the October elections clearly have the potential
to be different from the elections in 2018.
However, successful elections are not and cannot
be the sole responsibility of IHEC. We therefore
consistently call on all stakeholders, including
Government officials, parties, candidates, political
forces, civil-society organizations, media outlets and
voters, to commit to transparent and credible elections
in words and in deeds.
Not surprisingly, fear of electoral fraud is being
expressed by many, including Iraqi citizens and
political parties. Looking back on past events, that
fear is well understood. At the same time, it is fair to
emphasize that it is the political parties themselves
that can make or break these elections. No matter how
many technical measures are put in place, it is up to
them, collectively, to refrain from any attempt to force
or distort election results. It is up to them to stop the
buying of loyalties, voter suppression and/or other
intentional, illegal actions. It is they who must lead
by example, collectively. One bad actor can ruin it for
everyone else.
Another issue is the fact that misinformation — and
even conspiracy theories — continue to create false

I therefore call, yet again, on all stakeholders
to stick to the facts, to focus on their own roles and
responsibilities and to refrain from using the United
Nations as a scapegoat. Truth, discipline and courage
are required at this critical juncture. I would also like
to call on all media outlets to provide accurate, reliable
and timely information to the Iraqi people, instead of
fuelling false perceptions to suit their backers.
It is high time to recognize that Iraq leads and owns
the October elections. It is high time to stop blaming
others for things of one’s own doing. And it is high time
to acknowledge that the credibility of these October
elections will prove essential for Iraq’s future.
Of course, elections are not an ultimate objective
in and of themselves. They are a means to an
end — improved governance to build a safer, more
prosperous and just Iraq. And while the world is
watching, I can only emphasize that the responsibility
for the success of the upcoming elections rests with the
Iraqi stakeholders and authorities. The same is true for
the responsibility for what comes next: the formation
of a new Government that is able — swiftly and
effectively — to address Iraq’s long list of unfinished
domestic business.
I would like to say a few words on the calls for a
boycott or postponement of the elections. The reasons
for such calls vary from everyday Iraqis expressing their
disillusionment, lack of trust, anger and loss of hope to
apparent acts of political manoeuvring. However, to be
frank, a boycott is not an effective strategy, nor will
it solve anything. On the contrary, a vote not cast is,
in fact, a gift to the opposition. Hence, it is important
for voters and politicians alike to return to the process.
Also and importantly, Iraq needs to move beyond the

21-233933/19

S/PV.8842

The situation concerning Iraq

elections to go, hopefully, from a prolonged political
standstill to dynamic and responsive governance.
Now, to the Iraqis calling for a boycott because of
their disillusionment, I would like to say that the Iraqi
people are not a homogeneous and uniform group. Iraq
is a diverse society, home to a vast array of peoples,
languages and religions. Visions and opinions differ.
That means that the outcome of the elections might
not be what some are hoping for. It might even provide
legitimacy to a Government that would not be one’s
personal preference.
But one thing is certain — by not voting, one places
oneself outside the electoral process. Events that affect
everyone would only be shaped by others. As I said,
whoever does not cast a vote is gifting their silence to
those they may disagree with.
There is no denying it — a sense of realism and
pragmatism is important because these elections will
not lead to immediate miracles. No elections can.
Plainly speaking, Iraq is desperately in need of deep,
structural reforms. And such reforms take unwavering
determination, immense patience and lots of time.
It has to be said, democracy — for all its
rewards — can be, in many ways, painstaking business.
Balancing diverse interests and opinions always
requires compromise. And the truth is that sustainable
democratic societies across the world are often the
opposite of overnight wonders; they require immense
patience to build and constant efforts to maintain.
Do not get me wrong — after the many years of
hoping, demanding and protesting, impatience is, of
course, very understandable. Pain, disillusionment
and frustration about a lack of economic, social and
political prospects are very well understood. But in
a democracy, one makes one’s voice heard not only
through public protests but also, and critically, at the
ballot box. I say to the Iraqis, “This is your country,
your vote. Stand up and be counted”.
To the authorities, civil servants, officials,
political forces, parties and candidates, my message
is to not let the Iraqi people down. Service to the
citizens — whatever their background, belief, religion,
opinion or conviction — should be their first priority.
The focus must be on solutions that represent the
interests of all people. Solutions that only speak to
the majority or a particular group are untenable in the
long run.
4/19

25/08/2021

Moreover, actions speak louder than words. Beautiful
declarations and speeches abound, but at the end of the
day it is all about getting things done — combating
pervasive corruption, tackling negligence, fighting
incompetence, leaving aside narrow partisan interests,
overcoming factionalism and muhasasa, not allowing
the pillaging of State institutions.
I ask them to proceed at once with desperately
needed reforms, to diversify the economy to decrease
Iraq’s vulnerability to commodity price swings, to
move away from constant crisis management and ad hoc
deals. Instead, they must implement what they agreed
upon and work towards a predictable modus operandi.
They must halt the intimidation, aggression, abductions
and assassinations, end impunity, understand that
accountability is the key to restoring public trust and
act upon it. The Iraqi people have a right to know.
I ask these leaders to work on Iraq’s domestic
resilience, to not fall prey to external power competitions,
to rein in armed groups that continue to operate outside
State control, be they foreign or domestic, to assert the
sovereignty and authority of the State, to acknowledge
that political inaction comes at a very high price that the
Iraqi people ultimately pay, to recognize that empty or
broken promises only further erode public trust and to
be wary of the fact that simmering anger easily swells.
All this to say that the stakes are immensely high. I
hope that history will not repeat itself.
Before closing, I would like to give a progress
report on the issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-country
nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the
national archives. Since my most recent briefing (see
S/2021/474), the State of Kuwait conclusively identified
the remains of a further 10 individuals from its list
of persons missing since 1991. After 30 long years, a
total of 30 cases of missing persons have been formally
closed since November 2020, and I sincerely hope
that that important step will bring some closure to the
families of the missing.
Additionally, I would like to express my hope that
an improvement in the COVID-19 situation and the
subsequent easing of related restrictions will soon allow
the resumption of field missions and explorations of
potential burial sites to achieve further positive results.
In closing, let me underline that, with the election
date rapidly approaching, Iraq will have our support
every step of the way. These elections were hard earned,
21-23393

25/08/2021

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV. 8842

and I can only emphasize the importance of credible
elections for the future of Iraq’s young democracy.

its territorial integrity and ensure the enduring defeat
of ISIS.

The President: I thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert for
her briefing.

UNAMI’s crucial work factored into nearly every
significant meeting during the Government of Iraq’s
trip to Washington. In particular, President Biden
lauded the Iraqi Government’s efforts to prepare for
free and fair elections on 10 October, and he praised
UNAMI’s electoral assistance and the European Union
Election Observer Mission as good-faith efforts by
the international community to meet Iraqi demands
for such support. The United States announced the
$5.2 million grant to the UNAMI election monitoring
team, which follows a previous $9.7 million United
States commitment. This demonstrates that we have
complete confidence in UNAMI, in its impartiality,
expertise and earnest commitment to a better future
for Iraqis.

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Representative HennisPlasschaert for her very frank and informative briefing.
We again thank her and the entire team of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for
their dedicated and indispensable work helping forge a
future for the Iraqi people.
Last month, President Biden hosted Prime Minister
Al-Kadhimi in the Oval Office and reaffirmed the United
States commitment to a strong, stable, democratic and
prosperous Iraq. Shortly before that, Secretary Blinken
hosted the United States-Iraq strategic dialogue at the
State Department, which successfully ushered in a
new chapter of this vital partnership. To ensure a longterm, sustainable and strategic partnership, we are
broadening the aperture of our relationship to span the
full spectrum of bilateral issues, including economic
development, climate adaptation, public health and
human rights. This is the assistance Iraqis tell us that
they want, and we know we are uniquely positioned
to help.
With this renewed commitment, the United States
announced a donation of over 500,000 Pfizer BioNTech
vaccine doses, which have since been delivered to
Iraq, and an additional $155 million in humanitarian
assistance. The United States and Iraqi delegations
mutually decided that the security relationship will
fully transition to a training, advising, assisting and
intelligence-sharing role. There will be no United States
forces with a combat role in Iraq by 31 December 2021.
Make no mistake: as the Iraqi Government itself
made clear, the mission to defeat the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS) is still ongoing, but it is shifting to
a new phase. The United States, its coalition partners
and those in NATO Mission Iraq — all present in the
country at the Iraqi Government’s invitation — remain
resolute and will continue to train, advise and enable
the Iraqi security forces in the fight against terrorism
and build their capacity to address future threats. The
United States will continue to respect Iraq’s sovereignty
and laws, providing the resources Iraq needs to preserve

And I would like to extend our deep and sincere
gratitude to our partners and allies for joining us in
funding the election monitoring team so soon after
making voluntary contributions to UNAMI’s equally
important technical electoral assistance mission — the
largest in the world of its kind. UNAMI’s electoral
advisers have worked diligently to train the Independent
High Electoral Commission to enable free and fair
elections. The Secretary-General’s latest report on
UNAMI (S/2021/700) outlines the phased deployment of
130 election monitors in advance of and on election day.
We welcome this prompt deployment pursuant to
resolution 2576 (2021) and note the need to maximize
the number of United Nations personnel on the ground
in advance of the election. Further, we reiterate our
appeals to the Government of Iraq to take all measures
to protect the UNAMI election monitoring team, EU
observers, domestic monitors and all other individuals
deploying throughout the country to deter election
fraud and contribute to the integrity and transparency
of the election process.
Finally, we need judicial accountability for the
militia killings of civil society actors. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and her team
have worked tirelessly on this front. We again call on
Iraq to bring to justice the killers of innocent reformers
and redouble its efforts to create a safe electoral
environment for candidates and voters. Ehab Al-Wazni,
Hisham Al-Hashimi and countless other activists,
journalists and protesters deserve justice.

21-233935/19

S/PV.8842

The situation concerning Iraq

To this end, we applaud UNAMI’s work
documenting human rights abuses and violations
and laying the groundwork for proper accountability.
Together, let us hold perpetrators accountable, support
free and fair elections in Iraq and prepare for the new
phase of the campaign to defeat ISIS in Iraq, led by Iraq
and its people.

25/08/2021

Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing. I also
welcome the representative of Iraq to today’s meeting.

experienced in recent years, the transnational threat of
terrorism remains present in the country with the recent
terrorist attacks in Baghdad. The Niger reiterates that
we must not lose sight of the fact that victory over the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is not synonymous
with its total eradication in this region of the world.
That is why we call on the Iraqi authorities and the
Global Coalition to Defeat Da’esh to remain vigilant
and to continue the fight against terrorism, in order to
thwart the dark motives of those evil forces.

Iraq has suffered enormously from wars, and its
people are longing for a stable and prosperous life. We
commend the Iraqi Government for its determination
and efforts to address the many crises facing the
country, in particular the socioeconomic and security
challenges, and to bring about the Government’s
anti-corruption reform.

Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert, for her
detailed briefing and acknowledge and appreciate her
dedicated work for the benefit of the Iraqi people. I
also welcome the presence of the delegation of Iraq at
today’s meeting.

The Iraqi authorities’ efforts to develop peaceful
relations with their neighbours and to expand their
partnership regionally and globally are praiseworthy.
As indicated in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2021/700), international cooperation remains
essential to address the many challenges Iraq is facing.

First of all, on behalf of Mexico, I extend our
condolences to the families of the victims of the 19 July
attack. My country condemns all acts of violence and
calls for the perpetrators to be identified and brought
to justice.

With regard to the protection of human rights,
my delegation deplores the obstruction of the exercise
of fundamental rights and reiterates its call to the
Government of Iraq to protect and guarantee the rights
of peaceful protestors, civil society activists and human
rights defenders.
With regard to the electoral process, we reiterate
our support to the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) in assisting the Iraqi Government
and the Independent High Electoral Commission in the
preparations under way for the upcoming elections, with
a view to ensuring free and fair elections that include
all Iraqi social strata. My delegation also reiterates
its call on the international community to provide the
necessary support to the Iraqi Government with respect
to these elections.
With regard to missing persons, property and
archives from Kuwait and other third countries, my
delegation commends the Governments of Iraq and
Kuwait for the notable progress that they have made,
and we urge them to continue in that direction in order
to provide closure for the families of the missing.
In conclusion, it is regrettable that, at a time when
Iraq is trying to overcome the severe crisis that it has
6/19

With regard to the situation in Iraq and the
upcoming general elections, I will focus my remarks on
the following points:
First, we welcome the efforts of the Government
of Iraq, the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) and the United Nations Development
Programme to continue preparations for the elections.
The holding of regular, free, inclusive and transparent
elections is unquestionably a fundamental pillar in
the building of any democratic State. We commend
the support of the international community, not only
through funding for UNAMI but also through the
deployment of electoral monitoring missions.
Similarly,
Mexico
acknowledges
women’s
increasing participation with regard to the upcoming
elections, and we urge that the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women at all levels of decision-making
in Iraqi political, economic and social life continue to
be ensured.
Secondly, Mexico commends the progress
made in institutional capacity-building such as the
implementation of economic reforms and, above all,
the fight against corruption and the promotion of
accountability measures.
21-23393

25/08/2021

The situation concerning Iraq

Thirdly, we note with deep concern that incidents
of repression against demonstrators continue.
Investigations of such incidents and the Prime
Minister’s stated support for peaceful demonstrations
are encouraging signs. However, we urge the
Government of Iraq to protect the right to freedom of
expression and freedom of association. My country also
condemns forced disappearances and the harassment
of journalists and human rights activists, and we urge
stepping up the fight against impunity.
Fourthly, my country firmly condemns the attacks
carried out by the Islamic State on Iraqi territory,
particularly those targeting civilians and diplomatic
sites. While we encourage regional cooperation in the
fight against terrorism, we urge the Government of
Baghdad to redouble its efforts to promote a safe and
intimidation-free environment during the upcoming
elections, especially in view of the deployment
of thousands of electoral officials and monitoring
missions, as well as the protection of candidates.
Lastly, the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons must take place in a safe, dignified,
voluntary and orderly manner. The repatriation of 93
Iraqi families, including 245 minors, who were in the
Al-Hol camp in Syria is certainly an encouraging sign.
We hope that those families will be fully reintegrated
in their places of origin. In echoing the call of the
Secretary-General, we urge other Member States to
follow in Iraq’s footsteps and facilitate the return of
their citizens currently in Al-Hol.
In conclusion, Mexico commends the progress
made in the return of the remains of Kuwaiti and thirdcountry nationals thanks to the assistance of UNAMI
and the International Committee of the Red Cross. My
delegation commends Iraq’s active diplomatic efforts to
promote security and stability in the region.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank Ms. Jeanine HennisPlasschaert, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), for her comprehensive
briefing. I also welcome the representative of Iraq to
our meeting today.
We commend the efforts made by the Iraqi
Government in preparing for the upcoming October
elections. We join the international community in
supporting the Iraqi people to hold free and fair
elections. We appreciate UNAMI and international
organizations and partners for their strong commitment

S/PV. 8842

to assisting Iraq in the elections, as well as tackling the
multiple challenges currently facing the country.
We welcome all delegations of international
observers deployed in Iraq at the invitation of the host
country, and we stress the need to ensure security for
the electoral process. Violence and threats against
candidates and those engaged in the elections could
jeopardize the credibility and legitimacy of any
institution to be formed through elections. Therefore,
we call on all relevant parties in Iraq to take the
necessary steps to duly tackle the security concerns in
the lead-up to the elections.
We are encouraged by the efforts made by the
Iraqi Government in reaching out to regional and
international partners that can help the country move
forward on all fronts. We support the strengthening
of cooperation between Iraq and the countries of the
region in dealing with common challenges. At the
same time, regional and international partners should
support the promotion of security and stability in Iraq
through cooperation and dialogue. Transborder threats
should be addressed with full respect for the territorial
sovereignty of the countries concerned.
Turning to humanitarian issues, we welcome
progress on the issue of returning internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and continue to call on the relevant Iraqi
authorities and international partners to strengthen
their efforts to ensure the safe, voluntary, dignified
and sustainable return or settlement of IDPs, and
avoid a crisis of secondary displacement. We also take
note of the reported limitations and obstacles related
to accessing humanitarian aid in Iraq. We call on the
relevant authorities to tackle this issue and ensure the
safety of international and local aid workers.
Last week marked the eighteenth anniversary of
the bombing of the United Nations headquarters in
Bagdad, which killed 22 humanitarian workers. We
take this opportunity to call on the Iraqi Government
and every Government in the world to spare no effort in
protecting aid workers from violence and threats.
We commend the strengthened cooperation
between the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait in the
search for missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals
and the return of Kuwaiti property. We welcomed the
recent DNA identification of missing Kuwaiti citizens.
The continued efforts and commitments made by the
Government of Iraq in that regard are very encouraging.
At the same time, we value the assistance of UNAMI

21-233937/19

S/PV.8842

The situation concerning Iraq

25/08/2021

and the International Committee of the Red Cross
to national authorities to uphold their obligations in
accordance with resolution 2107 (2013).

religious problems will make it possible to effectively
leverage the country’s economic potential for the
benefit of the entire Iraqi nation.

Lastly, we would like to reaffirm Viet Nam’s support
for UNAMI and the relevant United Nations agencies
in assisting Iraq to maintain stability and security, as
well as providing humanitarian assistance to people
affected by conflict, poverty and the coronavirus
disease pandemic.

In turn, the international community should
support Baghdad in developing comprehensive
measures aimed at rebuilding the socioeconomic and
humanitarian sectors, especially in the context of the
coronavirus disease pandemic. The country also needs
to reconstruct the areas affected by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant.

Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert,
for her briefing on the situation in Iraq. We also
welcome the presence of the representative of Iraq at
today’s meeting.
We are closely following the changes taking place
in the friendly country of Iraq, where the situation
remains unstable. The precarious socioeconomic
situation is triggering demonstrations among the
people. The situation is aggravated by the sharp decline
in State revenue owing to the fall in global oil prices, as
well as the ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic. In
that regard, we support the efforts of the Government
led by Mustafa Al-Kadhimi to stabilize the situation
in the country, including ensuring security and the
rule of law. At the same time, we understand that over
the years a host of problems have accrued, owing to
obvious reasons, and that they simply cannot be
eliminated overnight. Iraq has had to recover from the
events of 2003 and the subsequent challenging struggle
against terrorists.
We understand that one of the priority tasks for the
Council of Ministers at the current stage is to prepare
for the early parliamentary elections scheduled for
October. We note the progress made in preparations for
the electoral process and trust that the elections will go
ahead as planned. We understand how difficult it will
be for the Iraqi leadership to incorporate the views of
the entire political, social and ethnoreligious spectrum
in the country. At the same time, we are convinced
that such an inclusive dialogue will help to overcome
internal divisions in Iraq.
We commend the continuation of dialogue aimed
at restoring mutual trust and managing existing
differences between Baghdad and Erbil. There is no
doubt that further improvement of relations between
them will help Iraq to strengthen its own security.
Meanwhile, the resolution of accumulated ethnic and
8/19

Baghdad and Kuwait deserve particular support in
efforts aimed at the swift resolution of all outstanding
issues in the Iraq-Kuwait dossier, taking into account
the stable and positive trends observed in that process.
That will serve the interests of strengthening peace,
security and stability in the Middle East.
We welcome Baghdad’s growing role in regional
affairs, including across the Arab region. We believe
that progress towards stability in the region must be
gradual and based on equal cooperation among all
regional and other stakeholders in resolving conflict
situations and developing confidence-building and
monitoring measures, which will ultimately lead to the
establishment of a coherent mechanism for collective
security and cooperation in the subregion. We invite all
countries in the region, including Iraq, to cooperate in
that area, including within the framework of Russia’s
updated collective security concept in the Persian Gulf.
We are concerned by the continued high level of
the terrorist threat. Despite the successes achieved
by Iraqis on the counter-terrorism front, the security
situation in the country remains fragile. That is due, in
part, to the increasing activity of underground terrorist
groups that regularly carry out attacks in various parts
of the country, including through the use of suicide
bombers. That challenge can be effectively countered
only through the broadest possible coordination of
counter-terrorism efforts.
In that regard, we believe that all actors involved
in the fight against terrorism in Iraq must respect the
sovereignty of the Iraqi State and coordinate their
actions with Baghdad. We believe that the presence of
foreign military units in the country is acceptable only
with the consent of the Iraqi authorities or following a
relevant Security Council decision.
We call on all external players interested in
stabilizing the internal situation in Iraq to refrain
21-23393

25/08/2021

The situation concerning Iraq

from unilateral destructive steps that would negatively
impact the situation both within and beyond the country.
Iraq must not become an arena for settling scores and
regional confrontation.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, for
her briefing. The United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) is doing a remarkable job in the service
of the Iraqi people under the leadership of Ms. HennisPlasschaert, who has, of course, France’s full support. I
also welcome the presence of the representative of Iraq
here this morning.
I have three messages to relay today.
My first message is one of support for Iraq as it
reaffirm its vital role in ensuring regional stability
and security. The regional conference to be held in
Baghdad on 28 August, which will be co-chaired by
the Iraqi Prime Minister and President Macron, will be
an opportunity for Iraq to assert itself as a beacon of
stability in the region. France is firmly convinced that
a prosperous and peaceful Middle East is inextricably
linked to a sovereign and stable Iraq. That requires
in particular the Iraqi authorities to exercise effective
control over all armed groups present in the country. It
also means pursuing the fight against Da’esh, as recent
deadly attacks have shown that the terrorist group
continues to be active in Iraq. It is imperative that the
Global Coalition against Da’esh continue to support the
Iraqi authorities by adapting its working methods to
the threat.
My second message concerns the need to respond to
the legitimate demands expressed by the Iraqi people,
particularly since the start of the October 2019 protest
movement. The organization of early elections, which
are scheduled for next October, is very welcome in
that regard. We are pleased that the Council has given
UNAMI broader responsibilities, at the request of the
Iraqi authorities, to support and observe the elections.
By way of a national contribution, France has allocated
€1 million to the financing of those activities. It is
important that the elections have a high participation
rate. It is therefore particularly vital that the climate be
conducive to a peaceful campaign and the security of
candidates, in particular those from the October 2019
movement and civil society, be guaranteed.
Responding to the needs of the population also
means, of course, carrying out the reforms that the

S/PV. 8842

country needs in order to overcome its dependence on
oil, to fight against corruption and to ensure quality
public services, especially in the field of health. It
also means ensuring that the perpetrators of crimes
against demonstrators do not go unpunished, which is,
unfortunately, largely still the case today.
My third message relates to the humanitarian
challenges facing the country, particularly in the context
of the coronavirus disease pandemic. It is crucial that
the United Nations humanitarian response plan be
adequately resourced. With regard to the situation
in Sinjar specifically, it is vital that the security
component of the agreement concerning that area be
effectively implemented in order to allow for the return
of the displaced Yazidi population. More broadly, we
hope that the dialogue between Baghdad and Erbil will
intensify in order to resolve all outstanding issues.
Finally, I would like to address the issue of missing
Kuwaitis, as mentioned by the Special Representative,
as well as missing third-country nationals. Progress
on that front has been made with the identification
of the remains of 10 additional individuals in July.
We look forward to continued cooperation between
Iraq and Kuwait to put an end to the suffering of the
victims’ families.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming France’s
full support for Iraq in the light of all the challenges
it faces.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I wish to thank Special
Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for her very useful
briefing. It is great to see her physically present here in
this Chamber. I also welcome the representative of Iraq
to the Council.
Norway fully supports the ongoing efforts in
preparing for the elections on 10 October and commends
the Independent High Electoral Commission and the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq for the
progress made in that regard. Free, fair and transparent
elections with broad representation and participation,
including of those internally displaced, are vital to the
integrity of the electoral process and the stability of
Iraq. We urge all Iraqi stakeholders to contribute to a
conducive environment for the elections.
Successful elections require safe electoral
environments, free from fear and intimidation, not least
for female candidates and voters. We commend the
June launch of the work plan to promote and monitor

21-233939/19

S/PV.8842

The situation concerning Iraq

women’s electoral participation and encourage its
continued prioritization as the election draws near.
Additionally, the security and protection of all Iraqi
citizens, including their rights to freedom of expression
and peaceful assembly, are essential. Once again, we
condemn the continued targeted attacks against Iraqi
protesters, human rights defenders, activists and
journalists. We reiterate our call on the Iraqi authorities
to end the cycle of impunity by investigating incidents
and holding perpetrators accountable.
The security situation in Iraq continues to be fragile
and volatile. We are concerned by the continued terrorist
activity of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, and
we convey our deepest condolences to the victims and
families following the appalling attack in Baghdad on
19 July. Furthermore, we call for the end of all attacks
against diplomatic facilities and coalition forces.
Nevertheless, we are encouraged by signs of
progress on justice and security issues, and welcome the
passing of the Yazidi Female Survivors Law. It is vital
that the United Nations support the Iraqi Government in
implementing this legislation to ensure accountability,
justice and reparations for the survivors. Furthermore,
we commend the Iraqi Government’s efforts aimed at
promoting cooperation and regional stability, and we
welcome the upcoming Iraqi Neighbouring Countries
Conference in Baghdad. Regional and transnational
threats,
disputes
and
challenges,
including
environmental issues, should be addressed on the basis
of the principle of good neighbourly relations and
respect for the territorial sovereignty of the States in
question. All actors need to uphold their responsibilities
under international humanitarian law to ensure the
protection of civilians.
Turning now to Baghdad-Erbil relations, we are
pleased to see progress on the budget law, and we call
for its expedient implementation. We urge the federal
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government
to further develop their dialogue to resolve outstanding
issues and promote increased cooperation. Similarly,
we encourage broader security cooperation in the
disputed territories and urge the implementation of the
Sinjar Agreement.
I conclude by welcoming the progress made on
the Iraq-Kuwait file and the recent identification of
the remains of another 10 missing individuals. We
commend the cooperation between Iraq and Kuwait in
bringing that humanitarian file to a close.
10/19

25/08/2021

Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I would like to start by
thanking Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert
for her thorough briefing. We would like to express
our full support to the efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). I also welcome
the representative of Iraq to today’s meeting.
Estonia appreciates the continued commitment
of the Government of Iraq to holding free and fair
parliamentary elections in October and welcomes the
progress in electoral preparations. We call upon all
Iraqi stakeholders to contribute to an environment
conducive to holding inclusive, credible and
participatory elections, which are a crucial element in
the path towards stability and restored public trust in
the political system. The importance of public trust was
well highlighted by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in her briefing.
Estonia welcomes the launching of the workplan
of the higher committee to promote and monitor
women’s electoral participation and urges the Iraqi
Government to ensure the full and equal participation
of women in the elections. We also express our support
for the Government’s commitment to implementing
economic reforms, fighting corruption and ensuring
State control over all armed forces, in order to respond
to the legitimate calls of Iraqis for improving the
socioeconomic situation, governance and long-term
stability of the country. In the context of continued
attacks against demonstrators, political activists and
journalists, we encourage the Iraqi authorities to
increase its efforts aimed at ensuring accountability
for those responsible for violations and at safeguarding
the freedom of expression and peaceful assembly. With
regard to the Yazidi Female Survivors Law, we urge
the Government to ensure its implementation and the
development of necessary by-laws, which will ensure
the return to normalcy for the survivors.
The continued terrorist attacks by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), as well as attacks against
diplomatic missions and coalition forces, are deeply
worrisome. We strongly condemn such activity, which
contributes to undermining Iraq’s stability, and we call
upon the Government to ensure that those responsible
are held accountable. It is clear that the fight against
ISIL is not over, and Estonia remains ready to support
Iraq in that regard. At the same time, it is essential
that all actors respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Iraq and refrain from any military action,
as that would threaten the stability of the country.
21-23393

25/08/2021

The situation concerning Iraq

We support Iraq’s constructive engagement with its
neighbours, including the planned conference with
regional actors in Baghdad on 28 August.
We also commend the constructive engagement
of the Iraqi Government with respect to the issue of
irregular crossings of migrants from Belarus into
the European Union. I would like to highlight that
Estonia strongly condemns the instrumentalization of
migration and the use of innocent people to advance
political goals.
Turning to relations between Baghdad and Erbil,
we encourage both Governments to increase efforts
to implement the federal budget law and also reach
agreement on other outstanding issues. That would
contribute to increased stability for the country as
a whole.
Ms. Prince (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
We begin by expressing our appreciation to Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing on the recent
developments in Iraq and for her efforts aimed at
discharging the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).
We welcome the Government’s commitment to
conducting free and just elections. We recognize
the importance of the enhanced technical support
provided by UNAMI to the Independent High Electoral
Commission, which has made significant advancements
in its preparation for elections. UNAMI’s deployment
of additional electoral advisers will contribute to the
integrity of the electoral process, and we encourage
Iraq’s international partners to positively consider the
Government’s request for electoral observers.
The elections will be a flagship moment for the
people of Iraq in exercising their rights to freely choose
their representatives, make their voices heard and bolster
the trust between the Government and the citizens. To
that end, we emphasize the importance of broad and
genuine participation in the elections from all sectors
of society. We encourage the Government and other
stakeholders in the country to engage in dialogue in
these critical weeks preceding the scheduled elections.
We stress that the involvement of women in the
elections and in Government will advance the shaping
of an inclusive and prosperous Iraq, as women play an
important role in the stability, progress and long-term
development of nations. Indeed, the holding of free, fair
and credible elections is critical to the future of Iraq.

S/PV. 8842

Also important to Iraq’s reconstruction is respect
for human rights and the rule of law. The preservation
of those core pillars requires accountability and
justice, and we call on the authorities to ensure that the
violators of human rights, including those who have
targeted civil society activists, human rights defenders
and peaceful demonstrators, are held accountable. In
this context, we express concern at the fact that attacks
by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant continue to be
carried out and that they continue to result in civilian
casualties. It is imperative that the perpetrators of these
attacks are also held accountable and that justice for the
victims and survivors is secured.
In that vein, we recall the adoption of the milestone
Yazidi Female Survivors Law and welcome the
progress that has since been made, particularly with
the establishment of a General Directorate of Yazidi
Affairs, to which a Yazidi female lawyer was appointed
Director General.
The overall stability of the region is closely linked
to the security and stability of its individual countries.
A collaborative regional approach to such challenges
as the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and
terrorism is indispensable to regional peace, security
and sustainable development. Barriers to this type of
regional cooperation must be overcome, and, to that
end, dialogue is a key tool. We therefore welcome
the efforts undertaken by the Government to engage
with countries of the region with a view to enhancing
regional ties and coordinating on common issues and
threats. The sustained engagement with international
partners and key stakeholders is also important.
Before concluding, we recognize the dedication of
the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait in resolving the
issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals
and missing Kuwaiti property, which is important to
ensuring closure for the affected families. The progress
that has been made, despite the challenges of the
COVID-19 pandemic, is indicative of their unwavering
commitment to this file.
In conclusion, we emphasize Iraq’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence in
handling its own internal affairs. We reaffirm our
support for UNAMI and the Government of Iraq and
continue to stand in solidarity with the Government
and the people of Iraq.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank
Representative of the Secretary-General

Special
Jeanine

21-2339311/19

S/PV.8842

The situation concerning Iraq

Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing, and I take note
of the Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/700) on the
work of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI). We welcome the participation of the
representative of Iraq in this meeting.
Iraq is now weeks away from the much-anticipated
parliamentary election scheduled for 10 October.
Kenya commends the relevant Iraqi authorities for the
preparations aimed at inclusive, transparent, free and
credible elections, whose outcome would reflect the
will of the people.
In that regard, we laud the collaborative efforts
of the Independent High Electoral Commission, the
Supreme Electoral Security Committee, the governorate
electoral officials and other stakeholders and urge
them to continue working together for the success of
the elections.
We must also commend the United Nations
for providing the necessary technical assistance to
the Independent High Electoral Commission and
election monitoring. We particularly laud the Special
Representative’s continued regular engagement with
the stakeholders and welcome the continued deployment
of additional electoral advisers as part of UNAMI’s
strengthened technical electoral assistance project in
support of the electoral process.
For the outcome of the elections to be truly reflective
of the voice of the people, they must be not only free
and transparent, but also devoid of fear, intimidation
and boycotts. Every effort should therefore be made to
attract the widest possible participation. In particular,
the targeting of political activists and whistle-blowers
should be prevented and dealt with by promptly holding
those responsible to account, in accordance with
the law.
On a positive note, Kenya is pleased that there
are significant developments being made through the
higher committee to promote and monitor women’s
electoral participation. That is a welcome step towards
equity and inclusivity.
Kenya also takes note of other positive
developments, including the substantial progress on
the implementation of the Federal Budget Law through
constructive discussions between Baghdad and Erbil.
We encourage the parties to continue that positive
impetus in order to build trust and shape strong relations
for future prosperity.
12/19

25/08/2021

On the security situation, Kenya condemns the
continued attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant in several governorates. We commend the Iraqi
security forces for their continued response counterterrorism operations. We call for coordinated regional
and international support in a manner that promotes the
security and stability of Iraq.
We further reiterate that Iraq should be protected
from becoming an international arena for States and
non-State actors to settle scores to the detriment of the
security, political stability and socioeconomic progress
of the country and its people.
Kenya takes note of the commendable progress
made in the identification of an additional 10 Kuwaiti
missing persons, whose families can now have closure.
We encourage continued dedicated cooperation and
look forward to further progress on that file.
On the humanitarian situation, Kenya welcomes the
facilitation of returns to areas of origin. We continue to
encourage the continued repatriation of refugees from
the Al-Hol camp to enable their return to normalcy. In
that regard, Kenya appreciates the role of the United
Nations Development Programme and the United
Nations Human Settlements Programme in carrying
out stabilization projects. Furthermore, Kenya calls
for more support to the humanitarian response plan to
ensure that the 1.5 million people in need are supported,
particularly during these challenging circumstances of
the coronavirus disease pandemic.
In conclusion, Kenya reiterates its call for all actors
to uphold the political independence, sovereignty, unity
and territorial integrity of Iraq and that all actions
should be informed by the needs of the Iraqi people. We
affirm our support for UNAMI in its assistance to the
Government and the people of Iraq to help them address
foreseen challenges and ensure that the forthcoming
elections are held successfully.
Ms. Farrey (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom commends the continued work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and the work
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Hennis-Plasschaert. I thank her for her briefing. I
would like to join other speakers in welcoming the
representative of Iraq here today. I would like to make
four points.
First, the elections on 10 October are critical to
Iraq’s stability and security. They follow the calls for
21-23393

25/08/2021

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV. 8842

reform by ordinary Iraqis across the country in 2019.
We remain committed to Iraq’s democratic progress
and welcome the efforts of the United Nations to
support Iraq’s Independent High Electoral Commission
to deliver a free, fair and credible vote in October.
However, we remain concerned by the continued reports
of threats and violence against independent candidates
and activists and the possibility of a low turnout. We
urge the Iraqi Government and the United Nations
mission to enhance their efforts to communicate the
Electoral Commission’s progress in preparing for the
elections in order to boost the turnout and increase the
credibility. We call on all stakeholders to redouble their
efforts and support for a peaceful electoral process in
which Iraqis are able to participate without fear.

the presence of the Permanent Representative of Iraq at
today’s meeting.

Secondly, the United Kingdom welcomes the
outcome of the United States-Iraq strategic dialogue
and the joint statement confirming a continuing basis
for the work of the Global Coalition against Da’esh
in supporting the fight against that group. We call
on the international community to continue its close
collaboration to secure Da’esh’s lasting defeat. The
United Kingdom continues to support the Government
of Iraq, the Global Coalition and NATO in tackling the
Da’esh threat.

First, the international community should continue
to support Iraq in advancing its national political process.
The upcoming parliamentary elections in October are
a top priority on Iraq’s current political agenda and a
crucial step forward in its political transition. China
support the Iraqi people’s independent choice of a
development path that caters to their national situation.

Thirdly, we remain concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Iraq and, in particular, the
1.2 million Iraqis who remain internally displaced. We
urge the Iraqi Government to continue working closely
with the United Nations to ensure that internally
displaced people are able to access assistance and
return voluntarily and in a safe and dignified manner.
The leadership of the Iraqi Government, working
closely with the international community, is essential
to finding durable solutions to the displacement in Iraq
and to addressing the longer-term drivers of instability.
Finally, like other speakers, we welcome the
ongoing cooperation between Iraq and Kuwait in the
search for missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals.
The identification of the remains of a further 10 Kuwaiti
missing persons is a significant step.
The United Kingdom stands alongside the
Government of Iraq as it seeks to deliver free, fair and
inclusive elections, combat terrorism and implement
durable solutions for its internally displaced population.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Special Representative Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing, and we welcome

In May this year, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2576 (2021), renewing the mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) for one year. That embodies the resolve
and commitment of the international community
to Iraq’s peace, reconstruction and development. I
wish to reiterate China’s support for the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
UNAMI. In the light of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2021/700) and the briefing by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, I have three
points to make.

We are pleased to see the positive progress on the
electoral preparations. We support United Nations
efforts to provide electoral assistance to Iraq and hope
that UNAMI will play a constructive role in ensuring
the smooth and successful conduct of the elections,
underpinned by the Iraqi-led and Iraqi-owned
principle. Two recent shipments of office supplies to
Iraq’s Independent High Electoral Commission are but
one example of our practical support of the country’s
electoral preparations. Greater unity and cooperation
among all Iraqi parties for more inclusive reconciliation
and faster integration and development serves the
fundamental interests of the Iraqi people. We support a
better relationship between the federal Government of
Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government of Iraq, as
well as their enhanced coordination on the enactment
of the 2021 federal budget law and finding inclusive
solutions to issues of common concern.
Secondly, the international community should
continue to support Iraq in combating terrorism and
maintaining national security and stability. Since the
beginning of this year, there has been a marked surge
in terrorist attacks on Iraqi soil, causing extensive
casualties and damage to its infrastructure. It is
imperative to increase international support so as to
help Iraq address the threat of terrorism, combat the
remnants of terrorist groups and accelerate the

21-2339313/19

S/PV.8842

The situation concerning Iraq

repatriation of foreign terrorist fighters. In order to do
so, the work of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant needs to be
further facilitated to support Iraq in bringing terrorists
to justice in accordance with its domestic legislation.
Good-neighbourly relations between Iraq and the
countries of the region can bolster their collective
efforts to address cross-border challenges. China
welcomes the joint work of Iraq and Kuwait on the issue
of missing Kuwaitis and Kuwaiti property, as well as
the progress achieved in that regard. Iraq has repeatedly
protested against unilateral foreign military actions on
its territory. We urge the parties concerned to respect
Iraq’s sovereignty and territorial integrity in good faith
and to put an end to any action that may endanger Iraq’s
security and stability and aggravate regional tensions.
Thirdly, the international community should
continue to support Iraq in fighting the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic and speeding up
its recovery and development. Iraq has borne the
brunt of the war since 2003. Its people have suffered
tremendously and are eager to rebuild their homeland.
The international community should translate its
assistance commitment into action, effectively help Iraq
rebuild its infrastructure, accelerate its socioeconomic
development and reverse the plight of displaced persons
and other vulnerable groups. Such assistance must not
come with political strings attached.
Control of the pandemic is a pressing task facing
the Iraqi Government, which we commend for actively
rolling out the vaccination programme. We call on the
international community to provide more assistance
to Iraq in its fight against COVID-19. After Iraq
was hit by the pandemic, China was one of the first
countries to come to its aid by providing supplies,
helping to set up a polymerase chain-reaction testing
lab, sending a team of health experts and supplying
them with vaccines. On 12 August, the third shipment
of vaccines from the Chinese Government arrived in
Baghdad. China stands ready to continue working with
the rest of the international community to support the
Iraqi Government in fighting COVID-19, accelerating
reconstruction, restoring development and achieving
long-term peace and security.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I welcome and thank
Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for her
14/19

25/08/2021

trademark frank and excellent briefing. I would also
like to welcome our Iraqi colleague to this meeting.
I begin by extending my deepest sympathies to the
families and loved ones of those who tragically lost
their lives in the fire at Al-Hussein Teaching Hospital
on 12 July. I also wish to extend our condolences on the
loss of life from the heinous terrorist attack carried out
in Baghdad just one week after that. Ireland strongly
condemns this attack and others carried out by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Such attacks
highlight the volatile security situation that persists
across the country.
The continued malign behaviour of such actors
threatens Iraq’s stability at a crucial time, just ahead of
elections that are critical to Iraq’s future and the security
of the entire region. I want to reiterate Ireland’s full
support for Iraq’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We look forward to the planned elections
proceeding on time, in transparency and in safety
on 10 October. We have previously underscored our
strong belief that women, young people and minority
communities should be included in the electoral process.
Recognizing challenging circumstances, not least the
coronavirus disease pandemic, Ireland welcomes the
continued progress in preparations towards free and
fair elections, in particular the work undertaken by
the higher committee to promote and monitor women’s
electoral participation.
I would like now to strongly echo the Special
Representative’s earlier appeal today to the Iraqi
people themselves to come out on the day and to
exercise their rights at the ballot box. We are pleased
that the European Union will deploy electoral observers
to Iraq, bolstering the expanded role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq in monitoring
elections, as we mandated here in the Council in May
(see S/PV.8780). These will be important elections and
we want to do all we can to build confidence around
their delivery.
A vibrant civil society is vital to a thriving
democracy, as we know, and to any credible electoral
process. Any national effort aimed at promoting
and protecting human rights requires ensuring that
international human rights obligations are incorporated
into domestic legislation, delivered on the ground and
implemented in practice. Ireland therefore welcomes
Iraq’s recent adoption of a five-year human rights
national action plan.
21-23393

25/08/2021

The situation concerning Iraq

However, we remain deeply concerned by
developments on the ground in terms of shrinking civic
space, with disgraceful attacks on activists, journalists,
human rights defenders and women’s groups. We are
also very concerned that accountability for such serious
crimes and human rights violations remains very
limited. Strong and coherent action on human rights
is critical. We call for the full implementation of the
human rights national action plan for justice, an end to
impunity and fair-trial guarantees for all.
Earlier this month, we marked seven years since
ISIL brutally targeted Yazidis in northern Iraq. We
take this opportunity to call on the Iraqi Government
to deliver accountability for the brave survivors of
ISIL crimes, mostly women and children, by swiftly
putting into practice the provisions of the Yazidi
Female Survivors Law. We welcome the establishment
of the General Directorate of Yazidi Affairs and the
appointment of a Yazidi female lawyer as Director
General to take forward this work.
We regret that the humanitarian situation remains
dire for many Iraqis. Internally displaced persons are
particularly vulnerable. We commend the Government
of Iraq in securing the safe return of 93 families from
Al-Hol camp in Syria in May. This is the beginning. It
is important to follow up by ensuring the resettlement
of these families and to work on the return and
resettlement of others across the country in a safe,
voluntary and dignified manner.
Finally, we know the stability of Iraq is inextricably
linked to that of the region more broadly. With that in
mind, I would like to note the commendable role played
by Iraq in facilitating and indeed encouraging regional
dialogue in recent months. We look forward to hearing
the outcome of the proposed Iraqi-led regional summit
later this month.
I conclude by echoing the comments of others
today in commending the efforts of the Governments
of Iraq and Kuwait with regard to missing persons,
and we welcome the progress we have seen in that
respect in recent months, thereby bringing closure to
many families.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. Jeanine HennisPlasschaert, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for her valuable briefing. I

S/PV. 8842

also welcome the participation of the representative of
Iraq in our meeting.
Iraq is witnessing positive developments, especially
in relation to the Government’s efforts to fight
corruption, implement economic reforms, promote
security and stability by bringing weapons under
State control, and implement the Sinjar Agreement.
We also welcome the progress in the preparations for
the elections to be held in October. We hope that the
elections will take place in a calm and transparent
environment and pave the way for a new chapter of
political stability in Iraq. We also welcome any measure
that promotes women’s participation in that important
national undertaking.
While we call on all the components of Iraqi society
to support the Government and the Independent High
Electoral Commission, we also stress the need for the
international community to provide support and help
Iraq in ensuring conditions conducive to successful
transparent and credible elections, paving the way for
a promising future for the country, in which national
unity, democracy and the rule of law are promoted and
the welfare of the people is guaranteed.
We commend once again Iraq’s counterterrorism efforts and the way it is addressing terrorist
organizations. Despite their defeat on the ground,
terrorist groups continue to destabilize the country
and thwart its development. They continue to spread
fear and chaos in Iraq and the wider region. Tunisia
strongly condemns terrorist attacks and schemes and
stands united with Iraq in its fight against this scourge.
We also stress the need to hold the perpetrators of these
crimes accountable. Furthermore, we stress the need
to respect Iraq’s sovereignty and territorial integrity in
line with the Charter of the United Nations, and we call
for constructive cooperation in the fight against crossborder threats while respecting the territorial integrity
of States and the principle of good-neighbourliness.
With regard to the relationship between the federal
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government,
Tunisia welcomes the progress made between the two and
the agreement to resume federal budgetary transfers to
the Kurdistan Regional Government. That is a positive
step in the direction of resolving outstanding issues,
and it paves the way for a constructive relationship that
promotes stability in Iraq.
Despite continuous efforts to address internal
displacement in Iraq, that issue continues to pose a

21-2339315/19

S/PV.8842

The situation concerning Iraq

big challenge. Nearly 1.2 million displaced persons are
still living in camps. We urge the Iraqi authorities to
continue making efforts to ensure their safe return to
their places of origin, which would promote security,
stability and social cohesion.
My delegation would like to commend the role of
UNAMI and all United Nations agencies working on
the ground in Iraq. We highly value the efforts they
make to support the preparations for the elections, fight
corruption and ensure justice and accountability.
In conclusion, we commend both the Iraqi and
Kuwaiti Governments for the positive results achieved,
despite all the difficulties, on the issue of missing
Kuwaitis and third-country nationals. We look forward
to seeing those efforts continue and to achieving further
progress on the issue of missing Kuwaiti property and
the national archives.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of India.
I thank Special Representative Jeanine HennisPlasschaert for her briefing. We appreciate the detailed
briefing, the insights provided and the support given
by the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). I also welcome the representative of Iraq to
this meeting.
The upcoming parliamentary elections in Iraq
provide a valuable opportunity to further consolidate
democracy in the country. A transparent, free and credible
election conducted in a violence-free environment with
high voter turnout will empower the new Government
to implement reforms, improve accountability and meet
the genuine aspirations of the Iraqi people, especially
women and youth. We commend the steps taken by the
Iraqi authorities and the Independent High Electoral
Commission to ensure a free, fair and inclusive electoral
process, despite constraints owing to the pandemic.
The support, including electoral technical assistance,
extended by UNAMI to the Independent High Electoral
Commission in its efforts to ensure full preparedness
for the elections is greatly appreciated.
India strongly supported the additional mandate
provided to UNAMI to deploy an election monitoring
team and to assist the Government of Iraq with the
elections, including through a public information
campaign to enhance election-related awareness among
Iraqi voters (resolution 2576 (2021)). We take note of the
update by the Special Representative of the Secretary16/19

25/08/2021

General on the mobilization of the team and call for its
early deployment to ensure the effective fulfilment of
the monitoring mandate provided by the Council. We
appreciate the financial support extended by various
Member States to UNAMI and other United Nations
agencies in implementing this mandate. In line with our
strong democratic traditions, India contributed to the
democratic and electoral process in Iraq as an observer
of the 2018 elections, and we hope to make a similar
contribution during the upcoming elections as well.
We are also encouraged by the increasing number
of women candidates who are participating in the
elections. The credible steps taken by the Government to
promote women’s electoral participation and to prevent
and address violence against women candidates must
continue so as to ensure full and effective participation
of Iraqi women in the political process.
The successful recovery, reconstruction and
economic development of Iraq are constantly threatened
by the menace of terrorism. The recent report of the
Secretary-General on the Islamic State of Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) (S/2021/682) has provided another
stark reminder of the critical danger posed by ISIL to
the stability of Iraq and to regional and international
peace and security. ISIL remains active in Iraq with
a changed modus operandi. The group’s core is now
focused on regaining ground in Iraq and Syria, while
its affiliates are functioning independently. These
evolving phenomena are extremely dangerous and pose
a new set of challenges to our collective efforts in the
fight against ISIL and terrorism.
I express solidarity with all the victims and offer
my deep condolences to their families in Iraq, who
have suffered and continue to suffer from the scourge
of terrorism. India had unfortunately lost 39 of its
nationals to ISIL’s terrorism in Iraq. Further, thousands
of other Indian nationals had to be evacuated. We also
recognize the immense sacrifices made by the people
of Iraq, the country’s national security personnel
in particular, in their fight against ISIL. We cannot
afford to lower the guard against terrorist groups. In
this regard, we welcome the continued international
efforts aimed aty supporting Iraq to combat terrorism,
restore stability, undertake reconstruction and train the
Iraqi forces.
The constructive dialogue and engagement between
the Iraqi Government and the Kurdistan Regional
Government on the budget, revenue sharing and
21-23393

25/08/2021

The situation concerning Iraq

border management has created a positive environment
conducive to reaching a sustainable agreement on all
outstanding issues. We encourage UNAMI to support
and facilitate the dialogue as and when requested by
both these Governments.
India condemns military action in Iraq’s territory
undertaken by its neighbours without the consent of
the Government of Iraq under the pretext of counterterrorism operations. There can be no violations of
Iraq’s sovereignty, and its territorial integrity and
independence must be fully respected.
We welcome the sustained joint efforts of the
Governments of Iraq and Kuwait to locate, identify and
repatriate the missing Kuwaiti and other nationals and
missing Kuwaiti property. Kuwait’s identification of
10 individuals from the remains sent by Iraq will help
provide closure to the victims’ families. We commend
the efforts made by the members of the tripartite
mechanism and hope that the parties will continue to
strengthen their cooperation until the matter is resolved
to the mutual satisfaction of Iraq and Kuwait.
India appreciates the efforts of the Iraqi Government
to contribute to regional stabilization and overcoming
tensions through dialogue with neighbouring States.
We wish Iraq success in its initiative to convene a
regional conference for fostering friendly relations
among counties in the region.
Let me conclude by reaffirming India’s steadfast
support for a democratic, pluralistic, federal, unified
and prosperous Iraq. As a long-standing friend, India
will remain a willing partner of Iraq in its efforts to
achieve economic recovery, peace and stability, national
reconciliation and reconstruction.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Fatah (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Mr. Tirumurti,
the Permanent Representative of India, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council this month. I
also thank Mr. Nicolas de Rivière on his outstanding
efforts as President of the Council last month. I express
my appreciation to Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), for her valuable briefing.

S/PV. 8842

The Iraqi Government continues to implement its
programme to fulfil the promises that it has made to the
Iraqi people. Despite tremendous and interconnected
challenges, the Government is working tirelessly,
as promised, to meet the demands of the people
by preparing for the holding of early, free and fair
elections, maintaining peace and security, combating
terrorism, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic and corruption, and implementing urgently
needed economic reforms.
Since its formation, the current Iraqi Government
has shouldered the task of restoring public trust,
especially among young people, by taking the following
steps. First, we are listening to the voices of the people
and respecting their constitutional rights to peaceful
demonstration, freedom of expression and protection.
Secondly, we are providing support to young people
through employment and housing. The Government
has launched an initiative to provide long-term lowinterest loans for the Dari housing project, which has
received so far 3.5 million applications. Thirdly, we
are promoting accountability for those responsible for
violations by establishing a team to investigate them
and ensure non-recurrence. The Government has taken
legal action against members of the security service
whose involvement in attacks against demonstrators
has been confirmed. We have also arrested a number of
people responsible for crimes against civilian activists
and demonstrators. Fourthly, we are imposing the rule
of law and bringing weapons under State control, while
we are promoting security sector reform so to ensure
human rights compliance in law enforcement.
With regard to COVID-19, in mid-August, the
Government has launched a national vaccination
campaign to vaccinate people against the virus. In
that regard, we thank the United Nations and the
World Health Organization for their role in providing
vaccines through the COVAX programme. We also
thank the United States for providing Iraq with 500,000
vaccine doses.
A number of tremendous security challenges are
affecting Government efforts. Terrorism remains
the greatest and most persistent threat. The Iraqi
Government thanks the Security Council for showing
its support and solidarity with the Government and
the people of Iraq by condemning the latest cowardly
terrorist attack against a market in Baghdad. The
significant threats of terrorism are hindering the work
of the Government and its efforts, especially its plans

21-2339317/19

S/PV.8842

The situation concerning Iraq

for development. For example, terrorists have attacked
power lines, which have resulted in severe material
damage and disrupted services.
Iraq calls once again for its territories not to be
used to settle political scores or carry out actions under
the pretext of combating terrorism, thereby threatening
the country’s security and stability. We stress the need
to respect the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, including respect for State sovereignty, goodneighbourly relations and cooperation. We call on the
Security Council to pay serious attention to this matter
and on all States Member of the United Nations to fully
comply with these principles.
Iraq remains committed to cooperating with the
international community to combat terrorism. During
the fourth round of the strategic dialogue between
Iraq and the United States, the parties agreed on the
withdrawal of all United States combat forces from Iraq
by the end of the year while maintaining cooperation
through the international coalition against Da’esh.
The parties also agreed on promoting long-term
partnerships in a number of areas, including security,
the economy, health care, culture, education, energy,
the environment and finance.
Iraq is committed to providing support for the
victims of terrorism, including the female survivors of
the attacks on the Yazidi people. The Iraqi Government
established the General Directorate of Yazidi Affairs
within the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs in
May. In line with our commitment to implementing
the Yazidi Female Survivors Law, the Prime Minister
recently visited Sinjar to meet with a number of female
survivors where he listened to their needs.
Iraq is also committed to repatriating Iraqis
stranded in the Al-Hol camp in Syria. The Iraqi
Government recently repatriated 93 Iraqi families
composed of 382 members, including 145 children,
who were transported to the Jed’ah 1 camp in Ninewa
governorate for rehabilitation.
The Iraqi Government is fully committed to
protecting diplomatic and consular missions and their
personnel in Iraq. The Government has made significant
efforts to avoid the recurrence of rocket attacks launched
by illegal groups that are seeking to destabilize Iraq
and undermine its relations with the international
community in its actions to combat terrorism.
18/19

25/08/2021

Iraq is committed to cooperating with the State
of Kuwait, as reflected in its continued commitment
to paying all compensation it owes on time, with the
most recent instalment of $600 million having been
disbursed on 27 July. With respect to missing Kuwaiti
persons, Iraq welcomed the announcement by the
Kuwaiti authorities of the identification of the remains
of eight missing individuals, thereby bringing the total
number of those identified to 28 out of the 69 missing.
Since August 2019, we have returned the remains of the
identified missing persons to Kuwait in two groups. In
the meantime, we call on the tripartite commission and
the State of Kuwait to announce the results of the DNA
testing of the other remains as soon as possible.
Iraq’s compliance with its commitments towards
the sisterly State of Kuwait reflects the principles
of cooperation, moderation and commitment to
international law. These are pillars of our foreign
policy, both within the region and throughout the
world. Iraq has always sought to contribute seriously
and effectively to efforts aimed at promoting regional
stability and trust. Accordingly, Iraq has called on its
neighbours in the region to attend a summit entitled the
Baghdad Conference for Cooperation and Partnership,
to be held on 28 August, with a view to promoting
dialogue and taking new trusted steps towards
establishing mechanisms for cooperation and lasting
stability.
The upcoming early elections in Iraq are
fundamental part of the Government’s reform
programme. That is why the Government has asked for
United Nations support in monitoring them, pursuant
to resolution 2576 (2021). On this occasion, on behalf
of my country’s Government, I would like to thank the
members of the Security Council for adopting resolution
2576 (2021) and for fulfilling Iraq’s request to observe
the elections. I also thank the Secretariat, UNAMI and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
particular for their tremendous efforts aimed at helping
Iraq implement the resolution. We look forward to
receiving a robust and notable United Nations electoral
team to carry out its work in Iraq as soon as possible
and cover all Iraqi provinces.
We value the decision by the European Union to
send an electoral observation mission to Iraq. Our
Government seeks to establish a close cooperation with
UNAMI and other international observation missions
to facilitate the work of the observers and provide them
with the optimal conditions to complete their tasks.
21-23393

25/08/2021

The situation concerning Iraq

In conclusion, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations for his steadfast and
firm support for Iraq. He has repeatedly called for
respect for Iraq’s sovereignty and territorial integrity,
as the international community, through its ongoing
cooperation, continues to support and assist my
country and its people to achieve prosperity and
stability. Also on behalf of my country’s Government, I

S/PV. 8842

wish to express our appreciation for the tireless efforts
UNAMI has made in various areas, especially at the
humanitarian and development levels, throughout the
reporting period.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

21-2339319/19
