S/PV.7999

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7999th meeting

Wednesday, 12 July 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Hickey
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-21167 (E)
*1721167*

S/PV.7999

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Ismail
Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen; Mr. Stephen O’Brien, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Tedros Adhanom
Ghebreyesus, Director-General of the World Health
Organization; and Mr. José Graziano da Silva, DirectorGeneral of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations.
Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed is joining via videoteleconference from Amman, and Mr. Tedros
and Mr. Graziano da Silva are joining via videoteleconference from Geneva.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed.
Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed (spoke in Arabic): The
situation in Yemen remains extremely grave. The
intensity of the conflict is increasing daily, and the
tragic humanitarian situation continues to worsen.
For the third successive year, Yemenis have seen
the holy month of Ramadan transformed from a month
of tolerance and peace into a month of violence and
hopelessness. Yemen has seen an increase in battles of
attrition between the parties to the conflict, and the pace
of military operations has increased in Hajjah, Ma’rib
and Al Jawf governorates. Since 10 June, fighting has
also escalated significantly in Taiz and areas to the east
of the city. The fighting for control of the presidential
palace in the city has intensified in parallel with
indiscriminate shelling in residential areas, leading
to an increase in the number of dead and injured, and
further destruction of the city’s remaining civilian
infrastructure. There have been numerous casualties in
2/12

12/07/2017

Ma’rib governorate, particularly during the battle for
control of Serwah district.
Violence has also continued in Hajjah governorate
and the border area between Yemen and the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, including on 22 and 29 June, when
rockets landed in the Jizan area of Saudi Arabia. In
addition, air strikes have continued to hit numerous
locations in the governorates of Sa’dah, Taiz, Ma’rib
and Sana’a. Air strikes hit a market in Moshnaq village,
in Sa’dah, on 18 June, and Al-Mokha town on 4 July.
Both incidents resulted in numerous civilian deaths and
injuries, including women and children.
Despite the fact that we have urged the warring
parties to respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law, the targeting of civilians and civilian
infrastructure continues; this cannot be tolerated. There
must be respect for international legal norms.
On 15 June, an Emirati ship was subjected to a
bombardment from the vicinity of Al-Mokha port,
threatening maritime security in the Bab Al-Mandab
strait. The continued targeting of vessels in the area
seriously jeopardizes the provision of much-needed
humanitarian and commercial supplies to the most
vulnerable Yemenis.
In addition, security continues to be undermined by
the activities of extremist groups, including Al-Qaida
in the Arabian Peninsula. On 7 June, a vehicle-borne
improvised explosive device targeted the convoy of the
Abyan chief of security, killing two of his bodyguards.
Later in the month, on 14 June, militants detonated an
improvised explosive device at a police station in Dhale
governorate, killing the chief of police and wounding
several others. Here let me stress, as I have done before,
that the longer the conflicts lasts, the more terrorist
groups will expand and threaten Yemen’s future by
controlling more territory.
The humanitarian situation in Yemen is appalling.
The people are suffering from war and hunger and from
cholera, which has continued to spread during the last
few weeks. The country is not suffering from a single
emergency, but from a number of complex emergencies
that have affected more than 20 million people and
whose scale and effect will be felt long after the end of
the war.
Approximately 14 million people are food insecure,
of whom almost 7 million are at risk of being victims
of famine, as my colleagues will indicate in their
17-21167

12/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East

respective briefings. Cholera is spreading rapidly
and is infecting children and elderly people and other
vulnerable groups in many parts of the country. There
are now over 300,000 suspected cases of the disease,
and more than 1,700 have died in the epidemic. Tens
of thousands of health-care workers have not been paid
for many months. More than half of the country’s health
facilities have closed, and supplies of medicine and
medical equipment remain severely limited.
The speed and scale of Yemen’s cholera outbreak
serves to highlight the consequences of a collapsed
public-sector system. I would like to praise the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia’s generous $67 million donation, which
has helped to slow the spread of the disease. I call on
other donors to provide further contributions as soon
as possible.
The non-payment of salaries for health-care
workers and other staff in the public sector is an
urgent issue. If it is not addressed, the continuation
of the status quo will lead to key State institutions
ceasing to function. I fully support the joint proposal
by the United Nations Development Programme, the
World Health Organization and UNICEF to support
immediate payments to health-care workers as soon
as possible in advance so that health services may be
maintained. I call upon Member States to make every
effort to support this initiative, as it is important to
improving the work of State institutions, stabilize
the humanitarian situation and provide basic-service
delivery in future.
A World Bank-financed cash-transfer programme
is expected to disburse the first quarterly payment to
the most vulnerable households across the country in
August, to benefit about 8 million Yemenis. My Office
has been working continuously with partners to ensure
the success of this initiative, with a view to supporting
household purchasing power, avoiding widespread
destitution, improving the general situation and
restoring hope. I hope that the international community
will heed this call and support these initiatives.
Over the past year, the United Nations Resident
Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator and I have
called repeatedly for the resumption of commercial
flights from and to the Sana’a airport. The absence of
commercial flights has placed an unnecessary burden
on the population and worsened an already desperate
humanitarian situation. I appeal to the coalition
and the parties to the conflict to support the United

S/PV.7999

Nations proposal for the resumption of regular flights,
especially for individuals requiring medical care,
students studying abroad and family reunification.
I continue to work with the parties and encourage
them to strive towards the adoption of the agreements
I outlined during my previous briefing to the Council
(see S/PV.7954). I am planning to invite representatives
of Ansar Allah and the General People’s Congress to
restart discussions on those ideas as soon as possible.
In the past few days, I was in direct contact with Ansar
Allah, which is cause for optimism. I am grateful for
the efforts of the People’s Republic of China in playing
an instrumental role in that regard.
The proposed agreements focus on the Hudaydah
port and the surrounding area. They aim to ensure the
continued flow of basic humanitarian supplies and
commercial goods through the port and to implement a
programme for collecting taxes and other revenues for
the purposes of paying salaries and supporting services,
rather than underwriting the war. An agreement on
the port of Hudaydah should become the basis for
a national agreement for the resumption of salary
payments nationwide, which should provide some relief
to many Yemenis. Undoubtedly, such an agreement
will require clear mechanisms for ensuring that all
State revenues, whether collected in Hudaydah, Sana’a,
Aden or elsewhere, are used in support of the payment
of salaries and the reactivation of State institutions in
all areas of the country.
The Government of Yemen has reacted positively
to these ideas and has agreed to negotiate on the basis
of my proposals. In my meetings with President Hadi,
he agreed on the need to implement measures to ensure
the delivery of humanitarian and commercial supplies
and to prevent arms smuggling and the diversion of
taxes and other revenues.
I arrived this morning from the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, where I met Saudi Crown Prince, First Deputy
Prime Minister His Royal Highness Mohammed
bin Salman bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud. I welcome the
commitment by the Saudi leadership to support efforts
to bring the parties to agreement on these issues. I will
depart for Cairo tomorrow to continue my current work
with the Government of Yemen and regional leaders on
these ideas.
I also hope to meet soon with the delegations of
Ansar Allah and the General People’s Congress to
discuss the possible agreements on Hudaydah and

17-211673/12

S/PV.7999

The situation in the Middle East

12/07/2017

salaries as a preliminary step towards a national
cessation of hostilities and a comprehensive resolution
of the conflict, with a view to restoring peace and
stability to Yemen. It is essential that Ansar Allah
and the General People’s Congress engage with me on
these proposals constructively and in good faith if they
truly want an end to the war and an improvement in the
humanitarian situation.

who destroy their country instead of build it. The
justifications are not convincing and the excuses are not
acceptable, especially since there is still an opportunity
to achieve peace.

I reiterate my sincere gratitude to the international
community, which has consistently supported my
efforts and the proposals that I have put forward to the
parties. I recently visited France briefly, and its new
Government reiterated its support for the peace process.
Regional and international unity is critical if peace and
security in Yemen are to be secured.

Mr. O’Brien: I thank Special Envoy Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed for his briefing, with which I fully
align myself.

I commend the courageous efforts of Yemeni civil
society, which continues to push for peace in spite of
many security challenges. In June, the Yemeni Women’s
Pact continued to promote a spirit of compromise
as well as mechanisms that could put an end to this
devastating conflict. I also recently met in Amman
with a group of Yemeni youth activists who, while
expressing sympathy for the suffering of the Yemeni
people, also demonstrate the same commitment and
dedication. Yemeni civil-society groups are in constant
contact with my team and me. They recognize that only
a political solution can end the war and the suffering of
the Yemeni people. Their drive and sense of nationalism
carries with it a great deal of hope.
I wish that the political leaders would mirror these
activists’ love of their nation and its people, which I
sense with each and every proposal I receive from civil
society. These groups are the true voices of Yemen, far
removed from personal concerns and considerations.
They convey the suffering of the people from the
farthest corners of the country.
The political leadership must recognize that the
continuation of the war can lead only to more human
and physical loss, and complicate crucial questions on
the future of Yemen, including the grievances of the
south. In that context, the southern question requires a
deeply considered solution, and I call on all Yemenis to
address it through dialogue and other peaceful means.
Finally, I would like to note that history will not
judge kindly those Yemeni leaders who have used the
war to increase their influence or profit from public
finances, and the patience of the people of Yemen will
not last. The people need an alternative to politicians
4/12

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Ould
Cheikh Ahmed for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.

Millions of Yemeni civilians — women, children
and men — continue to be exposed to unfathomable pain
and suffering. Cholera and the risk of famine remain
acute in all but one of the 23 governorates across the
country. In the midst of this, each day millions of people
in Yemen are struggling to survive the conflict, the
poverty and the end-of-their-tether grind just to survive
one day at a time. Seven million people, including
2.3 million malnourished children, of whom 500,000
are severely malnourished, under the age of five, are on
the cusp of famine, vulnerable to disease and ultimately
at risk of a slow and painful death. Nearly 16 million
people do not have access to adequate water, sanitation
or hygiene, and more than 320,000 suspected cholera
cases have been reported in all of the country’s districts
bar one. At least 1,740 people already are known to have
died from this entirely preventable disease, probably
many more in the many very remote areas of Yemen,
which we cannot reach.
Yemen is facing critical stoppages in hospitals
and a lack of doctors and nurses. The health system
has essentially collapsed, with an estimated 55 per
cent of facilities closed due to damage, destruction
or lack of funds. Approximately 30,000 healthcare workers have not been paid in nearly a year,
and no funding has been provided to keep basic
infrastructure, such as hospitals and water-pumping
and sanitation stations, operating. At what point will
the parties shoulder their responsibilities to protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure — hospitals,
medical facilities and schools — and to provide basic
services for the population? At what point will those
supporting the parties to the conflict take the necessary
action — or, perhaps more important, desist from
their violent actions? This cholera scandal is entirely
man-made by the conflicting parties and those beyond
Yemen’s borders who are leading, supplying, fighting
and perpetuating the fear and the fighting.
17-21167

12/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East

Over 120 humanitarian partners in Yemen
are delivering coordinated assistance out of five
hubs — in Aden, Hudaydah, Ibb, Saada and Sana’a.
From January to April, humanitarian partners reached
4.3 million people. However, at a time when the Yemen
humanitarian response plan is only 33 per cent funded,
that is $688 million out of the $2.1 billion required,
humanitarian workers have had to use resources
programmed for food security or malnutrition to
combat the unprecedented cholera outbreak, which has
surged beyond initial estimates. Funding to the appeal
is critical to ensure that lifesaving aid reaches all those
in need, wherever and whoever they are. Fresh funds
are needed to scale up further, pledges made in Geneva
at the April conference must be turned into cash now.
And the United Nations and its partners must be allowed
to use funds flexibly to tackle the multitude of crises
the conflict has created. The cholera response alone
now needs an additional $250 million, of which only
$47 million has been received and is being deployed
and used up as we speak.
I repeat my call made last time I briefed the Council
six weeks ago (see S/PV.7954). If only I did not have to
repeat it. There has been change since then, only, sadly,
for the dramatically worse.
First, notwithstanding the World Bank’s commitment
of $866 million to assist Yemen and the United States
lifting of the freeze on access to Yemen’s foreign
currency reserves, public servants need to be paid
immediately, and health facilities need to be reopened
and restarted. A failure to do so will result in further
preventable deaths. The United Nations and partners
cannot replace State functions. There is no time to lose
in ensuring that those payments are made.
Secondly, there is a need to ensure the protection
of the Yemeni people and critical infrastructure. For
as long as military actions continue, all parties must
comply with their responsibilities under international
humanitarian law and human rights law, and all States
must exert their influence to ensure the parties do so.
Today they are not doing so, and that must change.
Thirdly, there is a need to ensure that all ports
and land routes remain open for both humanitarian
and commercial imports in a predictable and stable
manner. That includes continuing efforts to avert an
attack on Hudaydah, to re-open Sana’a airport and for
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to release airspace and
getting the paid-for, desperately needed mobile cranes

S/PV.7999

to Hudaydah port, rather than leaving them sitting
useless and rotting on the Dubai quayside.
As I have said before, this is a man-made crisis.
The sheer scale of the humanitarian suffering of the
Yemeni people is a direct result of the conflict and
serious violations of international law. Humankind
simply cannot continue to lose out to politics. The
United Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism
has all the necessary checks and balances to ensure the
flow of commercial goods into the country via Red Sea
ports, in particular into Hudaydah. It is, and will be,
inhumane and irresponsible for parties to impede the
delivery of food and fuel into the country.
The international community must do more — words
are insufficient — to ensure that the parties are upholding
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
The Council has a primary responsibility for this, as
well as its responsibility to maintain international
peace and security, which is, frankly, patently failing
in Yemen. Approximately 20 million people depend
on the Council’s concrete action to end the conflict.
To do that, the Council will have to lean much more
heavily and effectively on the parties and those outside
Yemen who are leading this policy and action. Just for
the sake of reaching all the millions with the cholera
vaccines, which are so desperately needed, the people
of Yemen need stability so we can reach many of them
at all. A failure to do so will render their fate and
our — the Council’s — ability to intervene useless and
hopeless. We should all feel deeply guilty about that.
The conflicting parties in Yemen especially should
do so, as should those who drive them from outside
Yemen. Our — the Council’s — joint top common
priority should be always to save civilian lives and
to protect them — the Yemeni people deserve this as
equally as any other citizen of the world, just as any
representative around this table or someone cowering
in fear somewhere in Sana’a or Taiz in Yemen.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ghebreyesus.
Mr. Ghebreyesus: I am grateful for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the health situation in
Yemen, where a cholera outbreak of unprecedented scale
continues. The outbreak is being driven by conflict, the
collapse of basic public services and malnutrition. Two
years of conflict have devastated the lives of ordinary
people and left nearly 15 million without access to basic

17-211675/12

S/PV.7999

The situation in the Middle East

health care. Almost the same number of people do not
have regular access to clean water and sanitation. They
have no choice but to drink dirty water, thus continuing
the cycle of disease.
Cholera flourishes in a weakened health system.
We are witnessing the second wave of an outbreak that
first started in October 2016 and has led to more than
1,700 deaths, as pointed out earlier by Mr. O’Brien, and
more than 300,000 suspected cases in recent months.
It has affected 21 of the 23 governorates and 286 of
the 333 districts. Almost the entire country is affected.
The largest number of cases are in Amanat Al Asimah,
Al Hudaydah, Hajjah, Amran and Ibb — those five
governorates make up 55 per cent of the total of
300,000 cases. The World Health Organization (WHO),
UNICEF and other partners are working with Yemeni
authorities to detect and track the spread of the disease
and reach people with medical treatment, safe water
and adequate sanitation and hygiene practices. WHO
and UNICEF are supporting more than 600 cholera
treatment centres and oral-rehydration therapy sites
in the most affected districts across the nation, and
we plan to open another 500 centres. In addition, our
quick-response teams have been trained and deployed.
Emergency operation centres have been activated in
Sana’a and priority governorates. More than 400 tons
of critical lifesaving supplies have been delivered,
including intravenous fluids and treatment kits, and
more than 5 million people have been supported to
access safe water.
At the same time, there is a shortage of doctors and
nurses to help treat and care for those who are ill. Some
have fled the country, yet many continue to come to
work, even though they have not been paid for more than
10 months. WHO and UNICEF are paying incentives,
travel costs, overtime and other allowances whenever
they can in order to help to get them through this period,
but that is not a sustainable solution. Other challenges
include the fact that more than 55 per cent of all health
facilities are closed or only partially functional. There
are no doctors in 49 of the 333 districts. The supply
chain is hampered by restrictions on imports and
logistics, as well as limited numbers of implementing
partners and funding. The ongoing conflict makes the
challenge worse, because it is difficult to reach those in
need. Consequently, we have four major requests of the
Council today.
First of all, we call for an expedited political
process to bring an immediate end to the conflict — so
6/12

12/07/2017

that people cannot only survive, but thrive. Secondly,
in areas of continuing conflict, we must ensure that
civilian infrastructure, such as water, sanitation and
health facilities, are always protected, in accordance
with international humanitarian law. Thirdly, donors
need to not only quickly honour the pledges they made
at the high-level event regarding Yemen in April, but
also to provide funds for the crisis in a more flexible
manner. Ensuring that workers are paid and given
incentives to remain at their posts is a critical issue.
Those brave professionals need our help so that they can
continue to serve their communities. Lastly, we must
provide political and financial support for long-term
recovery and development. The partnership between
the World Bank, UNICEF and WHO on revitalizing
the health sector provides a useful model. We need to
rebuild the country’s health and sanitation systems so
that we can prevent and better contain future health
risks. We have agreed, with the World Bank, UNICEF
and the World Food Programme, to visit Yemen as soon
as possible. WHO, UNICEF and partners are doing all
they can to save lives and support the health system,
but without peace there will be no end to the suffering
of the people.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Ghebreyesus for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Da Silva.
Mr. Da Silva: I am thankful for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the work of the Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO) on Yemen for the period
under review. I will address two specific situations.
The first is hunger and the second involves our work in
the field with agricultural and livestock issues.
With regard to hunger, as was already mentioned,
17 million people are estimated to be severely food
insecure in Yemen, according to an assessment in
March, an increase of 20 per cent over the previous
assessment in June of last year. We believe that the
number has greatly increased since the most recent
assessment, in March. The Integrated Food Security
Phase Classification systems categorizes the level of
food insecurity into five phases, with phase 5 being
famine. Of the 17 million who fall into phases 3 and 4,
7 million — about 40 per cent — are in phase 4, very
close to famine. We have also reported that people are
already dying of hunger in many of the areas of Abyan,
Taiz, Shabwa and Hajjah governorates, which represent
three quarters of the 7 million that are bordering on
17-21167

12/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East

famine. The prospects are not good because, unless
they receive food aid immediately or cash, those people
will experience famine-like conditions — phase 5.
Secondly, I would like to give a broad overview of
what is happening in the field. We are seeing ongoing
conflict in many important food-producing areas, which
makes the movement of food supplies to local markets
even more difficult, leading to scarcity and spiralling
prices. Crop production last year fell by approximately
40 per cent of what was produced in those areas before
the conflict. Because of poor rains, we expect that the
harvest will be even lower this year. The prospect for
this summer season’s production is still very low, owing
to the combination of the poor rains and the reduced
access to farmlands — as farmers can simply not access
their lands. In addition, water scarcity is currently
one of the main challenges in Yemen. Moreover, the
lack of proper sanitation is leading to an increased
risk of disease, not only among human beings but also
herds. FAO is particularly worried about the collapse
in veterinary services, which in turn is increasing the
number of high-impact diseases in the area — ovine
rinderpest, brucellosis, goat pox and foot-and-mouth
disease, to mention but a few that are transmissible
to human beings. Unless we take steps to address the
conflict now, we will never truly eradicate hunger
in Yemen.
By way of conclusion, we would like to highlight
two main points. First, we all have limited funding and,
worse, limited assets. We simply cannot act where we
are most needed. Secondly, if we do not address the
capacity of those in rural areas, who, more or less,
account for 70 per cent of the country’s population,
there will be no prospects for a better future. If we do
not have a good season this year because of the lack
of rain, we will have even worse results in the future.
Let me conclude by saying that we save lives by saving
livelihoods. It is very important to protect livelihoods
in areas where people live if we want to prevent the
situation from becoming worse in the near future.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Da
Silva for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed; the Director-General of the Food

S/PV.7999

and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Mr. José Graziano da Silva; the Director-General of
the World Health Organization, Mr. Tedros Adhanom
Ghebreyesus; and the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O’Brien, for their briefings.
I would especially like to thank you, Sir, for having
convened today’s briefing.
The tragic situation in Yemen must continue to be
the subject of ongoing public scrutiny by the Security
Council and by the Members of the Organization. Our
most recent presidential statement on this topic was
issued on 15 June (S/PRST/2017/7). It is a long statement,
which describes the entire situation in Yemen and the
opinion of the Security Council on the steps to be taken.
Just two days after the statement was issued, actions
certainly spoke louder than words and could almost
be interpreted as a direct response it. I will now read
from a statement provided to us by Mr. McGoldrick, the
Humanitarian Coordinator in Yemen:
“On 17 June, at least 22 civilians, including six
children, were reported killed and injured in a series
of air attacks on a market in Saada governorate,
near the border with Saudi Arabia. There were no
reported military targets in the proximity of the
market at the time of the attack and no warning was
issued to civilians in the area”.
The statement mentioned air attacks. As far as
we know, the so-called Yemeni rebels do not have air
assets. That means that the attacks were perpetrated by
some other group operating in the region. According
to the information we have, Yemeni President
Mr. Mansour Hadi exercises no control whatsoever
over air operations being carried out in his country. We
do not know what type of strategic value a market could
have that would justify such an attack. Nonetheless, it is
time to demand that those who carry out such barbaric
attacks and those who provide logistical support and
weaponry immediately cease such actions, which are a
violation of international humanitarian law.
We endorse the call to the international community
made in August 2016 by Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein,
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
to establish a mechanism to investigate violations
of fundamental rights committed in Yemen. The
perpetrators of such gross violations of international
humanitarian law must be held accountable for
their crimes. The Security Council has all of the

17-211677/12

S/PV.7999

The situation in the Middle East

competencies required to establish impartial and
transparent mechanisms to investigate the violations of
international humanitarian law reported in Yemen and
committed by both parties to the conflict.
There is no military solution to the conflict. It is
through negotiations and peace talks alone that peace
will be restored to the Yemeni people. Nonetheless, the
parties are showing no signs of reaching an agreement
that would lead to a political solution, without
preconditions and in good faith, to end this protracted
conflict. Actors must assume that concessions must be
made in order to break the deadlock.
More than two years of conflict in Yemen have
caused not only a humanitarian disaster and the most
serious food insecurity crisis in the world, with millions
of people needing food aid daily in order to survive; the
violence has also weakened Yemen and has affected the
lives of millions of Yemenis.
Our own sensitivity is yet another victim of the
tragic events in Yemen. Here at the United Nations, we
have become accustomed to creating euphemisms so we
talk about food insecurity when we are really describing
a complete dearth of food. We talk about people who
are food insecure, instead of saying that they do not
have food to meet basic daily dietary requirements.
In this brutal war, the lives of people in vulnerable
groups, such as women and children, are seriously
and adversely affected by ongoing hostilities and the
humanitarian crisis. According to recent reports,
education and health, which has worsened by an
outbreak of cholera, and the nutrition of children are
all under threat. Uruguay takes this opportunity to
commend and support the work of the newly appointed
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba, and
awaits her annual report. In that regard, Uruguay trusts
that this year, a comprehensive list of all parties that
commit serious violations against children in Yemen
will be issued. In spite of the calls of the international
community, the Yemeni people continue to endure
widespread violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law.
In conclusion, I reiterate Uruguay’s support
for the work carried out by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh
Ahmed, and thank him for his tireless efforts to find
a peaceful solution to the conflict. At the same time,
once again, Uruguay deeply thanks and acknowledges
8/12

12/07/2017

all humanitarian workers and institutions in Yemen for
their courageous efforts to assist the millions of victims
of a terrible conflict.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like
to thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed; the Director
General of the World Health Organization, Mr. Tedros
Adhanom Ghebreyesus; the Director-General of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, Mr. José Graziano da Silva; and the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O’Brien
for their briefings.
We also thank you, Sir, not only for having
convened this meeting, but also for having come up
with the format including the relevant experts who have
provided briefings on the situation in Yemen, thereby
giving us a broad idea of what is happening not only
from the humanitarian, food and health perspective,
but also with regard to the political situation and the
tragedy that the Yemeni people are enduring.
The situation in Yemen remains critical, and the
statistics — such as those concerning the cholera
outbreak, as described in the latest briefings presented
to the Council in May (see S/PV.7954) — have surpassed
projections to an alarming extent. According to
information published by the International Committee
of the Red Cross on 11 July, it is estimated that more
than 313,000 people are suspected to be ill with cholera,
while to date more than 1,700 people have lost their lives
to the disease. That statistic is four times greater than
the figure recorded by the World Health Organization
(WHO) — 361 persons — for the months of April and
May. Even more concerning is the fact that the number
of those who have succumbed to cholera in Yemen
alone — 1,304 — is greater than the total number of
deaths resulting from the disease in the entire world in
2015 , as reported by WHO.
That terrible situation is but one of the many
aspects arising from the conflict in Yemen, and it
has been exacerbated by the lack of access to water,
sanitation and basic services, and, above all, by the
precariousness of the availability of medical services
to the population — as illustrated by the statistic cited
today that only 45 per cent of hospitals are operating
while lacking the resources necessary to respond to
the tragic situation. Unfortunately, added to that is the
17-21167

12/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East

disturbing lack of food; according to the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, more than
17 million people are living in food insecurity, of whom
7 million — as Mr. Graziano da Silva mentioned — are
at risk of famine.
It is important to recall that, according to the
29 June report of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the conflict
has resulted in approximately 2 million internally
displaced persons, while 18.8 million people — the most
vulnerable cross-section of the population and at the
greatest risk of falling ill from malnutrition — require
access to humanitarian assistance. In that regard, we
note with great concern that even though the Council
expressed its position on the subject in presidential
statement S/PRST/2017/7 on 15 June, humanitarian
assistance deployed in Yemen continues to be affected
by the imposition of restrictions and arbitrary unilateral
measures between the parties involved in the conflict.
We also continue to be alarmed by the constant threat
of aerial attacks on civilian infrastructure, which limits
and obstructs access to humanitarian assistance, which
the Yemeni population needs.
We reiterate our call on the parties and actors
involved in the conflict to comply with and respect
the provisions of resolution 2140 (2014) and to make
every effort to commit to a sustained dialogue leading
to an inclusive, orderly and political transition directed
and led by the Yemeni people, which satisfies their
legitimate demands and aspirations, while respecting at
all times the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Yemen.
In today’s briefings, we have heard all of the
consequences of the conflict. I believe that it is important
for the Security Council to also analyse the causes and
the situations that led to the conflict. The representative
of Uruguay made several statements with which we
fully agree. It important for us to receive reports after
investigations pertaining to those responsible for the
bombings and those providing weapons to the parties.
Although we can incessantly repeat that there is no
military solution to the conflict, the fact that we have
said it does not mean that we are going to end the military
offensives. Regrettably, this is a war that continues to
be passed over in silence. It is not part of the day-today reality outside of the Chamber. That fact is not only
striking, but also clearly shows the limitations of our
work on the Security Council. We hope that, beyond

S/PV.7999

our statements and declarations, we will be able to take
a specific action so that, only a few weeks from now, we
will not sit down again merely to hear that the situation
is deteriorating and the conflict escalating.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would first like to thank
Special Envoy Ould Cheikh Ahmed for his briefing
this morning and for his efforts to politically end the
conflict in Yemen, which is in a situation going from
a very bad — even desperate — situation to an even
worse one. I would also like to thank Mr. O’Brien,
Mr. Graziano da Silva and Mr. Ghebreyesus for their
valuable contributions today. I would like to say to
them that we pay tribute to the United Nations and
all humanitarian actors present on the ground, who
continue to deliver live-saving support to all those in
need in what are very challenging circumstances.
This morning’s briefings warrant action on several
fronts. First, we all know that a political solution is the
only way to end the conflict in Yemen. We therefore
reiterate our continued support for the Special Envoy
and his efforts for a resumed United Nations-led
political process and a durable cessation of hostilities.
As the Security Council stated in presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/7 one month ago, it is time for the parties
to resume peace talks and engage constructively and in
good faith. As we all know, women’s participation in
such talks is crucial.
Secondly, as our briefers clearly reminded us
today, the humanitarian situation in Yemen has further
deteriorated since we last met (see S/PV.7974), and that
was only six weeks ago. It is a man-made tragedy, and,
as often happens in cases of armed conflict today, the
civilian population and children in particular are the
main victims. We are horrified by the rapid spread
of cholera to all of Yemen’s governorates. It has been
described as the worst cholera outbreak in the world.
When Mr. O’Brien spoke to the Council on 30 May
(see S/PV.7954), only a little more than a month ago, he
reported 55,000 suspected cases, and it has now surged
to over 300,000. That increase is as much as 15,000 to
20,000 per day with more than 1,700 associated deaths
in just 75 days.
We also know that Yemen is on the brink of famine.
Yemen is the largest food-insecurity emergency in the
world, and more than 17 million people — approximately
two-thirds of the population — are food insecure, while
6.8 million Yemenis are living just one step away from
famine. We therefore need to immediately deliver funds.

17-211679/12

S/PV.7999

The situation in the Middle East

We call on donors to deliver on their commitments
made at the pledging conference for Yemen held in
Geneva on 25 April, which we, the Swedish and Swiss
Foreign Ministers, hosted together with the SecretaryGeneral, but even the commitments we and others made
in Geneva will not be sufficient to meet the enormous
humanitarian needs. We therefore call for additional
funding to the United Nations humanitarian response
plan for Yemen.
Finally, in addition to more funding, there is an
urgent need for greater humanitarian access and full
respect for international humanitarian law. We repeat
the Council’s call on all parties, issued last month in
presidential statement S/PRST/2017/7, for safe, rapid,
unhindered and sustained humanitarian access and for
facilitated access to essential food, fuel and medical
supplies throughout the country, in accordance with
international humanitarian law. It is important to keep
all of Yemen’s ports functioning, including Hudaydah
port, as a critical lifeline for the humanitarian response.
The parties now need to comply urgently with
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
We remain concerned about the high number of deaths
of civilians and the damage to civilian infrastructure,
particularly medical facilities and personnel. Medical
facilities are needed not only to give medical care,
but also to fight cholera. As the United Nations
Humanitarian Coordinator in Yemen stated recently,
“we must give hope to millions of Yemenis by showing
that the world is not indifferent to their suffering”.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
wise conduct of the work of the Council this month, and
to thank you for giving us this opportunity to speak to
the Council.
Almost two and a half years since the bloody coup
in Yemen — led by Houthi militias allied with our
country’s former President and supported by Iran, a State
that is a sponsor of terrorism around the world — my
country is currently dealing with an extremely serious
and complex health and humanitarian situation. Today
Yemen is making headlines because of the death,
poverty and disease that the militias have brought on us
since September 2014. The environmental health and
humanitarian situation in regions under the control of
the coup’s leaders has been complicated even further
10/12

12/07/2017

by an outbreak of cholera that has killed hundreds
of Yemenis.
Despite the international community’s appeals and
the intensified efforts of the World Health Organization,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, the World Food Programme and the King
Salman Center for Humanitarian Aid and Relief, the
militias continue to reject cooperation and subjugate
our people to dangerous blackmail. They believe that
making these health and humanitarian disasters as bad
as possible will force the international community to
come up with a solution that will enable them to sue for
a political compromise.
Today it is more urgent than ever to achieve
peace in Yemen, based on the three locally,
regionally and internationally agreed-on terms of
reference — the Initiative of the Gulf Cooperation
Council and its Implementation Mechanism, the
national dialogue outcomes and the relevant Security
Council resolutions, particularly resolution 2216 (2015).
They remain the main drivers of the efforts of the United
Nations and the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for
Yemen, all of which the Yemeni Government fully
supports with a view to making progress towards peace.
Our Government continues to be ready to make all
necessary concessions, however difficult, to achieve
the peace that the great and resilient Yemeni people
deserve, because we believe that war is the choice of
fools and peace the choice of the brave. We therefore
stressed in our communiqué of 3 June that we would
continue to support the efforts of Special Envoy Ismail
Ould Cheikh Ahmed, and when he met with our
President in May we emphasized our support for his
latest proposals and ideas. They include the withdrawal
of militias from Hudaydah governorate, as discussed
in last year’s peace consultations in Kuwait, and the
establishment of a technical committee of economic
and financial experts to help the Government establish
an appropriate and urgently needed mechanism to
pay employee salaries and address the problem of
livelihoods in regions controlled by the coup leaders,
in order to provide the income needed to cover such
expenses. In its presidential statement of 15 June
(S/PRST/2017/7), the Security Council stressed its
support for the Special Envoy and his recommendations
for peace. Unfortunately, however, the Houthi-Saleh
coalition has rejected those proposals.
17-21167

12/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East

I have outlined the position of the Yemeni
Government — its quest for sustainable peace and
an end to a war that was never of our choosing, but
was imposed on us — to the Council over and over
again. The Houthi militias have turned a blind eye
to all the options for peace and all the sacrifices and
concessions that our President has made in an effort
to avoid a foolish war in which the biggest loser is
the great Yemeni people. Despite all of this, we will
continue to extend our hand and choose the path of a
just, comprehensive and peaceful solution based on
the terms of reference — one that paves the way for a
genuine peace and does not lead to a fool’s war, accept
blackmail or reward the coup leaders, terrorists and
gangs for violating our State’s national sovereignty.
The only way to reach a sustainable solution to the
crisis and the war is by addressing their root causes. I
must emphasize how crucial we consider the current
cooperation between our Government and the United
Nations and all its agencies in Yemen. I would like to
take this opportunity to express our deep gratitude to
all the United Nations workers in Yemen who continue
to fulfil their noble humanitarian responsibilities in
dealing with the cholera outbreak, despite the desperate
conditions. We are expecting an important visit from
Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF, and
Mr. David Beasley, Executive Director of the World
Food Programme, in the next few days.
However, I feel compelled to note the inadequate
performance of the Office of the Resident Coordinator, a
subject that we have continually brought up in our letters
to the Secretariat, most recently in our communiqué of
26 June, which calls the Resident Coordinator’s work
unprofessional, biased and politicized, ignoring as it
does the tragic situation that the militias have caused,
particularly in Taiz, which has now been under siege
for more than two years, as well as the deaths and
displacement of women, children and the elderly in the
indiscriminate shelling in June of civilian services and
hospital facilities by the Houthi militias.
The Yemeni coalition monitoring human rights
violations has documented 917 violations by Houthis,
resulting in 187 civilians killed and another 205
injured, as well as 236 kidnapped and 33 who have
been the victims of forced disappearance. We continue
to document a growing number of children recruited
by Houthis, and the Office of the Special Envoy has
updated us on those numbers. It is distressing to see
the numbers, which grow daily, of children among the

S/PV.7999

victims in Taiz and other regions, and of the disappeared
and those who are detained in Houthi prisons. And yet
the conscience of the international community has not
yet driven it to raise its voice in protest at such violations
of human rights, and the deafening silence continues,
as if it were normal to consider that international
humanitarian law does not apply in Yemen and that the
international community does not care about Yemenis.
Under the leadership of President Mansour, the
Government of Yemen considers it vital to mobilize
international and Arab support in order to address the
deteriorating humanitarian situation and the cholera
outbreak in every region of Yemen. The challenges that
we have been facing exceed our capacity to address
them. We therefore call on the international community
to provide assistance and devote greater attention to this
issue. To date only 33.3 per cent of the United Nations
humanitarian response plan for Yemen 2017 has been
funded, despite the fact that we are in the second half
of the year. I therefore appeal to the human conscience
and to all States Members of the United Nations to
swiftly cover the remaining requirements of the plan
for the current year. We call upon those States that
made pledges at the Geneva conference to rapidly fulfil
their commitments to the United Nations, so that we can
overcome the cholera epidemic and famine in Yemen.
Allow me to express our thanks and appreciation to
Secretary-General António Guterres, donor countries,
the Friends of Yemen, the King Salman Centre for
Humanitarian Aid and Relief, UNICEF, the World
Health Organization, the World Food Programme
and other relief agencies in the brotherly United Arab
Emirates and Kuwait for swiftly responding to the
consequences of the humanitarian situation and the
cholera outbreak in Yemen.
In conclusion, I should like to stress once again
that a sustainable, effective and genuine solution to
the situation in Yemen requires that the reasons for the
coup be addressed and national political reconciliation
ensured, as well as a return to legitimacy, the restoration
of State institutions and the normalization of living
conditions through a peace process that puts an end to
the hijacking of our State by Tehran-backed militias.
This requires also that the international community
bring pressure to bear on the Houthis and Mr. Saleh
to resume, and genuinely engage in, the dialogue for
peace and make concessions for the sake of Yemen.

17-2116711/12

S/PV.7999

The situation in the Middle East

We appreciate the efforts of the Security Council
and the group of 18, and we thank the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and other
States of the Arab coalition for their efforts to support
legitimacy in Yemen. We call upon all members of the
Security Council to continue to make unified efforts to
end the Yemeni crisis by taking a firm stance against
the masterminds of the coup and to bring greater

12/12

12/07/2017

pressure to bear on them in order to ensure that they
comply with all resolutions of international legitimacy
and international humanitarian law.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

17-21167
