IX,

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter and the relevant resolutions of the organs of
the United Nations;
4. Condemns the _continu_ation of !epre~s~ve a~d
terrorist acts by colonial, rac1st and ahen reg1me~ m
deny.ing peoples their legitima-te right to self-d_etermmation and independence and other human nghts and
fundamental freedoms;
5. Appeals to States which have not ye! done so
to examine the possibility of . becomll!-g part1es to the
existing intemational conventlo~s wh1c~ relate to. va:
rious aspects of the problem of mternat10nal terror1sm,
6. Invites States to take all appropriate measures
at ,the national level with a view to the speedy and final
elimination of the problem, bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 3 above;
7 Invites the Ad Hoc Committee on International
Ter;orism to continue its work in accordance with the
mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly under
resolution 3034 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, first
by studying the ooderlying causes of terrorism and -then
by recommending practica! measures to combat terrorism;
8. Invites the States which have not yet done so to
submit their observations and concrete proposals as
soon as possible to the Secretary-General so as to
enable the Ad Hoc Committee to carry out its mandate
more efficiently;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Ad Hoc Committee an analytical study of the
observations of States submitted under paragraph 8
above;
10. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to consider
the observations of States under paragraph 8 above and
to submi,t its report with recommendations for possible
co-operation for the speedy elimination of the problem,
bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 3, to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Ad Hoc Committee with the necessary facilities and
services, induding summary records of its meetings;
12. Decides to indude the ítem in the provisional
agenda of its thkty-fourth session.

105th p[enary meeting
16 December 1977

32/148.

Drafting of an international convention
against the taking of hostages

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/ 103 of 15 December
1976,
Having considered the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention
against the Taking of Hostages, 26
Considering that the Ad Hoc Committee has been
unable to complete the mandate given to it within the
aUocated time,
Mindful of the need to conclude, under the auspices
of the United N ations, an international convention
against the taking of hostages, taking into account the
26 /bid.,

Supp/ement No. 39 (A/32/39).

2U

urgency of formulating cffective measures to put an
end to the taking of hostages,
Bearing in mind the recommendation of the Ad Hoc
Committee that it should continue its work in 1978, 27
l. Takes note of the repmt of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention
against the Taking of Hostages;
2. Decides that the Ad Hoc Committee, as constituted,28 should continue, in accordance with paragraph 3
of General Assembly resolution 31/103, to draft at thc
earliest possible date an international convention against
the taking of hostages and, in the fulfilment of its mandate, to consider suggestions and proposals from any
State, bearing in mind the views expressed during the
debate on this ítem at the thirty-second session of the
Assembly;
3. Invites Governments to submit, or to bring up
to date, suggestions and proposals for consideration by
the Ad Hoc Committee;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to r,ender ali
assistance to the Ad Hoc Committee, including the preparation of summary records of its meetings;
5. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to submit its
report and to make every effort to submit a draft convention against the taking of hostages to the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session the item entitled "Drafting of
an international convention against the taking of hostages".
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/150.

Conclusion of a world treaty on the
non-use of force in international relations29

The General Assembly,
Considering that, in conformity with the Charter of
the United Nations, States shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of any
State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the need for universal and effective application of this principle in international relations and
for assistance by the United Nations in this endeavour,
Recalling its resolution 31/9 of 8 November 1976,
in which it invited Member States to examine further
the draft World Treaty on the Non-Use of Force in
International Rclations 30 submitted by the Union of
21 /bid., para. 14.
28 As a result of the

appointment of the Byelorussian Soviet
Socialist Republic (sce A/31/479/Add.l), the Ad Hoc Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention against
the Taking of Hostages is composed of the following Member
States: Algeria, Barbados, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, Chile, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Egypt,
France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Guinea, Iran, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Philippines, Poland,
Somalía, Surinam, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Venezuela and Yugoslavia.
29 Sce also sect. X.B.2, decision 32/442.
30 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first
Session, Annexes, agenda item 124, document A/31/243, annex.
