84

General Auembly-Twenty-second SeHion

Member States, the United Nations itself and its officials, as well as diplomatic agents, shall enjoy the necessary privileges and immunities,
Recalling that Article 105 of the Ch~rte~ of the
United Nations provides that the Orgamzatto:1. shall
enjoy in the territory of its Members such pnv1leges
and immunities as are necessary for the fulfilment of
its purposes and that represen~atives of the M~m~rs
of the United Nations and officials of the Orgam1..a.t1on
shall similarly enjoy such privileges and in:ununities ~s
are necessary for the independent ex~rc1~e of their
functions in connexion with the Orgamzat10n,
Recalling further that the 1946 Convention on the
Privileges and Immunities ~f _the United_ Nations 9 confirms and specifies the proV1s1ons of Article 105 of the
Charter and lays down rules, inter alia, regarding the
immunity of the property and the in:71olabili~~ .of the
premises of the Organization, regar~mg fac1lt~1e~ for
its official communications and regardmg the pnv1leges
and immunities of representatives of Members t-0 orga~s
of the United Nations and conferences convened by 1t
while exercising their functions and during their journey
to and from the place of meeting,
Recalling that the rules of i~ter~ational l~w governing diplomatic relations embodt~d m_ the V~en~ ~nvention of 1961 10 aim at protectmg d1plomat1c m1ss10ns
and diplomatic representatives and otherwise facilitating
their functions,
Conscious of its duty to strengthen by every means
peaceful relations and co-operation among States,

1. Deplores all departures from the rules of international law governing diplomatic privilege;; and immunities and the privileges and immunities of the Organization;
2. Urges States Members of the United Nations
which have not yet done so to accede to the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the UniteJ
Nations, adopted by the General Assembly of the United
Nations on 13 February 1946;
3. Urges States Members of the United Nations.
whether or not they have acceded to the Convention
on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations,
to take every measure necessary to secure the implementation of the privileges and immunities accorded
under Article 105 of the Charter to the Organization.
to the representatives of Members and to the officials
of the Organization ;
4. Urges States which have not yet done so to ratify
or accede to the Vienna Convention on DiplomaticRelations of 18 April 1961;

5. Urges States, whether or not they are parties
to the Vienha Convention on Diplomatic Relations, to
take every measure necessary to secure the implementation of the rules of international law governing diplomatic relations, and in particular to protect diplomatic
missions and to enable diplomatic agents to fulfil their
tasks in conformity with international law.
1637th plenary meeting,
18 December 1967.
9 United

Nations, Treat_v Series, vol. 1 (1946), No. 4, p. 15.
!.\fations Coni'.'"':,,,c on Diplomatic Intercourse
and Immunities, Official Recor-ds, vol. II (United Nations
publication, Sales No.: 62.X .1:, p 82
10 United

2329 (XXII). Question of methods of fact-finding
The General Assembly,
l?ecalling its resolutions 1967 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, 2104 (XX) of 20 December 1965 and
2182 (XXI) of 12 December 1966 on the question of
methods of fact-finding.
Noting the comments submitted by M_ember States
pursuant to the above-mentioned resolutions, and the
views expressed m the United Nations,
Noting with appreciation the two reports submitted
by the Secretary-Ceneral 11 in pursuance of the abovementioned resolutions,
Recvgni:::ing the usefulness of impartial fact-finding as
a means towards the settlement of disputes,
B eliwng that an important contribution to the peaceful settlement of disputes and to the prevention of
disputes could be made by providing for impartial
fact-finding within the framework of international organizations and in bilateral and multilateral conventions
or through other appropriate arrangements,
Affirming that the possibility of recourse to impartial
methods fo fact-finding is without prejudice to the
right of States t(, seek other peaceful means of settlement of their vwn choice,
Reaffenm:ng the importance of impartial fact-finding,
in approprfr1te cases, for the settlement and the prevention of disputes,
Recalling the possibility of the continued use of existing facilities for fact-finding,
I. Urges Member States to make more effective
u,:;e of the existing methods of fact-finding;
2. Imn'tcs Member States to take into consideration,
in choosing means for the peaceful settlement of disputes, :.he possibility of entrusting the ascertainment
of facts, whenever it appears appropriate, to competent
international organizations and bodies established by
agreement between the parties concerned, in conformity
with the principles of international law and the Charter
vf the United Nations or other relevant agreements;
3. Draws speri.al attention to the possibility of recourse by States in particalar cases, where appropriate,
to procedures for the ascertainment of facts, in accord,lllce with Article 33 of the Charter;

4. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a register of experts i11 legal and other fields, whose services
the States parties to a dispute may use by agreement
for fact-finding in relation to the dispute, and requests
Member States to nominate up to five of their nationals
to be included in such a register.
1637th plenary meeting,
18 December 1967.

2330 (XXII). Need to expedite the drafting of
a definition of aggression in the light of the
present international situation
The General Assembly,
Considering that in conformity with the Charter of
the United Nations all Members of the United Nations
must refrain in their international relations from the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
,

11

Official

Records of _the General Assembly, Twentieth

,\ rsswn_, A,in,',res, agenda items 90 and 94, document A/5694;
tl>!d., 7 wrnly-/ir-..-t S,•ssi,m. Annrxes, agenda item 87, document

\/622X.
