S/PV.8560

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8560th meeting

Tuesday, 25 June 2019, 10.40 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Repkin
Ms. Bekwa
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan (S/2019/491)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-19039 (E)
*1919039*

S/PV.8560

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.

25/06/2019

their homes. Since the signing of the peace agreement,
according to the International Organization for
Migration, more than half a million people have done
gone home, including more than 210,000 who have
returned from neighbouring countries.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in South Sudan (S/2019/491)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. David
Shearer, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for South Sudan and Head of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan; Mr. Andrew Gilmour,
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights; and
Ms. Lydia Minagano, from the Strategic Defence and
Security Review Board of the Reconstituted Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission.

Humanitarian partners report improved access
to areas of need, although bureaucratic impediments
continue to dog some operations. Their efforts have
been assisted by the rehabilitation of 2,500 kilometres
of roads by the five engineering companies of UNMISS
and World Food Programme (WFP) projects. That has
enhanced the ability to move food to remote locations
in advance of the rains and cut down on expensive
airdrops. Together with opening of river corridors and
a reduction in illegal checkpoints across the country,
WFP reports cost efficiencies of up to $113 million.
The most recent food security analysis, however,
remains dire. Seven million people are facing crisis, or
worse. But, for the first time in years, some counties saw
slight improvements, where relative calm has enabled
households to resume cultivation. Those positive signs
come from a very low base. But it is a glimmer of what
is possible with peace. It is vital that that trend continue.

Mr. Shearer: It is my pleasure to brief the Security
Council on the two overarching areas of focus of
the mandate of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), namely, building durable peace and
protecting civilians in South Sudan.

Since the signing of the peace agreement, more
than 110 rapprochements have occurred in communities
around the country. UNMISS has directly facilitated
more than a quarter of them. I attended a number of
those meetings, including a recent joint delegation with
the Special Envoy of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) for South Sudan and the Chair
of the Reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission. Helicoptering into Panyume in Central
Equatoria — a proposed opposition cantonment site
where tensions remain high — we were met by dozens
of opposition soldiers. Their welcome was warm and
we sat under mango trees together with hundreds of
local people to talk reconciliation. We then flew to
Yei, where we met with Government authorities, youth,
women and religious leaders.

The Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan continues
to hold and, except for areas in Central Equatoria, the
ceasefire is in process. Just that one simple reality of
peace has produced significant change. The drop in
political violence, based on the trend of past years,
has meant that hundreds, if not thousands, of people
are alive who would otherwise not be. Many displaced
families have decided it is safe and time to return to

The visit showed that, while groups are on opposite
sides of the political divide, their experiences of war
and hopes for peace are the same. That one example
matches what my colleagues and I witnessed on many
occasions in recent months across the country where
the sides have come together. The desire for peace is
palpable, and there is a fierce aversion to any renewed
fighting. My observation is that the pace of dialogue and
peacebuilding at the grassroots level is moving much

Ms. Minagano is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Juba.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/491, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Shearer.

2/20

19-19039

25/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

faster than among the elites negotiating nationally. The
country’s politicians need to listen to the mood of the
people and follow the lead set by the local communities.
In that vein, it is a shame that the national dialogue
process has so far failed to achieve the inclusivity
required for a true consultative process.
The strong desire for peace is echoed in results
of a perception survey that we carried out, which
interviewed 2,400 people in 10 different locations. The
survey exposed the shocking impact of the conflict:
79 per cent of the people interviewed reported that
members of their family had been killed. The same
proportion reported family members forced to flee
violence. And yet, remarkably, 89 per cent of those
interviewed believe there will be lasting peace by the
end of the year. We should be frank. The fighting has
stopped because the leaders ordered their soldiers to
stop. If it resumes, against the will of the people, it will
be because those same leaders want it, and ordered it,
to happen.
In May, the parties unanimously decided to
extend the pre-transitional period, thereby delaying
the formation of a transitional Government until
12 November. While the postponement is disappointing,
it does give time to resolve outstanding issues that might
have otherwise derailed the peace deal. Implementation
is frustratingly slow. Many benchmarks are still to be
met. More compromise is needed, particularly from the
Government, which holds the much stronger position.
The transitional Constitution, which incorporates the
peace agreement, has been returned to the National
Constitutional Amendment Committee for further
updates. The Independent Boundaries Commission
reported back last week; How its conclusions play out in
the coming weeks remains to be seen. Security reform
and the unification of armed forces has been sluggish,
despite the much-appreciated efforts of IGAD Special
Envoy Ismail Wais. UNMISS is providing political and
technical guidance to help the parties in line with its
new mandate.
A fundamental challenge is the lack of regular
face-to-face meetings between President Salva Kiir
and opposition leader Riek Machar. If former bitter
enemies can put the past behind them and reconcile
at the local level, their national leaders must do the
same. Leader-to-leader meetings, preferably held in
Juba, are critical because trust and confidence cannot
cold-start the day a new unified Government is formed.
The Government should also meet its commitment to

S/PV. 8560

release the funding it pledged for implementation, as an
example to other donors.
The African Union, IGAD and the United Nations
have been working collectively to support the process.
We are strongly unified in our position that the most
recent six-month extension should be the last one. We
accept that some tasks may not be entirely complete
by November— however we define “complete” — but
that should not delay the formation of the transitional
Government. We should see the peace agreement
as a living document, not set in stone. There are no
pre-transitional tasks that cannot be achieved within
a unified transitional administration. In fact, there are
many advantages to decisions made collectively within
a transitional Government, because they will be made
collectively and transparently and parties will be better
held to account by citizens.
The decision of the United Nations in 2013 to open
its gates to people fleeing for their lives was one of the
most noble actions the Organization has ever taken. It
saved tens of thousands of people and remains at the
heart of our protection of civilians mandate. However,
our mandate also stresses the importance of supporting
conditions for the safe, informed, voluntary and
dignified return of internally displaced persons (IDPs)
and refugees. So far, actual numbers of returns are
relatively small compared to the 2.3 million refugees
and the 1.9 million internally displaced, but there is a
growing trend of return.
Prior to the signing of the peace agreement, the
number of people returning home each month averaged
about 18,000. Since the peace deal was signed, that
number has jumped to 76,000 each month. Some families
have returned under their own devices, but thousands
of others — particularly those living in protection of
civilians sites — will need assistance. Most wanting to
go home are women and children without the ability or
resources to leave without help. UNMISS, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and humanitarian partners are providing that support
in line with international humanitarian principles and
are following guidelines agreed by the humanitarian
country team.
A key challenge ahead is the lack of basic services
within communities of return. Today, the reason
most commonly cited by IDPs for not wanting to
leave a protection of civilians site is a reluctance to
take their children out of school, not insecurity. In

19-190393/20

S/PV.8560

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

parallel, UNMISS is shifting its focus from static
duties — guarding protection of civilian sites — to
more long-range patrolling, concentrating on areas of
return. A substantial component of UNMISS’s effort is
now devoted to protection of civilians site protection.
Despite the reduction in political violence,
fighting continues in Central Equatoria, causing
ongoing suffering. Early next week, UNMISS will
release a human rights report on the situation. Our
investigations reveal atrocities committed by all sides
against civilians, including killings, rape, abduction
and looting. In response, UNMISS has beefed up
its presence in Yei and matched that with political
engagement. The protection of civilians will continue
to be a top priority, but our protection role will naturally
diminish if there is peace. We can then look to adjust
our troop requirements accordingly, while continuing
our mediation and peacebuilding efforts.
In two weeks, South Sudan will celebrate its
eighth anniversary of gaining independence. With
that sovereignty comes responsibility — an obligation
that is acknowledged only rarely and that includes
the leaders’ use of the country’s resources in the best
interests of their citizens, not their own. The message
from the people of South Sudan that we have heard in
that regard is very clear. Leaders must live up to their
responsibilities and give the people peace.

25/06/2019

General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, has briefed the
Council about and which I will not repeat.
Crucial though it is, the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan does not address all divisions, with their
increasingly ethnic dimensions, that lie at the root of
the conflict or the extremely high levels of corruption,
which continue to undermine sustainable peace and
justice in South Sudan, as well as the economic and
social rights of the population.
We have just heard about the continued serious
violations in Central Equatoria; I will not repeat them.
In other parts of South Sudan, the violence has
shifted primarily to acts perpetrated by communitybased militias and armed elements. Frequently referred
to as cattle raids or intercommunal violence, these
incidents have largely evolved from a traditional
practice to acts of political violence involving State
actors, including State security forces, elements of
organized armed groups and self-defence groups
established by local communities. Since the signing of
the revitalized agreement in September 2018, civilian
casualties resulting from this form of violence have far
exceeded those resulting from violations and abuses by
conventional parties to the conflict.

Mr. Gilmour: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council on the human rights
situation in South Sudan and its impact on peace
and security.

The restriction of political and civic space is also
a worrying trend. Freedom of expression is under
constant attack in the country and is closely linked with
the unfettered power of the National Security Service to
impede citizens’ civil and political rights. Surveillance,
intimidation and arbitrary arrests are commonly used
to restrict the activities of human rights defenders,
critics and journalists. The case of Mr. Peter Biar Ajak
is noteworthy in that regard.

In line with the important progress that Mr. Shearer,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
South Sudan and Head of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS), has just reported, since last
September the Human Rights Division of UNMISS
has documented a significant and welcome decrease
in the number of human rights violations and abuses
perpetrated by Government forces and organized armed
groups throughout the country. A major exception
to this, however, has been the continued prevalence
of sexual violence by parties to the conflict, which
Ms. Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-

The real guarantee of lasting peace in South Sudan
lies with efforts to end impunity. Many reports have
concluded that there are reasonable grounds to believe
that gross violations of international human rights law
and of international humanitarian law, and international
crimes have been committed by the parties to the
conflict. Those include joint reports by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and UNMISS, those of the Panel of Experts established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) as well as the reports
of the Commission on Human Rights in South Sudan,
established by the Human Rights Council.

The President (spoke
Mr. Shearer for his briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Gilmour.

4/20

19-19039

25/06/2019

S/PV. 8560

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Despite all that evidence, however, no significant
action has been taken against the perpetrators. And
to break the long-standing cycle of impunity, as well
as to prevent future violations, we believe that the
transitional justice mechanisms outlined in the peace
agreement must be implemented. The Government
has not yet signed the memorandum of understanding
with the African Union for the establishment of the
hybrid court.
UNMISS has supported the State in its efforts
to deliver justice at local levels, offering what David
Shearer has just called some important glimmers of
hope amid the challenges facing the country, including
through mobile court initiatives. The UNMISSsupported mobile courts in Bentiu and Malakal have led
to the conviction of at least three members of organized
forces for rape. We are encouraged that, on 14 March,
Government speakers — including the Minister of
Defence and Veterans Affairs and the Chief of the
South Sudan Defence Forces — publicly conceded
that members of the Government security forces had
been involved in perpetrating sexual violence and
urged commanders to ensure that the perpetrators of
these acts are held accountable. Real change starts with
an acknowledgement of the problem, so we welcome
that step.
The UNMISS Human Rights Division also
regularly engages with and provides support to national
authorities, security forces, civil society organizations
and community groups on a range of human rights
issues. It supports human rights forums in all of the field
offices, such as that held in Bentiu last week, chaired
by the state Governor and attended by key partners, to
address justice and sexual violence in hotspot areas.
In conclusion, we hope that the international
community and the Security Council will continue to
urge as strongly as possible the South Sudanese parties
to implement their commitments to ending hostilities
and to stopping the sexual violence. As we have just
heard Special Representative David Shearer say, let us
be frank. The fighting has stopped because the leaders
ordered the soldiers to stop. That surely applies to
the continued human rights violations and the sexual
violence. If the leaders order the soldiers to stop those
crimes, they too will largely stop. We also hope that
everyone, including the Council, will continue to press
the parties for the establishment of the accountability
and transitional justice mechanisms outlined in the
revitalized agreement.

The President (spoke
Mr. Gilmour for his briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Ms. Minagano.
Ms. Minagano: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
invitation to brief the Security Council on the situation
of women and girls in South Sudan. Today marks more
than nine months since the signing of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, yet the fighting has yet
to fully cease. While women and girls are affected
disproportionately by the years of conflict and the
current humanitarian crisis, I want to speak not only
of their despair, but also of their resilience and of what
they need to rebuild their country.
My name is Lydia Minagano, and I speak
in my capacity as Project Manager of the Peace
Implementation Monitoring Initiative, a network of
civil society organizations working to monitor progress
and challenges in implementing South Sudan’s peace
agreement. I am a member of the Strategic Defence and
Security Review Board, one of the mechanisms of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan, and a member of the South
Sudan Women’s Coalition for Peace, which participated
in the peace talks in 2018.
My statement will focus on four key areas. The
first is the gendered nature of the conflict, especially
its impact on women and girls. The second is the need
to strengthen women’s meaningful participation in the
implementation of the peace agreement, as well as all
decision-making processes that will impact the future of
South Sudan. The third is the critical need for security
sector reform. The last is the importance of consulting
with civil society in South Sudan, particularly womenled organizations.
The conflict of the past five years is deeply rooted
in gender inequality. That has resulted in widespread
violations of the rights of women and girls, including
sexual and gender-based violence, forced displacement
and the denial of basic access to livelihoods. As Council
members know, South Sudan has one of the highest
rates of violence against women and girls in the world.
Entrenched discrimination and harmful practices, such
as early and forced marriages, have contributed to an
environment where gender-based violence against
women and girls is widespread.

19-190395/20

S/PV.8560

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

As I address the Security Council today, more than
50 civilian areas are still occupied by the military,
according to the June 2019 report of the Ceasefire and
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring and
Verification Mechanism. Although the military has
vacated some civilian areas, its continued presence
in other areas still puts women and girls at risk of
sexual and other forms of gender-based violence.
Without accountability for gender-based violence and
challenging those in our communities who permit such
actions we cannot move forward.
The majority of those displaced by the conflict in
South Sudan are women and children. I have listened
to too many stories of women and girls who have fled
as refugees to Uganda, or spent years stuck in the
protection of civilian sites, where they are exposed
to diseases and lack access to basic services, such as
education for their children. One 14-year-old girl in
Uganda told me how she lost her mother in a refugee
camp owing to a simple fever. The pain and agony in
that little girl’s face still haunt me today. Nobody should
die from easily treatable or preventable diseases.
For women, peace is more than just a signed
agreement. Its dividends must be felt in the daily lives
of every man, woman and child in South Sudan. In the
ongoing political processes, priority should be given
to enabling women and women-led organizations to
heal themselves and their communities. That means
ensuring equal access to livelihoods, reproductive
health services, psychosocial support and legal services.
South Sudanese women advocated tirelessly for a
place at the table during the High-level Revitalization
Forum, which led to the signing of the peace agreement.
We also fought to secure a 35 per cent quota for
women’s inclusion. However, that quota was not fully
implemented during the nomination process to the
pre-transitional arrangement bodies. Resolution 2459
(2019), which was adopted in March and calls on all
parties to ensure the full and meaningful participation
of women in the peace process, is an important step
forward. However, that call must be backed by regular
follow-up and specific monitoring measures to ensure
it is adhered to and that there is accountability for the
lack of its implementation.
Security sector reform (SSR) is essential for longterm peace and stability in my country. SSR must
ensure that all security-sector actors are competent,
professional and responsive. Anti-corruption and human
6/20

25/06/2019

and women’s rights training on an ongoing basis is
essential, as are accountability standards for leadership.
Furthermore, diversity and inclusion must be central to
reform efforts. The security sector must represent all
the people of South Sudan. That means ensuring not
only regional diversity, but the representation of men
and women. The needs of women in the armed forces
and in the cantonment areas must be addressed.
The slow progress in the cantonment of all forces is
an urgent outstanding issue and an important aspect of
transforming the security sector, as it will allow for the
professionalization of the army. I urge the parties to the
agreement to ensure that major milestones for security
sector reforms are achieved. Delays in professionalizing
the army mean delays in ensuring the proper protection
of women and girls.
Comprehensive security sector reform backed by
economic recovery programmes is necessary in order
to win the trust of displaced women and girls so that
they can return home safely and voluntarily and start
rebuilding their communities. That can be achieved
only by ensuring that their rights are protected and
that they have adequate support for reintegration when
they return.
As my colleague Angelina Nyajima Simon Jial
pointed out to the Security Council in March (see
S/PV.8480), civil society in South Sudan plays a crucial
role in building and maintaining peace and security.
They are not only instrumental in the delivery of
life-saving humanitarian services, but are also key
to implementing the peace agreement. In March, the
Security Council responded to our call for the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to work
more closely with us by giving it a mandate to engage
with women-led non-governmental organizations and
with civil society more generally. We now expect the
Council to fulfil that mandate. Civil society must enjoy
a safe and enabling environment in order to carry out
its work.
I would like to conclude by calling on the Security
Council to ensure that the Government of South Sudan
supports the implementation of the agreement with
reliable and adequate financial resources; continue to
call on parties to realize the 35 per cent quota for women’s
representation, especially in the upcoming transitional
Government; encourage donors to support programmes
for local and national civil society organizations;
encourage UNMISS to continue to engage with diverse
19-19039

25/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

women’s groups, particularly those working to end
sexual and gender-based violence in our communities,
as a fundamental part of implementing its protection of
civilians mandate, which should include the creation of
safe spaces, which are critical for survivors and victims
of sexual and gender-based violence; urge parties
to the conflict to vacate all civilian areas; ensure
the adequate protection of women and girls from all
forms of sexual and gender-based violence, including
psychosocial support; support the security sector in
developing expertise and require professional training,
including in the prevention of sexual and gender-based
violence and a response that is tailored to the specific
context of South Sudan; and ensure that the process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
engages youth and young women in their programming.
The majority of those who carry guns are young people,
and it is much easier for young people to communicate
with each another.
Lastly, the DDR process should also address
the specific needs of female ex-combatants. Women
make up the majority of my country’s population, and
South Sudan cannot afford to ignore us. Giving us the
resources that we need to participate in the future of
our country will directly contribute to South Sudan’s
peace, stability and development. For the generations of
South Sudanese women and girls like myself, who have
never known anything other than conflict, we hope the
agreement will deliver the peace we yearn to see.
The President (spoke in
Ms. Minagano for her briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Shearer, Assistant SecretaryGeneral Gilmour and Ms. Minagano for their briefings.
Although the implementation of the 2018
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan remains slow, the
United States acknowledges that the parties continue
to respect the ceasefire in most parts of the country.

S/PV. 8560

We also note the consensus approach to extending the
pre-transition phase.
Nevertheless, the potential for peace remains
unfulfilled. Gross human rights violations and abuses
persist, particularly in the Equatorias. Violent clashes
continue to break out across the country. And by the
end of July, nearly 7 million South Sudanese — more
than 60 per cent of the population — will face severe
levels of acute food insecurity, or worse, because of a
human-made crisis.
With the reduction in violence, humanitarian
workers are better able to prepare for, and take on, the
hunger season, as they have increased access to South
Sudanese in need. However, there remain ongoing
obstacles to the international community’s ability to
assist with that effort and support the peace process
overall. The Government must adhere to its obligations
under the status-of-forces agreement to allow full
and unrestricted freedom of movement for the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
We are also concerned that, while there is increasing
stability around the country, the Government continues
to restrict key political and civic freedoms. In fact,
that seems to have escalated since the signing of the
agreement. There can be no real implementation of
the agreement without true respect for the liberties
guaranteed in South Sudan’s own Constitution. We
stress the need for face-to-face meetings between
Salva Kiir and Riek Machar, keeping in mind the
12 November date for the establishment of the
transitional Government.
We are deeply disappointed by the verdict in the
case of Peter Biar Ajak and five other men, just days
after the Government of South Sudan took an important
step by ratifying the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights. The Government must guarantee
citizens’ freedom of expression, as stipulated in the
Covenant, and abide by fair-trial guarantees.
The flow of weapons into South Sudan is another
area of concern. We look forward to a day when peace
in South Sudan negates the need for an arms embargo.
But in the meantime, we welcome its renewal and call
on the international community, and on the region in
particular, to uphold the South Sudan sanctions regime
and help make peace more profitable than war in
South Sudan.

19-190397/20

S/PV.8560

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The Revitalized Agreement is central to the shift
from war to peace. As a first step, the signatories will
have to move beyond quarrels over procedure and
instead use the remaining time during the extension
period to make real progress. That means first coming
to an agreement on security arrangements, including
protection for opposition members of the transitional
Government. It means ensuring the work of the
Independent Boundaries Commission does not become
a flashpoint for more violence. It means allowing
UNMISS to fulfil its mandate to protect civilians.
It also means the Government of South Sudan’s
delivering on its $100 million pledge to expedite the
implementation of pre-transition tasks in a timely
and transparent fashion. It means implementing
the transitional justice provisions of the agreement,
including engaging with the African Union to establish
the hybrid court. And it means the opposition’s pressing
ahead with overdue tasks, such as moving its forces into
cantonment and proceeding with combined training.
The United States calls on the South Sudanese
parties who did not sign the agreement to renounce
violence, adhere to cessation of hostilities agreements
and seek political resolution to concerns about the peace
agreement. We also call on the signatories to engage with
such parties in a non-violent and constructive manner.
The efforts described are not simple, but there is
evidence, particularly at the local level, that the parties
can compromise and accomplish important results
when they choose to work together. The alternative — a
return to conflict and the loss of more South Sudanese
lives — is intolerable. The South Sudanese people
have already paid a devastating price for the war their
leaders imposed on them.
We are convinced that the continued engagement
of the region is key to building sustainable peace.
We appeal to the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development to stay engaged and appoint a permanent
chair to the Reconstituted Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission. We call on the region and the
signatories to ensure the crisis in the Sudan does not
impede the South Sudanese peace process. And we call
on neighbouring countries to crack down on the illicit
flow of financing from South Sudan into their banking
systems and real estate markets.
We urge all parties to follow the positive examples
of collaboration at the local level to fulfil South Sudan’s
8/20

25/06/2019

potential and bring lasting peace and security to the
people of South Sudan.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. David
Shearer for his briefing and for his outstanding work
under difficult conditions. I also thank Mr. Andrew
Gilmour and Ms. Lydia Minagano for their briefings.
On 9 July it will have been eight years since South
Sudan became independent. Five of those years have
been marked by the effects of civil war. The conflict
has claimed the lives of nearly 400,000 people. One
in three people have been forced to leave their homes.
One in two face acute food insecurity, or worse. It is
expected that about 860,000 children under the age of
5 will suffer from severe malnutrition in 2019. Women
and girls are the most affected by violence, including
degrading and barbaric sexual violence. No one is
spared, neither women in their 80s nor 2-year-old girls.
We can only imagine the intolerable suffering of the
people of South Sudan, and it must spur real action
from the leaders of South Sudan.
Just before 12 May, what was to be the end of
the eight-month pre-transition period, the South
Sudanese parties unanimously agreed to a six-month
extension to allow for the implementation of the
essential pre-transition conditions. The region and
the international community supported that decision,
but time is passing, no progress has been made and
there is a real risk of compromising the gains that
have been made. Unless there is significant political
investment from the parties and the region, including
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, to
accelerate preparations for the transition period, the
new deadline could be missed.
That is worrisome — the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan presents the window of opportunity to
instil lasting peace in the country. We encourage all
actors to spare no effort to achieve real progress on
key issues in the implementation of the agreement.
The parties must put in place security arrangements,
finalize the determination of internal boundaries,
create an implementation road map, organize face-toface meetings of key political leaders and release the
implementation funds announced by the Government.
Non-signatory parties must sign the agreement. We
support the Secretary-General’s call for the parties to
refrain from mutual recrimination and inflammatory
19-19039

25/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

rhetoric. The firm commitment of the States of the
region is essential to ensuring the implementation of
the agreement.
The protection of civilians remains critical.
Although political violence has decreased, there has
been an increase in intercommunal violence in recent
months. Human rights abuses continue. There can be no
lasting solution to the conflict in South Sudan without
addressing those abuses urgently and effectively. We
call for an end to the culture of impunity. We call on
the Government to assume its responsibility to protect
civilians, thoroughly investigate all cases of sexual
violence and other abuses and bring those responsible
for those crimes to justice. We call for the establishment
of transitional justice mechanisms, including the hybrid
court, to combat impunity.
Restrictions on the freedom of expression are
unacceptable. A country can flourish only with a
diverse and active civil society and free media. Political
prisoners and prisoners of war must be released without
delay. It is also unacceptable that the whereabouts of
two staff members of the United Nations Mission in
the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) has remained
unknown since their arrest in 2014: the South Sudanese
authorities should immediately inform UNMISS about
their condition and location.
Conflict is the main factor driving the humanitarian
crisis and violence in South Sudan, a crisis that is
completely man-made. Any delay in the implementation
of the agreement will prolong the suffering of the
people of South Sudan. The steps that are needed have
been identified; it is now up to the parties to take them.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Representative Shearer for his briefing.
We have listened to the statements made by Assistant
Secretary-General Gilmour and Ms. Minagano.
Since the beginning of this year, the overall situation
in South Sudan has continued to turn for the better, with
the ceasefire holding in most regions. Most opposition
leaders have returned to Juba. The South Sudanese
Government and parties have been jointly promoting
the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan and have carried out in-depth discussions on
ceasefire monitoring, constitutional amendments,
boundary demarcation, security and defence and other
arrangements with positive results.

S/PV. 8560

On 2 May, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the South Sudanese parties
agreed to extend the pre-transitional period by six
months. Large numbers of refugees have voluntarily
returned to South Sudan, and an increasing number
of displaced persons wish to return home, which fully
demonstrates that peace in South Sudan has been further
consolidated. China welcomes those developments.
At the same time, the situation in South Sudan
remains challenging. The top priority is to continue to
have South Sudan maintain the hard-won momentum in
favour of peace. The implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement holds the key to a political settlement of the
issue of South Sudan. The international community,
and the Security Council in particular, should lend
greater support, while focusing on promoting the
parties’ efforts to further implement the Revitalized
Agreement. Greater efforts should be made in the
following three areas.
First, the ownership of the South Sudanese
Government should be fully respected. The parties
in South Sudan have the primary responsibility for
the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement.
International partners should enhance communication
with the parties, and with the Government in particular,
listen carefully to their input and provide the necessary
funding and material and technical support in the
political and security fields in the light of the country’s
needs
Secondly, support for IGAD should remain ongoing
in its role as mediator. The international community
should strengthen coordination with IGAD and the
African Union to support their mediation efforts and
help the South Sudanese Government and the opposition
enhance mutual trust so that they can demonstrate
greater flexibility and sincerity in order to reach
agreement on such core issues as security arrangements
as soon as possible. Efforts should also be made to push
parties that have not signed the Revitalized Agreement
to join the peace process as soon as possible.
Thirdly, humanitarian and economic assistance
to South Sudan should continue to be provided. At
present, priority should be given to helping address
food security, assisting displaced persons with their
return and resettlement, increasing investment in such
fields as agriculture, energy, infrastructure, education
and health care, and helping the South Sudanese people
strengthen their capacity to rebuild their homes and

19-190399/20

S/PV.8560

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

restart development. China highly appreciates the
important contribution made by the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan to maintaining
peace and stability in South Sudan and supports the
Mission’s continued efforts aimed at helping the South
Sudanese parties implement the Revitalized Agreement
and move forward in the peace process.
China supports peace and development in South
Sudan. We will continue our active support and
constructive participation in the peace process so as to
contribute to lasting peace and sustainable development
in South Sudan.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes today’s briefing on the situation
in South Sudan. We thank Mr. David Shearer, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan (UNMISS), and Mr. Andrew Gilmour, Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights, for their excellent
briefings. We also thank Ms. Lydia Minagano of South
Sudanese civil society for her inspiring statement.
Finally, I welcome the participation of Ambassador
Akuei Bona Malwal, Permanent Representative of
South Sudan to the United Nations, in today’s meeting.
Côte d’Ivoire remains concerned about the delays
in the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, signed on 12 September 2018, referred to in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/491). We recall
that the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement,
under the auspices of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), had raised many hopes,
especially since it had made it possible to significantly
reduce the level of political violence and had brought
about intranational rapprochement and the return
of refugees. However, it must be noted that those
achievements, while significant, fall short of the
expectations of the international community.
The lack of progress in the implementation of
some important provisions of the agreement in the
pre-transition phase, which should have led to the
formation of a Government of national unity, is a perfect
illustration of this situation. My country therefore
encourages the South Sudanese parties to seize the
opportunity offered by the six-month extension
period of the Revitalized Agreement, concluded by
the parties themselves, to make decisive progress. It
is on this condition that they could hope to maintain
10/20

25/06/2019

and strengthen the multifaceted support of the United
Nations and the international community for a peaceful
way out of the crisis in South Sudan.
Côte d’Ivoire therefore strongly encourages the
parties to rise above partisan interests and make the
compromises needed to implement the key steps
required for the success of the transition phase. In that
regard, my country hopes that the efforts of the South
Sudanese parties will focus on determining the number
of states and their borders, reviewing and drafting
laws, incorporating the agreement into the interim
Constitution and providing for the billeting, training
and redeployment of the armed forces.
In addition, Côte d’Ivoire echoes the SecretaryGeneral’s call for operationalization of the transitional
security arrangements, security sector reform and
the facilitation of the activities of the Ceasefire and
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring and
Verification Mechanism. In that regard, we welcome
the commitment of the Government of South Sudan to
disbursing $100 million to finance the reforms provided
for in the Revitalized Agreement.
An inclusive political dialogue that takes into
account the contribution that South Sudanese women
can make in the crisis-recovery process is essential
for achieving lasting peace and stability. Côte d’Ivoire
would also like to stress the importance of strong
regional ownership of the Revitalized Agreement. We
also welcome the continued involvement of the African
Union and IGAD’s initiatives. The meeting held in
Addis Ababa on 2 May upon the initiative of the IGAD
Special Envoy enabled all stakeholders to identify the
major obstacles to progress and propose the extension
of the pre-transition period.
Despite the persistent challenges in South Sudan,
the multidimensional contribution of UNMISS to
stabilization and peacebuilding efforts in the country
is well established. Côte d’Ivoire joins the support
expressed for the Mission and urges the Special
Representative and his entire team to persevere in
their daily efforts so as to fulfil the deep aspirations
of the people of South Sudan for peace and security.
Nevertheless, the efforts of UNMISS will be
unsuccessful if the will of the South Sudanese parties
does not evidence a real commitment to emerging from
the current crisis and writing a new chapter in their
country’s history.
19-19039

25/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Accordingly, my country hopes that the unity
displayed by the main political actors in South Sudan
in the context of the spiritual retreat organized on 9 and
10 April upon the Vatican’s request will be translated
into concrete action on the ground. There are human
and moral dimensions to the unspeakable distress of the
people of South Sudan, as Ms. Minagano pointed out,
which must challenge all the actors in the country and
lead them to make the sacrifices necessary to put an end
to it. The people of South Sudan and the international
community fervently urge them to do so.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I wish at
the outset to thank Special Representative David Shearer
for his briefing, which was, as usual, very enlightening.
It was particularly helpful that the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Human Rights, Andrew Gilmour, was
able to brief us today on the human rights situation in
South Sudan, which, as we know, lies at the heart of the
conflict. I wish also to welcome in particular Ms. Lydia
Minagano and thank her for her testimony from the
ground and for her commitment to peace. Her statement
recalled the central role of the women of South Sudan
in the building of a lasting peace.
I will focus on three points: the peace process, the
humanitarian and human rights situation, and the role of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
The Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan is a historic opportunity to
put an end to the conflict in South Sudan, and France
deplores the fact that the pre-transition period was
extended by six months. It is imperative that this be the
last postponement. Whatever happens, a Government
of national unity must be formed in November. We
encourage President Kiir and Riek Machar to work
together to find a compromise on the thorniest issues,
including security arrangements and the demarcation
of internal borders.
In order for the peace process to succeed, in
addition to direct dialogue between the two main
actors, a number of other conditions must be met.
First, the parties must sincerely commit to reaching
an agreement. We welcome the fact that the Catholic,
Anglican and Presbyterian churches have taken a very
useful initiative in this respect that is aimed at reminding
the South Sudanese authorities of their responsibilities.
The second condition is for the international
community to support this process. Here I should
like to stress the key role of the Intergovernmental

S/PV. 8560

Authority on Development (IGAD) and welcome the
work of its Special Envoy for South Sudan, Mr. Ismail
Wais. The African Union and the United Nations must
likewise support IGAD’s efforts. It is also important
for non-signatory armed groups to rejoin the peace
process, and here I refer in particular to the National
Salvation Front.
Finally, the quota for women provided for in the
agreement must be respected. Women must be able
to participate actively and meaningfully in the peace
process at all levels and on all issues.
The second key point I wish to make concerns the
humanitarian aspect. The conflict in South Sudan is
continuing to cause terrible suffering for the people of
that country, in particular women and children. More
than half of the population is suffering from food
insecurity, and one third of South Sudanese remain
displaced or refugees. The increase in the number of
voluntary returns is encouraging, but we deplore the
fact that at the same time intercommunal violence is
causing fresh displacements. Although the ceasefire
is generally respected, intercommunal and sexual
violence have not decreased. The Commission on
Human Rights in South Sudan mandated by the Human
Rights Council indicated in its most recent report that
these acts of violence and the grave violations of human
rights accompanying them could, given their nature
and their level, potentially constitute war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
The report notes restrictions on the freedoms of
expression and movement in South Sudan as well as
an increase in arbitrary detentions, the use of torture
and forced disappearances. France therefore urges all
parties to engage urgently in an in-depth dialogue with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict.
We likewise call on all parties to establish and
operationalize without delay the Hybrid Court for
South Sudan with the support of the African Union.
The perpetrators of these violations cannot remain
unpunished. The prosecution of those responsible and
reparations for victims are essential to fulfilling the
conditions for a lasting peace. The Security Council
also has a role to play and must make use of sanctions in
order to punish and bring pressure to bear on those who
commit such crimes. That is an important instrument
of dissuasion.

19-1903911/20

S/PV.8560

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

France is equally concerned by the numerous
grave violations against children, and we call on all
parties that have already made commitments in this
area to implement them, in particular in the areas of
prevention, recruitment, demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration. We call on the other parties to sign
a plan of action and implement it. Here an ongoing
dialogue must be maintained with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba.
We must also do everything in our power to meet
the growing humanitarian needs, and the parties
must ensure safe and unimpeded humanitarian access
throughout the country’s territory. This, of course,
includes protecting humanitarian workers, which is an
obligation on which we cannot falter. It is also crucial to
continue hammering home the fact that the perpetrators
of the crimes committed during this conflict must be
brought to justice. There can be no impunity.
Thirdly, in this context UNMISS must fully
implement its mandate. Protecting civilians, in
particular women and children, must remain its top
priority. We encourage the Mission to facilitate the
return of displaced persons, as long as the returns
are safe, voluntary, dignified and well-informed. We
encourage UNMISS to support the peace process
through the new provisions of its mandate, which
allow for the provision of technical assistance to
pre-transitional bodies and of help to the parties to
assist them in making progress in implementing the
Revitalized Agreement. We fully support the Special
Representative in his good offices and encourage him
to continue working closely with IGAD to that end. It
would also be very useful for the Mission to continue
providing support to the mobile courts and to develop
that initiative. It is essential to bring justice closer to
perpetrators if we wish to effectively combat impunity.
To conclude, I should like, on behalf of France,
to most sincerely thank the United Nations teams and
humanitarian workers who, in often difficult conditions,
perform vital work for the people of South Sudan.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish at the outset to express our appreciation for
the holding of this meeting and to thank Mr. David
Shearer and Mr. Andrew Gilmour as well as Ms. Lydia
Minagano for their important briefings.
Peru regrets that the transitional Government has
not yet been formed, in keeping with the Revitalized
12/20

25/06/2019

Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
South Sudan, owing to delays by the parties in
the implementation of critical tasks during the
pre-transition period. However, we trust that the sixmonth extension agreed upon on 2 May in Addis Ababa
will enable the parties to complete their outstanding
tasks and strengthen the major progress made thus far.
In this connection, we welcome the fact that the
entry into force of the Revitalized Agreement has led to
an appreciable drop in the level of political violence in
the country. Nevertheless, it is our view that this is just a
starting point that should encourage further progress in
the peace process. We call on the parties to honour their
commitments and to prepare for the transition period
by giving priority to core outstanding issues such as
force cantonment, selection, training, unification and
deployment, and to the issue of determining the number
and borders of states.
We are particularly concerned at the prevalence of
sexual and gender-based violence in South Sudan. There
continue to be reports of incidents of such crimes, most
of them attributed to Government forces. It is our hope
that the action plan launched by the Government to
tackle this issue will be translated into concrete action
and that the next time we hear a report, there will have
been zero victims.
We also deplore the fact that the humanitarian
situation remains critical despite the fact that the
conflict has eased. Food insecurity and the fragile
economic situation in South Sudan continue to have a
serious impact on civilians. Furthermore, we noted with
interest the spontaneous return of 142,000 refugees,
which shows that the people yearn for peace and to return
to their homes. We must create conditions conducive
to safe returns and provide the people with the basic
services necessary for them to live dignified lives.
Here we welcome the response of the Central
Emergency Response Fund, which provided $11 million
to deal specifically with almost 270,000 persons in
various regions of South Sudan.
We are alarmed that there has been a consistent
increase in intercommunal violence in the past
few months, leading to 531 casualties, 192 per cent
more than the previous year. We trust that a genuine
commitment by the parties through the implementation
of the agreement within the agreed timelines will
make it possible to achieve peace and reconciliation
throughout the country. We believe that we are close to
19-19039

25/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

that objective, but we must not lose the momentum of the
peace process. We commend the three churches on their
efforts to reconcile the leaders in South Sudan and also
welcome the efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development to help the parties to implement the
key tasks needed to move to the transition stage. We
welcome the joint visit of the United Nations, the
African Union and IGAD to Juba on 10 May. The visit
sent a powerful message to the parties and served as an
effective endorsement of the peace process.
I conclude by highlighting the efforts undertaken
by IGAD, the African Union and the United Nations,
as well as the valuable work of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan. We reiterate the importance
of maintaining unity in the Council in order to provide
the political support and follow-up required to continue
advancing the South Sudanese peace process and in
working in close coordination with the African Union
and IGAD.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to thank
Ms. Minagano, Mr. Gilmour and Mr. Shearer for their
important briefings.
The period under consideration saw some
important developments in the process of implementing
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, which has
been characterized thus far by its slowness. In May, the
parties agreed by consensus to a six-month extension
to the pre-transitional period in order to facilitate the
resolution of critical aspects such as the delimitation
of state boundaries and military cantonment and
redeployment, inter alia. Progress in these areas has
been limited and lacking in coordination and order.
In this context of political uncertainty, we are
encouraged by the sustained ceasefire, ongoing
rapprochement between the Government and
the opposition, and the tireless initiatives of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and other international actors, such as the Vatican
which have enabled the revitalized peace agreement to
survive and created forums in which to discuss ways to
move forward and fulfil all pending tasks.
Unfortunately, this scenario has been plagued by
threats against the civilian population and by a serious
humanitarian crisis, including increasing acts of sexual
violence and intercommunal conflicts, as well as the
obstruction of access to United Nations Mission in

S/PV. 8560

South Sudan (UNMISS) and humanitarian personnel. It
is therefore essential that the militias and Government
forces allow humanitarian personnel to move freely and
without restrictions on the ground.
We are particularly concerned that 57 per cent
of the population are suffering from severe or worse
levels of food insecurity, with 45,000 persons enduring
a potentially catastrophic situation. This reality is
exacerbated by the negative impact of the lack of rain
and the effects of climate change, in addition to the
latent threat posed by the incidences of Ebola reported
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Beyond this political and humanitarian crisis,
we are concerned about the vulnerability of the
civilian population and serious reports of human and
sexual rights violations. We are also concerned by
the limitations faced by UNMISS personnel in terms
of their capacity to address, monitor and investigate
these violations.
With regard to crimes of a sexual nature, we are
concerned that these cases of abuse are not being
investigated or prosecuted and that the Government’s
actions to eradicate this scourge are inadequate.
Impunity should not be the norm. We urge the
Government to establish a process of accountability
against perpetrators and we call for the provision of
comprehensive services to survivors of sexual violence.
In this regard, we commend the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army for launching an action plan for sexual
violence in conflict, focused on the accountability of
commandos for acts perpetrated by their subordinates.
We also welcome the initiative of UNMISS and the
United Nations Development Programme to hold
discussions with the authorities regarding the future
establishment of mobile courts and the deployment
of prosecutors in areas with insufficient or no
prosecutorial capacity. All avenues must be pursued
in order to establish accountability and put an end to
this outrageous culture of impunity, while investing
in mediation and peacebuilding efforts with the
participation of women and youth.
It is imperative that this political process not become
stagnant and that this new deadline be utilized in a wise
and steady manner in order to ensure a sustainable South
Sudanese-led peace process with enhanced regional
and international support. There are no shortcuts or
express routes to achieving peace in South Sudan. Now
is the time to take advantage of the momentum and

19-1903913/20

S/PV.8560

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

foster political will and diplomatic creativity to avoid
the failure of the revitalized agreement. This is the tool
we must use; there is no contingency plan.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank the
briefers — Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. David Shearer; Assistant SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Andrew Gilmour; and Ms. Lydia
Minagano — for the information they have shared with
us today.
Poland takes note of the extension of the
pre-transition period in South Sudan. We continue to
believe that the implementation of the provisions of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan is crucial for durable
peace and long-term stability in South Sudan. We call
on all signatories to make good use of these additional
months and spare no effort to step up preparations for a
successful transition. The issue of transitional security
arrangements is of particular importance in this regard.
We remain convinced that there can be no durable
peace without inclusiveness and believe that the
participation of women in the political process in
South Sudan is indispensable. We also see a need for
the genuine inclusion of youth and South Sudanese
civil society in the peace process. It is our strong belief
that only if its inclusivity is ensured will the transition
be credible to the citizens of South Sudan and stand a
chance of leading to sustainable peace.
Poland welcomes the fact that the permanent
ceasefire continued to be widely respected throughout
South Sudan and that the parties to the Agreement
continued with their confidence-building measures.
At the same time, we remain deeply concerned about
the increased levels of intercommunal violence
and persisting tensions. We believe that particular
emphasis should be placed on reconciliatory efforts and
supporting the intercommunal dialogue.
The human rights situation in South Sudan is
also alarming. Serious human rights violations and
abuses, as well as serious violations of international
humanitarian law, persist and their perpetrators enjoy
impunity. High levels of sexual violence against women
and girls also continue to be an issue of grave concern.
We call on the Government of South Sudan to spare no
effort in bringing the perpetrators to justice and to fulfil
its obligations with regard to the protection of civilians.
14/20

25/06/2019

The dire humanitarian situation in South Sudan
needs our full attention. Millions of South Sudanese
are displaced and more than half of the population
is suffering from food insecurity. There is no doubt
that the people of South Sudan are in critical need of
stability and State institutions that care for their citizens
and provide basic services. We are convinced that this
should be the end goal of the transition in South Sudan.
Poland believes that regional engagement remains
critical to the sustainability of peace in South Sudan
and considers that the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and its member States, as well as the
African Union, have a key role to play in terms of the
enforcement and monitoring of the implementation of
the agreement. We believe that the Security Council
should stand ready to support these efforts. Only the
collective and unified approach of the international
community can help to maintain this positive
momentum in the peace process.
Let me conclude by thanking UNMISS for its
tireless efforts to ensure the protection of civilians and
a conducive environment for humanitarian actors to
deliver their assistance and support the implementation
of the revitalized peace agreement. We are glad that, in
the third quarter of this year, Poland will contribute to
the efforts of UNMISS.
Ms. Bekwa (South Africa): We too would like to
express our appreciation to the briefers today for their
comprehensive briefings. We would also like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
David Shearer, and the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) for all the hard work that they
are doing under difficult conditions in South Sudan.
I would like to focus my interventions on three key
issues: the political situation, the security situation and
the humanitarian situation.
On the political front, the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan continues to be an integral part of creating
engagement for constructive dialogue and democratic
processes towards sustaining peace and development in
South Sudan. Equally vital is that we encourage Mr. Riek
Machar to return to Juba, as that will further enable
the implementation of the agreement. In that regard, it
is important that we all rally behind the peace process
and encourage the implementation of all outstanding
provisions. We concur with Special Representative of
19-19039

25/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the Secretary-General Shearer that this is the only path
that will lead to peace and stability.
We note the decision of the parties on the
unanimous agreement on the extension of six months of
the pre-transitional period. However, we strongly urge
the parties to do everything possible to implement all
the remaining tasks of the pre-transitional period.
While we recognize and acknowledge all the
positive strides that have been made, we are also
cognisant that the situation in South Sudan remains
very fragile, considering the slow progress and
insufficient resources to sponsor the implementation
of the revitalized agreement. We would like to urge
the Council to support the implementation of the
agreement, ensure that we keep the momentum going
that has been created, and prevent South Sudan from
sliding back into conflict.
We note with appreciation the work of the
Independent Boundaries Commission, which has
completed its work and submitted a report to the
ministers of the States members of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) in Addis Ababa on
19 June. We recognize that the boundary issues are
still very divisive in nature and need to be treated in
a transparent manner to minimize the risk of sparking
conflict. We urge parties to continue working to resolve
this matter.
On the security situation, my delegation is
encouraged by the positive developments outlined in
the Secretary-General’s reports, particularly the report
that the ceasefire is holding and that the violence has
decreased. This is imperative to creating conditions
conducive to making peace. South Africa wishes to call
on all our international and South Sudanese partners
to mobilize and make resources and relevant expertise
available in support of the implementation of the
agreement, especially with regard to the implementation
of security sector reform.
For South Africa, the role of local communities in
the security sector reform process is critical to ensuring
local ownership, cultivating trust and confidence, and
the legitimacy and success of the entire process. That
can be achieved only through adequate and timely
consultation with various stakeholders at all stages of
the process. But more important to the process is the
inclusion of women, as they are key to any sustainable
conflict resolution.

S/PV. 8560

On the humanitarian situation, we welcome the
improvement of humanitarian access, which is a
critical lifeline for thousands of vulnerable people. We
further welcome the reports that, owing to increased
peace, along with some positive signs of change, the
security situation has improved, which has allowed
some internally displaced persons to return, while
cautiously also exploring options to return to other
areas of relocation.
South Africa urges international stakeholders
to make meaningful contributions to post-conflict
reconstruction and development programmes and to
support efforts to repatriate and resettle internally
displaced persons and refugees returning to South
Sudan, as well as to help rebuild their communities
and livelihoods. The pledge of $100 million by
the Government of South Sudan towards the
implementation of the agreement is a positive step. We
urge the Government to urgently disburse the funds for
the implementation of the critical pending tasks.
In closing, we remain steadfast in our commitment
to playing a key role in supporting the peace process in
South Sudan through the mediation efforts of President
Ramaphosa, as Chair of the African Union High-level
Ad Hoc Committee for South Sudan, as well as Deputy
President Mabuza as South Africa’s special envoy to
South Sudan. We continue to reaffirm that these efforts
are always geared towards complementing the African
Union’s efforts, as well as IGAD processes. We continue
to commend the hard work being done by IGAD in
trying to support the South Sudan peace process.
South Sudan continues to be a critical part of
the region, as its stability is interdependent with that
of many countries in the region. More importantly,
however, the people of South Sudan deserve to finally
enjoy the tangible peace dividends that have eluded
them for many decades.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would first like to
thank all the briefers. I hope that David Shearer and
Andrew Gilmour will forgive me if I single out Lydia
Minagano first in my remarks. This is the second time
since March that we have had a very impressive woman
from civil society in South Sudan briefing the Council.
While we heard from Mr. Shearer and Mr. Gilmour
about the improvements with regard to the security
situation and the overall human rights situation, there
is still a lot of sexual and gender-based violence, which
remains at a worrisome level and is unacceptable.

19-1903915/20

S/PV.8560

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Women and girls continue to be disproportionately
affected by the conflict. We heard the heartbreaking
story about women and children who are displaced in
camps. We have to continue to focus on that. We also
fully support what many have said about the need to
have women participate in the political pre-transitional
and transitional processes. The quota must be reached
and it must be an inclusive process.
Also, impunity must end. We still have not made
progress on the hybrid court. We need to see that
those who have committed the atrocities are actually
brought before the court. With regard to the sanctions
that we have imposed on South Sudan, those who are
committing these crimes have also been inscribed on
that list. Therefore, I also request that David Shearer,
among his many tasks, continue to work very hard with
civil society and look in particular at what is happening
and not happening with regard to sexual violence,
women’s participation and impunity.
I would also like to thank Mr. Shearer for his
engagement and that of all the peacekeepers. They are
doing a fantastic job. He mentioned how much they
have done to protect refugees. He provided figures
with regard to their return to their places of origin.
It is very important that he continue to support that.
As he himself highlighted, those returns must be safe,
informed, voluntary and dignified.

25/06/2019

Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the African Union and the United Nations. I would
also like to highlight IGAD’s outreach activities with
non-signatories and the Holy See’s plan for a spiritual
retreat. If it helps, it will be very good to continue to do
that and make some progress on reconciliation.
Lastly, coming back to human rights, I would like to
underline the importance of guaranteeing fundamental
freedoms in South Sudan. The two vital aspects are
that human rights defenders must be able to do their
job and freedom of expression must be guaranteed.
We are appalled by the conviction of Peter Biar Ajak,
a journalist who criticized the Government. This is
about life in the international community. If all the
journalists who criticized Governments were put in jail,
there would not be enough jails. Freedom of expression
is fundamental, including in South Sudan.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
our briefers. I want to express our strong support for
Special Representative Shearer and the men and women
serving in South Sudan on behalf of all of us here, and
to thank them for all that they are doing on the ground.

I agree that the postponement to November of
the deadline with regard to the establishment of the
transitional Government must be the final postponement.
As Mr. Shearer said, and based on our own analysis,
there is no task that the pre-transitional Government
authorities can accomplish that cannot be fulfilled by
a transitional one. I appreciate what Mr. Shearer said
about his activities relating to local reconciliation,
but while it is very important that the communities
get along, we have to go to the national level. It is
absolutely essential that Mr. Kiir and Mr. Machar meet
and do their job. That is what the people on the ground
ask and expect of their leaders.

On many occasions the United Kingdom has
welcomed the genuine hope for a peaceful South
Sudan that came with the signing of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan in September. It was inspiring
to hear from Mr. Shearer about the enthusiasm and the
desire of people all over South Sudan for that peace
agreement to turn into substantive and lasting peace.
Today I want to express once again the strong and
unwavering support that the United Kingdom has for
the people of South Sudan as they seek peace. Today’s
briefers reminded us, of course — and in that respect
I pay particular tribute to Ms. Minagano — that the
people of South Sudan cannot be expected to wait any
longer for the implementation of lasting peace, not least
given the still large numbers of people who are facing
acute food insecurity — almost 7 million, according to
a report last week from the Integrated Food Security
Phase Classification. I am struck by the fact that 89 per
cent of those surveyed believe that lasting peace is
possible by the end of the year, despite the fact that
79 per cent of them knew of someone in their family
who had been killed or forced to flee. There is therefore
still a real opportunity in South Sudan.

With regard to the political process, we are
watching the important close cooperation between the

Despite a promising start, however, crucial tasks
remain unsolved, particularly with regard to security-

Unfortunately, the fact remains that the work of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) is
still obstructed. It still does not have full freedom of
movement. In that regard, I also urge the Government
and all actors to guarantee that UNMISS can do
its work.

16/20

19-19039

25/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

sector reform, agreement on State boundaries and the
unification of forces. Today I want to urge all the parties
to make the compromises needed to unlock progress in
those areas. We supported the agreement in May this
year to extend the pre-transition period, as a sign of
the parties’ desire to continue to work for peace. I now
want to echo the calls of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and other Council members
for Salva Kiir and Riek Machar to meet and redouble
their efforts to ensure that a transitional Government is
formed in November. There should be no more delay,
indeed there need be no more delays.
I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for his and his team’s efforts
to support the hundreds of thousands of South Sudanese
still living in protection-of-civilian sites. We share the
desire that those sites should be reduced in size as the
peace agreement delivers genuine improvements on the
ground. We also want to point out that the Government
of South Sudan has a primary responsibility for creating
an environment conducive to returns and urge it to play
its part in creating the stability necessary for the safe,
durable and dignified return of internally displaced
persons and refugees.
The United Kingdom also shares the concerns that
Assistant Secretary-General Gilmour expressed today
about restrictions on the political and civic space.
Despite the extension of the pre-transition period,
progress on justice and accountability continues to stall,
and defence and security forces, including the National
Security Service, continue to threaten and intimidate
people perceived as critics. We are deeply troubled by
the findings of the Panel of Experts on South Sudan
with regard to responsibility at the highest level within
the National Security Service for the abduction and
killing of the human rights activist Dong Samuel Luak
and the writer and opposition member Aggrey Idri,
and by the failure of the Government to investigate
or punish those involved. We urge the Government of
South Sudan to meet its commitment to taking steps to
end the culture of impunity, and in particular to sign
the necessary agreements with the African Union to
establish the hybrid court.
Ms. Minagano’s presence here today is an important
reminder for us all of the vital role of civil society in the
peace process. She outlined a number of areas where
we need to see action on delivering the agreement.
As I said before, her account and that of the Special
Representative show that after decades of violence,

S/PV. 8560

people across the country are starting to work for
rapprochement and build peace. The dire situation in
South Sudan has been of serious concern to the Council
for some time, but the peace agreement that was signed
represented a new start and a new dawn. Around the
table, we all desperately want to see progress, and there
is still time for it. But it must not be wasted. There
should be no more delays. The two main actors, Salva
Kiir and Riek Machar, have a responsibility to their
people to come together and resolve the outstanding
issues. The region and all of us around the table must
support them. We must not let down the people of South
Sudan, who still have such hope in their hearts.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): First and foremost, I would like to thank the
briefers, Mr. David Shearer, Mr. Andrew Gilmour and
Ms. Lydia Minagano, for their informative briefings. It
is also always a pleasure to see my brother Mr. Akuei
Malwal, Permanent Representative of South Sudan, in
the Chamber.
The Government of Equatorial Guinea deplores
the delays in the implementation of the political and
security tasks set out in the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic
of South Sudan, signed on 12 September 2018. In
that regard, we support the decision to extend by six
months the pre-transition period for completing the
immediate political and security tasks, since that will
be a significant step forward in restoring peace to
South Sudan.
We would like to remind the parties that the six
months should not be wasted. On the contrary, it is the
moment when they must assume their responsibilities
and demonstrate the political will necessary for the full
and timely implementation of the peace agreement, in
letter and spirit, considering that it has already become
clear that an inclusive political solution is the only way
to achieve peace in South Sudan. My country hopes
that the parties will work to make solid and rapid
progress in resolving the transitional arrangements.
The parties must also honour their commitments and
refrain from acts that could cause an already fragile
situation to deteriorate.
As a gesture emphasizing the determination and
commitment of the Government of South Sudan to the
peace process, we welcome its promise to contribute
$100 million to complete the outstanding activities of the
pre-transition period, and we encourage it to disburse

19-1903917/20

S/PV.8560

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

that funding in a timely and transparent manner. We
also encourage donors to continue to provide support to
the Government so that the Revitalized Agreement can
be fully implemented. While we commend the general
respect for the ceasefire, we deplore the persistent
sporadic fighting between Government forces and the
opposition, as well as among the opposition groups.
We also firmly condemn the continuing prevalence
of sexual violence and brutality against civilians, and
we urge the parties to spare no effort to bring those
responsible for those atrocities to justice. We are
equally concerned about the humanitarian situation and
the attacks on humanitarian workers and the personnel
of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, which
are totally unacceptable. We therefore urge the parties,
particularly the Government, to ensure a more secure
and supportive environment for the humanitarian
workers who are working tirelessly to provide assistance
to South Sudan’s most vulnerable civilians.
In conclusion, my Government appreciates the
mediation and commitment of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, as well as the staff of
the United Nations team and non-governmental
organizations for their work in providing humanitarian
assistance to the population. We would also like
to express our sincere thanks to the African Union
Commission for its active involvement in the collective
efforts for peace in South Sudan. We want to reiterate
our support for the people of South Sudan and its
authorities in the peace process. My country maintains
special ties with our brother country of South Sudan,
and we continue to hope that it can overcome its current
adversities and that its people can find a definitive
solution to their problems.
Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. David Shearer, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing on the situation in South Sudan and on the
peace process there. We listened attentively to all of
today’s briefers. We welcome the significant progress
in the implementation by the parties of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan of 12 September 2018. It is
important that they have demonstrated a willingness
to resolve their differences by seeking what are often
difficult compromises.
We believe that the decision by the parties to the
conflict to extend the pre-transitional period was fully
justified, and we realize that a number of objective
18/20

25/06/2019

factors prevented its completion by the 12 May deadline.
It will be important for the regional actors to maintain
a united approach, as was shown at the session of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
at which the agreement of the parties was approved.
We see that as a practical realization of the principle
of African solutions to African problems. Besides
that, the potential for effective cooperation among
the United Nations, the Security Council and the
relevant regional organizations is still there. We hope
that will help the national reconciliation process, and
that the IGAD member States will continue to support
the South Sudanese peace process despite their other
pressing issues.
We have noted the establishment and preliminary
operationalization of the structures and mechanisms
provided for in the agreement. We are pleased that
the level of armed violence in the country and the
numbers of human rights violations have decreased. An
increasing number of refugees and internally displaced
persons have expressed the desire to return to their
permanent homes. In our view, all of that is linked to the
implementation of confidence-building measures and
contacts between the opposing parties on the ground.
We join the Secretary-General’s call to the South
Sudanese parties to focus on security issues and
complete the constitutional amendment process. In
our view, only the parties’ full and comprehensive
compliance with the commitments they have undertaken
will increase mutual trust and ensure that they do
not repeat the mistakes of the past. We call on the
South Sudanese parties to the conflict to make every
effort to implement the outstanding provisions of the
Revitalized Agreement. That is in their own interests
as well those of the country’s ordinary citizens. South
Sudan deserves to live in peace.
We believe that the positive momentum that we have
seen in the South Sudanese peace process cannot be
attributed solely to increased sanctions pressure and the
introduction of an arms embargo. It is first and foremost
thanks to the contribution of the regional mediators.
Moreover, to some degree the embargo prevented the
region from being more flexible in supporting the
settlement through its own security initiatives.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I too would like to join
others in expressing our appreciation to Special
Representative David Shearer, Assistant SecretaryGeneral Andrew Gilmour and Ms. Lydia Minagano
19-19039

25/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

for their briefings. I would also like to welcome
the Permanent Representative of South Sudan to
the Chamber.
We can see a number of positive trends in South
Sudan, as attested to by the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/491). A permanent ceasefire
has largely taken hold across the country, made possible
by confidence- and trust-building at the sub-national
level, much of it facilitated by the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). There has been a
decrease in armed conflicts, although sporadic clashes
persist. We see refugees returning home and internally
displaced persons (IDPs) voluntarily leaving UNMISS
protection-of-civilian sites. But we are mindful that
those gains are fragile and that their sustainability
hinges on the full implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan. My delegation would like to
make three points today.
First, the Revitalized Agreement is the best and
only option for South Sudan. We have made it clear
before in this Chamber that we believe there is no
plan B. We commend the continued engagement of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
to preserve the Revitalized Agreement and bring
non-signatories into the peace process, and my
delegation applauds the convening of a spiritual
retreat for the South Sudan presidency in the Vatican
in April. The extension of the pre-transitional period
must be used to expedite all pending tasks, including
transitional security arrangements, the resolution of
boundary issues and the incorporation of the Agreement
into the Transitional Constitution. Important steps
have been taken on security arrangements over the
past month, including the inspection and assessment
of cantonment sites. Indonesia fully endorses the role
of UNMISS in supporting the implementation of the
Revitalized Agreement, using its good offices and by
providing advice and technical assistance. We echo the
call for the South Sudanese Government to disburse
the funds for critical pending tasks in a timely and
transparent manner.
Secondly, Indonesia stresses how vital it is
to protect civilians and observe international
humanitarian law. We are concerned about the increase
in intercommunal violence and the continued human
rights violations across the country. Restrictions on
its movements have repeatedly prevented UNMISS
from implementing its mandated tasks of protecting

S/PV. 8560

civilians and investigating human rights violations,
and we believe that accountability for such violations
must be upheld. Ordinary citizens will not feel peace
dividends if the perpetrators escape justice. UNMISS
should continue to support capacity-building in the
rule of law and to strengthen the judicial presence,
including through mobile courts. My delegation
recognizes the efforts made to promote human rights
in the country, including through its recent ratification
of the International Covenants on Civil and Political
Rights and on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
Thirdly, we appeal for enhanced humanitarian
assistance for South Sudan. A durable solution is
needed for the 1.9 million IDPs and 2.3 million
refugees. More than half of the South Sudanese
population, about 6.45 million people, are facing
acute food insecurity. A further 45,000 are on the
brink of catastrophe. South Sudan needs resources
to enable it to prevent and anticipate the possible
spread of Ebola from neighbouring countries. All the
stakeholders on the ground must provide humanitarian
actors with the necessary space for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.
We are at a critical juncture in South Sudan’s quest
for peace. The role of UNMISS is now more valuable
than ever, and Indonesia is proud to have contributed
both military and police peacekeepers to UNMISS.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Kuwait.
I thank Mr. Shearer, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General; Mr. Gilmour, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Human Rights; and Ms. Lydia Minagano
for their briefings.
In my statement, I will focus on three key points:
political developments, the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the
humanitarian situation.
On political developments, following the agreement
of the parties to the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan to extend the pre-transition process to November
and the return of the majority of leaders to Juba, we
hope that South Sudan will take advantage of this
opportunity to achieve security and stability. We call
for further measures to build trust among the various
political actors. In that connection, we commend the

19-1903919/20

S/PV.8560

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

efforts of the Holy See to gather the South Sudanese
leaders and to call on them to make further progress
in order to overcome the wounds of the past and
ensure a better future. We also commend the role of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
including the recent efforts of its Member States to
encourage non-signatory parties to the revitalized
agreement to join it.
On the Mission’s mandate, our meeting today
is taking place at an important and delicate moment
for UNMISS. While the security situation remains
unchanged, the implementation of the pillars of the
Mission’s mandate remains crucial for the Security
Council. We are pleased with the Mission’s role in
strengthening and building institutional capacities
in South Sudan, particularly in the areas of security
and justice. We call on all parties to maintain their
cooperation with the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism and to facilitate the Mission’s movement.
With respect to the humanitarian situation, we
welcome the increasing number of returning displaced
persons and refugees. We hope to see that process
continued in a voluntary, safe and dignified manner,
and that those returning will be able to access basic
services, on top of which are health and education
services. We also welcome community reconciliation
efforts in South Sudan and hope that they will be felt
at all levels.
Moreover, we reiterate our condemnation of child
recruitment and sexual violence in conflict, whoever the
perpetrator may be. We call for the Mission’s freedom
of movement to be guaranteed, as provided for by the
status-of-forces agreement. We also call for its tasks to
be facilitated and for it to be allowed to accomplish its
mandate to the fullest.
In conclusion, fewer than five months remain in the
pre-transitional period, representing a crucial turning
point in the history of South Sudan. We hope that we
will be able to contribute both within and outside the
Security Council to ensuring that the friendly people
of South Sudan are be able to realize their legitimate
aspirations for the future.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.

20/20

25/06/2019

Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): My delegation
congratulates you, Mr. President, on your successful
presidency for the month of June. As you are about to
conclude your tenure at the Security Council, we would
like to thank you for the cooperation and friendship
that you and your Mission have extended to us during
the past two years. I would also like to take this
opportunity to welcome and thank Ambassador David
Shearer, Mr. Andrew Gilmour and Ms. Minagano for
their interventions and their reporting on the situation
in South Sudan.
On behalf of the Government of the Republic of
South Sudan, we welcome the report of the Secretary
General (S/2019/491), which covers the period from
February to May 2019. We want to reiterate that
confidence-building measures between the signatories
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan are improving
steadily and that, as the Secretary-General reported,
the revitalized peace agreement mechanisms and
committees are meeting in Juba as scheduled.
While Mr. Riek Machar is not in Juba, I can assure
the Council that close contact is being maintained
between him and President Salva Kiir. We were all,
of course, disappointed, as we were hoping that they
would fly together from Rome to Juba. Nevertheless,
we think that he will be in Juba before November.
As the Council is aware, the implementation
needs major funding. As reported, the Government of
the Republic of South Sudan has pledged to allocate
$100 million to jump start the implementation of
the peace agreement. Already some $2 million has
been spent towards food and cantonment preparation
activities in greater Upper Nile and Bahr el-Ghazal.
Challenges exist, however. The peace implementation
needs technical assistance and experts, which we hope
the international community will provide.
In conclusion, we would like to thank the region and
those international donors who have been supporting
the revitalized peace agreement in terms of money,
humanitarian support and personnel.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

19-19039
