A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/23
22 December 1995

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 39
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/50/L.34 and Add.1)]
50/23.

Law of the Sea

The General Assembly,
Emphasizing the universal character of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea 1/ and its fundamental importance for the maintenance and
strengthening of international peace and security, as well as for the
sustainable use and development of the seas and oceans and their resources,
Considering that, in its resolution 2749 (XXV) of 17 December 1970, it
proclaimed that the seabed and ocean floor, and the subsoil thereof, beyond
the limits of national jurisdiction (hereinafter referred to as "the Area"),
as well as the resources of the Area, are the common heritage of mankind, and
considering also that the Convention, together with the Agreement relating to
the implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea of 10 December 1982, 2/ provides the regime to be applied to the
Area and its resources,
Recalling its resolution 49/28 of 6 December 1994 on the law of the sea,
adopted consequent to the entry into force of the Convention on
16 November 1994,

1/
Official Records of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law
of the Sea, vol. XVII (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.84.V.3), document
A/CONF.62/122.
2/

95-25772

Resolution 48/263, annex.

/...

A/RES/50/23
Page 2

Aware of the importance of the effective implementation of the
Convention and its uniform and consistent application, as well as of the
growing need to promote and facilitate international cooperation on the law of
the sea and ocean affairs at the global, regional and subregional levels,
Conscious of the strategic importance of the Convention as a framework
for national, regional and global action in the marine sector, as recognized
also by the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in
chapter 17 of Agenda 21, 3/
Recognizing the impact on States of the entry into force of the
Convention and the increasing need, particularly of developing States, for
advice and assistance in its implementation in order to benefit thereunder,
Noting the responsibilities of the Secretary-General and competent
international organizations under the Convention, in particular pursuant to
its entry into force and as required by resolution 49/28,
Reaffirming the importance of the annual consideration and review by the
General Assembly of the overall developments pertaining to the implementation
of the Convention, as well as of other developments relating to the law of the
sea and ocean affairs,
Noting the decisions taken by States parties to the Convention to
convene meetings of States parties to deal with the initial budget and
organizational and other related matters of the International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea in preparation for its establishment and the election of its
members, 4/ as well as to prepare for and organize the election of the
members of the Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf,
Noting also that the Assembly of the International Seabed Authority has
concluded its first session and has scheduled two meetings of the Authority
for 1996, from 11 March for up to three weeks, if necessary, and from 5 August
for up to two weeks, in Kingston, 5/
Noting further that the Assembly of the Authority requested arrangements
for the interim secretariat of the Authority, authorizing the
Secretary-General to administer the interim secretariat until the
Secretary-General of the Authority is able to assume effectively the
responsibility of the Authority’s secretariat, 6/

3/
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I and
Vol. I/Corr.1, Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1)) (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), Vol. I: Resolutions Adopted by
the Conference, resolution 1, annex II.
4/

See SPLOS/4, para. 38.

5/

See ISBA/A/L.7/Rev.1, para. 35.

6/

See ISBA/A/L.5 and ISBA/A/L.7/Rev.1, para. 33.

/...

A/RES/50/23
Page 3

Recalling that the Agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982
provides that the institutions established by the Convention shall be costeffective, 7/ and recalling also that the meeting of States parties to the
Convention decided that this principle would apply to all aspects of the work
of the Tribunal, 8/
Emphasizing the importance of making adequate provisions for the
efficient functioning of the institutions established by the Convention,
1.
Calls upon all States that have not done so to become parties to
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and to ratify, confirm
formally or accede to the Agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 in
order to achieve the goal of universal participation;
2.
Calls upon States to harmonize their national legislation with the
provisions of the Convention and to ensure the consistent application of those
provisions;
3.

Reaffirms the unified character of the Convention;

4.
Recalls its decision to fund the budget for the administrative
expenses of the International Seabed Authority initially from the regular
budget of the United Nations, in accordance with the provisions of the
Agreement; 9/
5.
Approves the provision by the Secretary-General of such services
as may be required for the two meetings of the Authority to be held in 1996,
from 11 to 22 March and from 5 to 16 August;
6.
Approves also the request of the Assembly of the Authority to
continue the staff and facilities previously available to the Kingston Office
for the Law of the Sea as the interim secretariat of the Authority, and
authorizes the Secretary-General to administer the interim secretariat until
the Secretary-General of the Authority is able to assume effectively the
responsibility of the Authority’s secretariat;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to convene the meetings of States
parties to the Convention from 4 to 8 March, from 6 to 10 May and from 29 July
to 2 August 1996;
8.
Notes with appreciation the progress made in practical
arrangements for the establishment of the International Tribunal for the Law
of the Sea and in preparations for the establishment of the Commission on the
Limits of the Continental Shelf;

7/
para. 2.
8/

See resolution 48/263, annex:

Annex to the Agreement, sect. 1,

See SPLOS/4, para. 25 (e).

9/
See resolution 48/263, para. 8; and ibid., annex:
Agreement, sect. 1, para. 14.

Annex to the

/...

A/RES/50/23
Page 4

9.
Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the annual
comprehensive report on the law of the sea 10/ and the activities of the
Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea of the Office of Legal
Affairs of the Secretariat, in accordance with the provisions of the
Convention and the mandate set forth in resolution 49/28;
10.
Reaffirms the importance of ensuring the uniform and consistent
application of the Convention and a coordinated approach to its effective
implementation, and of strengthening technical cooperation and financial
assistance for this purpose, stresses once again the continuing importance of
the Secretary-General’s efforts to these ends, and reiterates its invitation
to the competent international organizations and other international bodies to
support these objectives;
11.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the institutional
capacity of the Organization adequately responds to the needs of States and
competent international organizations by providing advice and assistance,
taking into account the special needs of developing countries;
12.
Invites Member States and others in a position to do so to
contribute to the further development of the fellowship programme on the law
of the sea and training and educational activities on the law of the sea and
ocean affairs established by the Assembly in its resolution 35/116 of 10
December 1980, and advisory services in support of effective implementation of
the Convention;
13.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Assembly at its
fifty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution, in
connection with his annual comprehensive report on the law of the sea;
14.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-first
session the item entitled "Law of the sea".
81st plenary meeting
5 December 1995

10/

A/50/713.
