S/2018/190

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 March 2018
Original: English

Letter dated 1 March 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 1966 (2010), by which
the Council established the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals,
and, in particular, to article 10, paragraph 2, of the statute of the Mechanism, annexed
thereto, on the appointment of a judge to fill a vacancy in the roster of judges of the
Mechanism.
Article 8, paragraph 1, of the statute provides that the Mechanism is to have a
roster of 25 independent judges.
One of the judges, Solomy Balungi Bossa (Uganda), has resigned with effect from
11 March 2018, following her election as a judge of the International Criminal Court.
Pursuant to article 10, paragraph 2, of the statute, in the event of a vacanc y in
the roster, after consultation with the Presidents of the Security Council and of the
General Assembly, the Secretary-General is to appoint a person meeting the
qualifications of article 9, paragraph 1, of the statute, for the remainder of the term of
office concerned.
According to article 9, paragraph 1, of the statute, the judges are to be persons
of high moral character, impartiality and integrity who possess the qualifications
required in their respective countries for appointment to the highest judicial offices.
Particular account is to be taken of experience as judges of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia or the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
The procedure for identifying a candidate for consideration for appointm ent
under article 10, paragraph 2, is not prescribed in the Statute. In accordance with the
established practice regarding the appointment of a judge to fill a vacancy at the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, which was adopted for the purposes of filling a vacancy in the
roster of judges of the Mechanism in 2016, the State of nationality of the outgoing
judge, Uganda, has nominated a candidate, Judge Elizabeth Ibanda -Nahamya, to
replace Judge Bossa for the remainder of her term of office.
It is my view that Judge Ibanda-Nahamya meets the qualifications that are
prescribed in article 9, paragraph 1, of the statute of the Mechanism.
In accordance with article 10, paragraph 2, of the statute of the Mechanism, I
look forward to receiving your views on the appointment of Judge Ibanda -Nahamya
as a judge of the Mechanism.
(Signed) António Guterres

18-03489 (E)

080318

*1803489*
