228

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

2.

Further decides that, with regard to paragraph 501

(d) of the report of the Committee, programme element 9.1

(Environmental law) of subprogramme 9 (Environmental
management including environmental law) should be retained, with the exception of two meetings on international
rivers, which should be deleted;

XIX
USE OF EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS IN THE
UNITED NATIONS

l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the use of experts and consultants in the United Nations 82
and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions; 83
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit an updated
report on this subject to the General Assembly at its thirtyseventh session;

XX
FORMULATION, PRESENTATION, REVIEW AND APPROVAL
OF PROGRAMME BUDGETS

Decides, in the event of a resumption of its thirty-sixth
session in 1982, to authorize the Fifth Committee to meet
in order to continue its consideration of the question of the
formulation, presentation, review and approval of programme budgets.
105th plenary meeting
18 December 1981

36/236. Vienna International Centre
The General Assembly
l ._ Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions on the Vienna International Centre 84 as well as
of the agreements referred to therein;
2. Endorses the observations and understandings put
forward by the Advisory Committee with respect to those
agreements;
3. Takes into account the assurances given by the Secretary-General on the various concerns expressed by the
Advisory Committee in its report.
105th plenary meeting
/8 December /98/

Taking note of the report of the Inter-Organization Board
for Information Systems containing an evaluation of the
Development Information System of the Information Systems Unit, 85 as well as the report of the Secretary-General 86
and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 87 which provide information on the progress of the Unit since last year, and
particularly the section which outlines the role that the Unit
can play in the maintenance of compatibility and the exchange of development information among the regional
commissions,
Mindful of the limited size of both the data base and user
community of the Development Information System and of
the need to improve its coverage and services,
Considering that the Development Information System.
in providing access to the unpublished reports and studies
produced by or for the Department of International Economic and Social Affairs, the Department of Technical Cooperation for Development and other parts of the Secretariat,
will be providing a needed and valuable service to the Governments and Member States and other users of the System,
Further considering that the loss of the Development Information System could have a negative effect on international co-operation for development,
I. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the Information Systems Unit by absorbing the cost of the Unit
from the resources proposed for the 1982-1983 programme
budget through savings, economies and redeployment;
2. Requests the Committee for Programme and Coordination to consider, at its twenty-second session, the programme implications of the proposals contained in the report
Information Systems Unit which would enable it to serve
as a focal point for the expansion, merging and distribution
of the development-related data bases of the regional commissions and for the maintenance of the macrothesaurus;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to undertake
measures to improve the Development Information System
in terms of its coverage and services;
4. Requests the Inter-Organization Board to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session, through
the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination and the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, on the performance and utility of the Information
Systems Unit.
105th plenary meeting
/8 December 1981

36/238.
36/237.

Establishment of an Information Systems Unit
in the Department of International Economic
and Social Affairs
The General Assembly,
Recalling section XIII of its resolution 35/217 of 17 De-

cember 1980, by which it decided that the staffing complement of the Development Information System of the
Information Systems Unit would be funded temporarily by
the regular budget for 1981 and that a report on the evaluation of the System should be submitted to the General
Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.

2

A/C.5/36/46.
83
Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-sixth Session. Supplement No. 7A (N36/7/Add. l-21 ). document A/36/7/Add.15.
84
Ibid., document N36/7/Add. I.
•

Report of the Committee of Governmental
Experts to Evaluate the Present Structure of
the Secretariat in the Administrative, Finance
and Personnel Areas
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/211 of 17 December 1980, by

which it established the Committee of Governmental Experts to Evaluate the Present Structure of the Secretariat in
the Administrative, Finance and Personnel Areas,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Committee of Governmental Experts to Evaluate the Present
Structure of the Secretariat in the Administrative, Finance
and Personnel Areas; 88
" A/C. 5/36/7.
Xh A/C.5/36/6.
" Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 7A (N36'71Add.l-21), document A/36/7/Add.7.
'" Ibid . Supp/emeni No. 44 (A/36/44 and Corr. I).
