S/PV.7891

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7891st meeting

Monday, 27 February 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Yelchenko. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ukraine)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Arancibia Fernández
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Kandeel
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen Mohsen
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Klein
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2017/95/Rev.1)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-05153 (E)
*1705153*

S/PV.7891

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2017/95/Rev.1)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Serbia to participate in this meeting.
I request the protocol officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Tomislav Nikolić, President of the
Republic of Serbia, to his seat at the Council table.
Mr. Tomislav Nikolić, President of the Republic of
Serbia, was escorted to a seat at the Council table.
The President: On behalf of the Security Council,
I welcome His Excellency Mr. Tomislav Nikolić,
President of the Republic of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Vlora
Çitaku to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/95/Rev.1, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tanin.
Mr. Tanin: Before I begin my remarks on the
situation in Kosovo, I would like to convey my profound
sadness over the passing of Ambassador Vitaly Churkin
of the Russian Federation, and to express my sincere
condolences to his wife, his family and the Government
of the Russian Federation on having lost one of his
country’s greatest diplomats. We will miss him in
the Council.
2/25

27/02/2017

As noted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/95/Rev.1), the past few months in Kosovo have
been characterized by inconsistent progress as well
as heightened tension between Belgrade and Pristina,
including a reciprocal series of reactions and counterreactions, accompanied at times by threatening and
bellicose rhetoric. These events and political posturing
reduce space for progress within the top-level political
dialogue — a process that remains as fragile as it is
essential and irreplaceable.
During my recent discussions in Pristina and
Belgrade, each side naturally expressed differing
perceptions of the reasons behind the reduced quality
of communications and relations, and in general
accused one another of having engaged in intentional
provocations. Pristina leaders perceive various actions
and words from Belgrade as being calculated to
undermine the objectives of the Pristina Government,
particularly as regards its outreach efforts towards
the northern Serb-majority municipalities. Belgrade
leaders perceive the actions and words of Pristina as
attempts to sidestep processes based in the dialogue
facilitated by the European Union (EU) and create new
realities on the ground.
Irrespective of the divergent perceptions and
interpretations, the facts were that a succession of events,
detailed in the Secretary-General’s report, combined
to undermine trust, to inhibit the space for productive
dialogue, and to push the situation uncomfortably close
to renewed instability and confrontation. I should note
that, since the issuance of the report, several other
significant developments have taken place, including
some more constructive ones.
At the beginning of this month, partially as a
response to an escalating situation, Belgrade and
Pristina leaders finally met at the highest political level
in Brussels, under the auspices of the European Union
High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy. This meeting was an essential step to chart a
path out of a deteriorating situation and to publicly
reconfirm their commitment to working together. A
few days later, after close consultations led by the EU
Special Representative and involving various other
diplomatic partners, the Mayor of North Mitrovica and
the Minister of the Environment and Spatial Planning
of Kosovo signed an agreement to remove the wall
that had previously been constructed as part of the
bridge redevelopment plan near the northern end of
the Mitrovica bridge. It was removed without incident
17-05153

27/02/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

on 5 February, and construction subsequently began
on a newly agreed park space plan that addresses the
concerns of all stakeholders.
Most recently, Pristina has renewed calls for the
transformation of the Kosovo Security Force into the
Kosovo armed forces, including through the adoption of
a resolution in the Assembly of Kosovo. This initiative
remains opposed by the Kosovo Serbs and Belgrade,
with reference to resolution 1244 (1999), emphasizing
the exclusive role and authorities of the international
security presence, the Kosovo Force (KFOR).
In the short term, the effects of the recent stresses
in Kosovo still reverberate. Trust and confidence
among Kosovo Serbs and Albanians have been affected;
they will take time to rebuild. Nonetheless, with the
restarting of the top-level dialogue, there are signs that
work is again happening towards this goal. Discussing
the details involved in implementing the future
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
will certainly help the Kosovo Serbs to re-engage with
the range of Government activities from which they
have unfortunately removed themselves over the past
three months. As seen in the past, one-sided approaches
or steps aimed at resolving issues that affect both
sides, and indeed overall progress in the normalization
process, are more likely to lead to confrontation than
to positive results in the direction desired by those who
contemplate such steps.
There is no alternative to dialogue. The international
prescriptions set forth to Pristina and Belgrade are
categorical imperatives: non-confrontation, resolving
issues through dialogue, and placing the objective
improvement of the lives of people ahead of more limited
and parochial calculations. I hope that the Council will
help to hold leaders to their words that they will maintain
a sincere and consistent commitment to dialogue and
the full implementation of all the agreements already
reached, and avoid making statements or undertaking
activities that undermine its potential and put at risk
all the benefits it is designed to bring to the population:
security, prosperity and peace.
Kosovo’s institutions continue to face daunting
challenges to delivering as their leaders might wish.
Political infighting persists. Disputes between the
Government and opposition remain acrimonious.
Disputes between the governing parties are also
visible, as is dissent within governing parties. Major
stakeholders feel pressure to position themselves for the

S/PV.7891

electoral cycles, too often at the expense of time and
energy that can be devoted to governance. Belgrade is
also engaged in a political campaign surrounding the
presidential elections in April. It is paramount to ensure
that electoral politics do not disrupt vital processes and
the kind of progress that is built up only with sustained
time and effort, beyond the fluctuations of political
seasons. The normalization of relations, reconciliation
and justice all belong to that broader horizon.
Success in the normalization of relations between
Belgrade and Pristina is interlinked with longterm and sustainable societal reconciliation among
Kosovo’s communities. Courageous leadership and
positive actions are important to promoting changes
in attitudes. We recognize and appreciate a number of
significant steps taken by some leaders, and encourage
more sustained efforts to move beyond the past and to
focus on the future.
Along with all my international colleagues in
Kosovo, I took careful note of the recently announced
initiative to explore the establishment of a truth and
reconciliation commission as one additional mechanism
to open internal dialogue between the communities in
Kosovo. Any such initiative should be lauded and given
as much support as needed to encourage success. It is
also important to recall that such initiatives are parts
of a greater whole; the EU-facilitated dialogue itself
is also one part, as is the serious work under way to
provide for the many victims of the conflict in Kosovo
who still await justice. Among the most essential
international principles and practices for conducting
truth and reconciliation processes in the post-conflict
setting are impartiality, independence, transparency,
complementarity with other efforts, full consultation
with and the participation of all stakeholders involved,
and, ultimately, commitment to the due diligence and
care required for such a sensitive process.
Concentrated work needs to continue in order to
improve the social and economic situation in Kosovo.
Addressing unemployment, making progress in the
rule of law and fighting corruption remain central for
all people in Kosovo. People who find little hope or
prospects within society experience frustration and
isolation. Many will gravitate to alternative paths,
including those leading to religious radicalization and
violent extremism. As noted in the Secretary-General’s
report, the threat of violent extremism and terrorism
remains real in Kosovo and throughout the region.

17-051533/25

S/PV.7891

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

The professional work of Kosovo’s security bodies
continues, while better integration into regional and
international approaches can greatly leverage these
efforts. Through the current five-year plan coordinated
by the Office of the Prime Minister, the authorities of
Kosovo are also focusing on a holistic approach to the
issue, including in the educational anddevelopmental
spheres. That important work can also benefit from
strong support and coordination with global efforts.
Coordinated responses and engagement during the
recent period of increased tensions, notably involving
the European Union, the Kosovo Force, UNMIK
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, among others, once again confirmed the
importance of the ongoing international engagement in
the maintenance of peace and stability in Kosovo and
the region. Stability in Kosovo and the normalization
of relations between Pristina and Belgrade are part of
the broader effort to improve stability in the Western
Balkans. Last week in the Security Council (see
S/PV.7886), the Secretary-General highlighted the
danger of instability in the Western Balkans region.
Any tension or potential crisis between Belgrade and
Pristina cannot be seen in isolation from the challenges
that the region already faces. Good-neighbourly
relations, dedication to a common future within a united
European space and a commitment to human rights and
the rule of law and resolving disputes only through
the peaceful means of dialogue and compromise are
essential for Kosovo, as they are for the entire region.
As I have reported to the Council over the past
months, UNMIK has brought a newly calibrated focus
to its work, providing applicable support where it is
most suited and working to ensure that the parties, the
EU-centred political process and all our international
organizational partners benefit from well-coordinated
and constant partnership on the ground. In doing so,
we are grateful for the close support we receive from
all members of the Council. I thank the Council most
sincerely for the ongoing support.
The President: I thank Mr. Tanin for his briefing.
I wish to remind invited participants to limit their
statements to no more than 10 minutes, in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
A red light will flash on the microphones when the
10-minute mark is reached.
I now give the floor to President Nikolić.
4/25

27/02/2017

President Nikolić (spoke in Serbian; English text
provided by the delegation): At the beginning of my
statement, let me welcome Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and thank him
for his overall commitment to the implementation of the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) under resolution 1244
(1999). I also thank the members of this organ for the
attention they give to this issue on a regular basis. I
also take this opportunity to wish His Excellency
Mr. António Guterres, the new Secretary-General of
the United Nations, every success in his future work.
It is with sadness and sorrow that I note that
Ambassador Vitaly Churkin is not with us today
sitting behind the nameplate of the Russian Federation.
He was a diplomat who contributed through his
indefatigable work not only to protecting the interests
of his country but also to international diplomacy and
the global political policies of our age. Serbia will
forever be grateful to him for the understanding and
support he extended over many years, as well as for the
dedication and energy that epitomized his work in the
Security Council.
I would like to point out once again the importance
of convening regular quarterly meetings of the Security
Council, at unchanged intervals, to discuss the present
agenda item. This is an important contribution to
transparency and openness and, equally relevant, it is
the only way to create conditions for the unhindered
implementation of UNMIK’s mandate in Kosovo and
Metohija. Also, these meetings lend support to the
dialogue conducted between Belgrade and Pristina
with the facilitation of the European Union (EU).
We fully agree with the observation in the report
(S/2017/95/Rev.1) before us regarding the importance
of ensuring that UNMIK is appropriately resourced
to address current and emerging challenges, including
fragile reconciliation and the evolving threat of violent
extremism. It is evident that the United Nations
Mission needs optimal, larger staffing and financial
capabilities in order to address all the requirements of
the implementation of its mandate.
There is no doubt that the Republic of Serbia is
committed to resolving all outstanding issues through
dialogue, within a status-neutral framework. Only
through such an approach will it be possible to bring
about stabilization in the southern Serbian province
and uphold Serbia’s right, as a sovereign State, to
17-05153

27/02/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

territorial integrity. Our primary goal was, is and will
be to safeguard peace, stability and human lives. By
responding determinedly to all the challenges, the
Government institutions of the Republic of Serbia have
been instrumental in easing the tensions in Kosovo
and Metohija when they threatened to escalate. The
message that I send to all extremists from this organ
is that peaceful solutions have no alternative. Problems
and outstanding issues must be solved through dialogue,
and not by threats and the use of force.
The Republic of Serbia expects the international
community to stand united in defence of this
civilizational achievement. In that context, I would like
to emphasize in particular the detrimental statements
made in respect of a possible formation of an army of
Kosovo. It would be a gross violation of resolution 1244
(1999) and, at the same time, present a new, serious
threat to the efforts invested in stabilizing not only
Kosovo and Metohija, but also the Western Balkans.
The Republic of Serbia will continue to pursue a
responsible and peaceful policy and will provide no
excuse to anybody to engage in escalation and violence.
In the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, Serbia has
sought to pave the way towards gradual normalization.
For a genuine and implementable agreement, though, it
is necessary that the other interlocutor be sincere too.
Serbia’s proposals submitted within the dialogue
have been constructive and realistic. Also, my country
has been ready for compromises. All along, we have
striven to find mutually acceptable solutions to for
many complex issues. That approach by Serbia has not
been reciprocated by the other side, which often stalls
the implementation of commitments it has assumed
by agreement and signature. Certain results have been
achieved, but they are far from what is expected.
For its part — only one part, though — Serbia is
firmly committed to the preservation of peace and the
creation of conditions in which all residents of Kosovo
and Metohija will be ensured security and respect for
basic human rights. This is the place and opportunity
for us to face the fact that the situation in Kosovo and
Metohija is, as borne out by the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the work of UNMIK, different altogether.
Let me recall that more than 200,000 internally
displaced persons (IDPs) continue to live in central
Serbia, without any hope of ever returning home.
Regrettably, such hope is not provided by the
international presence either. Serbia is interested in

S/PV.7891

protecting the lives and property of all the residents
of the province and creating conditions for sustainable
IDP returns. Yet all our commitments to the dialogue,
agreed to by Belgrade and Pristina and facilitated by the
European Union, are continually undercut by violations
of agreements and aggressive acts of the authorities in
Pristina. The aim is to provoke conflicts — from the
ban on Serbian-language textbooks to the continuous
attacks on Serbs and their property and the unlawful
attempt at confiscating the Mining, Metallurgy and
Chemical Combine at Trepca, to the latest instance
of preventing a Belgrade train from entering Kosovo
and Metohija, the gravest violation of the basic human
rights and the freedom of movement.
Traffic connections among people in the twentyfirst century cannot be considered a provocation
against anyone; rather, they are an obligation of all
civilized societies to ensure economic development and
decent living conditions to its citizens. Let me point out
in that regard that the initiative for the operation of a
train on that route was not made by politicians, but by
students of the only university in Kosovo and Metohija
in which instruction is in Serbian. The request of over
10,000 young men and women for a better and more
economical traffic connection with Belgrade and the
rest of central Serbia was met by threats, the mining of
the line and recourse to long guns and combat vehicles.
Such an approach is in direct contravention of the spirit
of the dialogue aimed at normalizing relations and poses
a serious threat to peace and stability in the region.
They say that the train was carrying the message
that Kosovo is an integral part of Serbia and that it was a
provocation that they were ready to stop by the force of
arms. There is not a single decision of the United Nations
under which Kosovo and Metohija is not a constituent
part of Serbia. For me, the real provocation is that all
representatives of the provisional administration in
Pristina continue to aver that Kosovo is an independent
State. Would members justify the actions of Serbia, a
State Member of the United Nations, if it responded to
that provocation with the threat of arms?
I am sure that members share my concern at the
dispatch, short of the mandatory agreement of the local
Serbian community, of the ethnically pure special
police units, armed with offensive weapons, to the
north of Kosovo and Metohija, populated by and large
by Serbs still harbouring a vivid memory of the wave of
organized ethnic cleansing in March 2004. In that wave,
let me recall, Serbs were expelled from almost all cities

17-051535/25

S/PV.7891

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

and towns in Kosovo and Metohija. The deployment
of special police units is absolutely unacceptable and
represents a call to armed conflict. Ask them what
orders they had in case the train full of students were
to appear at the administrative crossing. They did not
know how to answer me at a meeting in Brussels in
the presence of Ms. Mogherini, High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy. Perhaps they will tell the Council. Perhaps
they will tell the Council, as there are many here who
support their behaviour, which was a direct threat to
civilian lives.
The manifestation of the institutional intention to
use violence against peace-loving students — members
of non-Albanian communities — was also a serious
threat to peace in a volatile security situation in
Kosovo and Metohija. Just as it has on many previous
occasions, the Republic of Serbia also reacted
reasonably and responsibly on that occasion, taking
decisions and conveying messages whose only goal
was to preserve peace and whatever level of stability
existed in the region and to eliminate the danger posed
to the lives of the remaining non-Albanian population
in the province. In no way has Serbia ever provided
any pretext to Albanian extremists, yet they continue
to employ every asset to provoke conflict on a larger
scale. That bona fide compromise-based approach of
ours is also reflected in the 4 February agreement on
the landscaping of part of the area near the bridge in
Kosciuszko and Mitrovica.
Almost four years have elapsed since the signing
of the First Agreement of Principles Governing
the Normalization of Relations. A key segment of
the agreement, agreed and signed, relates to the
establishment of the association/community of Serb
municipalities in Kosovo. Unfortunately, it has not
been started yet. Pristina representatives are sending
ever more open messages that they are not interested
in the community and that they will not honour the
agreement guaranteed by the EU. The obstinacy of the
Pristina negotiators will not be checked by a few public
criticisms of Pristina made in the West en passant.
Serbia demands that Pristina honour the agreement
reached four years ago, nothing more, nothing less.
Serbia also expects to hear the united and powerful
voice of the international community, including that
of our partners from the European Union, against
the callous position held by Pristina on this issue
of vital importance to the Serbs. What is the use of
6/25

27/02/2017

agreements reached and obligations assumed if they are
not implemented?
The establishment of the association/community
of Serb municipalities in Kosovo is a precondition for
the normal life and sustainable survival of the Serbian
people in the province; it provides for systemic,
institutional protection of guaranteed human rights.
As such, it also deserves to be accorded much greater
attention in the reports of the Secretary-General, whose
task it is to protect basic human rights, primarily the
right to life, freedom of movement, housing, the right
to work and education, the right to the preservation of
the cultural uniqueness of a people and the freedom
of religion.
Serbia confers by agreement all those rights on the
Provisional Institutions in Pristina. Under the Brussels
Agreement, Pristina has to confer all such rights on
the association/community of Serb municipalities in
Kosovo, the institution that is to implement them within
the non-Albanian and, especially, Serbian populations
in Kosovo and Metohija, in municipalities in which they
constitute the majority. The association/community of
Serb municipalities in Kosovo was entrusted the task of
establishing the rule of law and human freedoms for the
Serbs through the institutions of the system.
It is also in that context that Serbia views the
importance of convening regular meetings of the
Security Council from which messages are sent to
either side, especially to Pristina, that agreements are
not, and cannot be, just a dead letter and that, instead,
they must be achieved in practice and enforced. Four
years is more than sufficient time. Procrastination
and excuses must no longer be taken lightly. The
establishment and the commencement of the work of
the association/community of Serb municipalities in
Kosovo is of primary importance. The dynamics must
be defined and the date on which the management
team will commence work must be determined, while
the community is to be based exclusively on what has
been agreed and not on some subsequent attempts to
unilaterally change the agreements that have already
been reached with facilitation by the EU.
The establishment of the association/community
of Serb municipalities in Kosovo, with substantive
powers provided for by the Brussels Agreement and
by accompanying agreements, rather than with the
competencies of a non-governmental organization, is
also necessary in order to prevent a further escalation
17-05153

27/02/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

of mistrust. Anything else would amount to the flouting
of commitments that have already been made and
would render the very dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina meaningless.
The situation in Kosovo and Metohija continues to
be characterized by a continued lack of physical and
legal safety for the Serbs and all other non-Albanians,
especially for IDPs, either who have returned or are
willing to return to their previous homes. The padlocks
on the Church of Christ the Saviour in Pristina
symbolize the intolerance of, and the attitude towards,
non-Albanian communities, especially the Serbs
in Kosovo and Metohija. Behind that unambiguous
anti-civilizational act is the resolve to erase all traces of
the existence of the Serbian people and their culture from
a city in which more than 50,000 Serbs lived until 1999.
The international community must not allow the brutal
ethnic cleansing of the Serbs and other non-Albanians
from Pristina to be carried out symbolically by the
violent acts of usurpation of this holy site. Every effort
to create at least an illusion of a multi-ethnic society in
Kosovo and Metohija is rendered meaningless in that
way. The Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija are therefore
sent an abundantly clear message that their centurieslong history, culture and religion are unwelcome.
In their fictitious endeavours to protect the Serbian
cultural and religious heritage, Pristina resorts to
double talk — as historical, cultural and religious
heritage is not protected from the desecration, arson
and destruction of the centuries-long Christian heritage
that belongs not only to the Serbs, but also to the
medieval memory of humankind. A truly democratic
society cannot be developed in an atmosphere in which
the crimes committed against the Serbs and other
non-Albanians, their property and historical, cultural
and religious heritage and identity go unpunished. That
is also becoming increasingly clear to those countries
that once supported the attempt by the authorities in
Pristina to join UNESCO.
I emphasize that there can be no true reconciliation
unless all crimes are tried. It is an obligation towards the
families, who have the right to find out the truth about
the fate of their loved ones. The Republic of Serbia has
never called into question the need for all those who
committed war crimes, irrespective of their ethnic
identity, to be brought to justice, on the contrary. At the
same time, in that regard, it is of the utmost importance
not to resort to manipulation and abuse for political
purposes, employed ever so often by the authorities in

S/PV.7891

Pristina. This provides clear evidence of Pristina’s lack
of readiness to assume responsibility within its own
ranks for war crimes. I point that out well aware of the
upcoming commencement of the work of the Specialist
Chambers, established to try the crimes committed in
Kosovo and Metohija in connection with the assertions
in the Dick Marty report on the trafficking in human
organs of abducted Serbs, as well as other war crimes
and crimes against humanity. Serbia also attaches great
importance to the solution of the problem of missing
persons, as a priority humanitarian question.
The French judiciary is to decide on the request to
extradite Ramush Haradinaj to Serbia. He is accused
of committing the gravest war crimes. In an attempt
to flee justice, this brute, one of the commanders of
the so-called Kosovo Liberation Army, does not refrain
even today from openly threatening Europe and the
world with a new war and states that “Serbia will fare
just as it did in 1999”.
Allow me to take the Council back in just a couple
of sentences to 1999, not through the stories of the
people killed, innocent civilian victims and ruins, of the
destruction and demolition during the aggression, which
is not difficult for me to recall was carried out against
a sovereign European State, without the approval of
the Security Council and the United Nations. Instead, I
shall advise of the consequences with which we live 18
years later and include facts also available to the World
Health Organization. Science has established that, once
the micro- and nano-particles of depleted uranium
enter the body, they have heavy metal radioactive and
toxic effects and, if they are sufficiently small, they
pass through all corporal barriers, including the bloodbrain barrier and the placenta, and can be found in all
tissues and organs of a contaminated person, as well as
in the intrauterine fetus.
Research conducted in 2004 by Gatti and Montanari
reveals that if someone comes from a territory hit by
missiles containing depleted uranium, one cannot
exclude the presence of depleted uranium as a potential
pathogen, even if there is no proof of its presence in that
person’s tissue. That is telling proof that nuclear arms,
including those containing depleted uranium, are in
fact by-products of civilization. They are an invisible,
ideal killer and a means of mass transgenerational
destruction, leading to lasting irriversible changes in
all natural organisms, despite being the end result of
state-of-the-art technology. The bombs containing
depleted uranium that were dropped on Serbia 18

17-051537/25

S/PV.7891

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

years ago are today damaging the ecosystem of the
entire planet.
However, I leave that topic to be considered by us
all to be an inseparable part of the Security Council’s
mission in the field of armament, the use of arms and
the consequences to humankind’s future survival on
planet Earth. I do not know, therefore, why there was no
strong condemnation of what I would refer to as clear
threats made by Ramush Haradinaj. Impunity for the
crimes committed must not be allowed or tolerated. It
is a civilizational matter and a litmus test for the entire
membership of the United Nations. It is an opportunity
for us to demonstrate that law and justice are above
politics and that all victims are equal in suffering.
Many incidents confirm that security in Kosovo
and Metohija continues to be unstable and that there is a
latent danger of escalating violence. I would reiterate that
it is the returnees in the nationally mixed environments
who are the most vulnerable. Accordingly, this question
should be accorded greater attention in the reports of
the Secretary-General.
Let me give a concrete example: between 1 October
2016 and 31 January 2017, that is, in the past four months
alone, over 30 ethnically motivated attacks against
Serbs and other non-Albanians have been recorded.
Physical attacks were committed, attempts were
made to prevent displaced persons from celebrating
Christmas Eve in the Church of the Assumption of Holy
Virgin Mary in Djakovica, the property of returnees
was broken into and set on fire and the memorial plaque
of the abducted Serbian journalists in the municipality
of Orahovac was damaged once again. A bomb was
planted near the Orthodox church in the Serbian part
of Orahovac, an explosive device was found at the
water-supply line in Kosovska Mitrovica, a school bus
with children aboard was stoned on the road between
Silovo and Koretiste — all of these instances evince the
discrepancy between Pristina’s formal pronouncements
and the reality on the ground.
Is it not a clear cause for concern and reaction by
the entire international community that Serbs continue
to be prevented from visiting their churches and
graveyards even during the major Christian holidays,
such as Christmas? If the international community is
not concerned and does not stop these prohibitions, it
is sending a clear message that it approves Pristina’s
position that the Serbs are unwanted, that they will never
be able to be the masters of their own destiny, that there
8/25

27/02/2017

are no conditions for their safe return, and that their
lives — let alone their property and security — will
never be safe.
The restitution of private property, which is one
of the most frequent violations of human rights that
internally displaced persons from Kosovo and Metohija
are facing, remains an unresolved problem, Over
40,000 requests for the restitution of illegally seized and
usurped property have been submitted to the Kosovo
Property Agency, which is under the control of Pristina.
Out of the requests, some 97 per cent were submitted
by Serbs and other non-Albanians, while approximately
18,000 lawsuits relative to compensation for property
damage were filed in courts in the province.
It is therefore evident that the basic conditions for
the sustainable return of the displaced are not present,
with the lack of guarantees for the safety of persons and
the protection of property, the absence of the rule of
law and the widespread discrimination against and lack
of respect for the non-Albanian population and their
fundamental human and civil rights and freedoms.
The number of returnees to Pristina continues to be
discouragingly small, despite the fact that the creation
of conditions conducive to an unhindered and longterm sustainable return is one of the main tasks of
UNMIK’s mandate.
It is clear that UNMIK carries out this part of
its mission with difficulty, the key reason being the
absence political will of the majority community and
its unwavering intolerance of all other communities.
For example, a declaration aadopted by the local
Municipal Assembly in Suva Reka makes the return of
internally displaced persons to Mušutište contingent
upon the resolution of the question of missing persons
and upon an apology by the Republic of Serbia and
the Kosovar Serbs for crimes allegedly committed
during the conflicts of 1999. Of no value at all are the
Serbs’ title deeds proving ownership of property or the
right to live in houses they have inherited from their
forefathers. Empty, too, are the Brussels Agreement
and the UNMIK mandate.
No one reacts to such wilful acts or the denial of
all rights to Serbian returnees. Failure to react to such
incidents is a form of tacit acceptance of, or even the
support for, the continuation of such practices, which is
neither in the spirit of Security Council resolutions nor
any other United Nations instruments and declarations,
in clear violation of the spirit of law and justice. We
17-05153

27/02/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

therefore request that the question of minority rights
be accorded greater attention in the reports of the
Secretary-General on the work of UNMIK.
It is evident that systemic, legal, administrative,
institutional and political threats to the human rights
of the non-Albanian communities are widespread in
Kosovo and Metohija. Systemic double standards in
which members of non-Albanian communities have to
face numerous obstacles when trying to exercise their
rights — the most basic right to live without fear of
physical violence, the right to see perpetrators punished,
the right to return and stay in the place of return, the right
to employment and the right for children to receive an
education, the right to health protection, property rights
and religious rights — are the rule. As long as crimes
go unpunished and as long as the authorities in Pristina
carry out their designs without consequences and fail to
implement the provisions of the Brussels Agreement, a
dignified life in a multi-ethnic community will not be
possible. In that regard, I note the responsibility of the
United Nations.
In a word, it must not be allowed that the questions
of essential importance for a normal and dignified
life of Serbs and the members of other non-Albanian
communities be submerged in general statistics without
regard to the ethnic component that underlies all the
problems in Kosovo and Metohija. That path cannot be
acceptable when it is construed as proof of readiness to
accept the existing conditions without the intention of
making any substantial changes, proceeding from the
fact that enclaves have their own distinctive problems
and are worthy first and foremost of recognition by the
State and of greater efforts towards resolving numerous
everyday problems.
On this occasion, I would also like to reiterate that
we consider it necessary to introduce a new section in the
report with respect to northern Metohija, which would
focus on the situation of the minority communities
south of the Ibar River. Radicalization of the political
climate and the strengthening of the political, ethnic
and religious intolerance amplify the instability of the
security situation in Kosovo and Metohija.
A drastic increase in religious extremism, with
elements of terrorism, is evident in the province, as
are activities by radicalized extremists returning from
the battlefields of the Middle East. At the same time as
the political situation of Kosovar Albanians becomes
more polarized, a trend towards further escalation is

S/PV.7891

observable, with the constant threat of the Albanian
electorate redirecting its discontent to the members
of the non-Albanian communities, primarily the
Serbs, which requires heightened attention from the
international presence.
Guided by the interest of regional stability and
a vision for a different life in the region, and truly
dedicated to reconciliation, the rule of law and
democratic values, the Republic of Serbia is firmly
committed to maintaining the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina, whose primary aim in the
solution of everyday problems of the people living
Kosovo and Metohija, with full respect for resolution
1244 (1999), which represents the basis and framework
for the resolution of these issues. However, in order for
the dialogue to be truly purposeful, it must be grounded
in the genuine desire to resolve the problems on the
basis of compromise, and it must not be abused as a
platform for the imposition of the interests of one side
alone, especially not for the purposes of promoting the
unilaterally declared independence of Kosovo, which
the Republic of Serbia will never recognize.
The solution to the question of Kosovo and Metohija
cannot be based on diktat and on the presentation of a fait
accompli to the Republic of Serbia. The solution is only
possible through dialogue and by solutions acceptable
to all sides. The last thing we want is for the situation
in Kosovo and Metohija to pose a constant threat to the
stability and progress of both Serbia and the region,
for which reason we shall continue our dedicated work
on the process of normalization and responsibility and
regardless of the increasingly frequent manifestations
of the lack of constructiveness and the presence of
harmful unilateral actions by the other side.
There are numerous examples of unilateral steps
that Pristina has taken outside the agreements reached
within the dialogue, such as the attempts to join
international organizations. As a matter of fact, the
dialogue provides for the resolution of all issues — all
issues — through the dialogue between the two parties
with the facilitation of the European Union. Detrimental
is the habit of Pristina authorities to resort to unilateral
actions, with the support of some major Powers, the
sponsors of their attempts at independence, contrary
to the Brussels dialogue as the agreed framework for
resolving the outstanding issues. The continuity of this
regrettable practice is evinced by Kosovo’s efforts to join
UNESCO, INTERPOL and other organizations, which
unnecessarily disturbs the atmosphere in which the

17-051539/25

S/PV.7891

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

dialogue takes place and which is keeping us back from
what is supposed to be the primary goal for both sides,
namely, the stabilization of the situation in the region
and the quest for sustainable and mutually acceptable
solutions. Serbia, for its part, honours agreements.
Five years ago, I decided to join the dialogue with
the provisional authorities in Pristina in order to calm
the tensions and, above all, ensure a normal and safe life
for Serbs and the non-Albanian minorities in Kosovo
and Metohija. Serbia’s experiences in the dialogue have
made me wonder if I did the right thing. Many forget
that, historically, Kosovo and Metohija is the territory
of Serbia, and not of the Albanians, who, according to
the Ottoman census, did not even live in the territories
in the fourteenth century.
It is forgotten that Kosovo Day, in which Kosovo as
a Serbian land was celebrated in the United States some
99 years ago. On that occasion, President Woodrow
Wilson sent a message of American goodwill towards
Serbia and the Serbian people to the Serbian community
of the United States. It is forgotten that the Serbs had
founded their State on the territory of Kosovo in the
Middle Ages, and that ever since the Serbian emperors
and kings built their churches and monasteries there,
most of which are inscribed on the UNESCO List of
World Heritage Sites as Serbian heritage. Unfortunately,
most of them are also now on the List of World Heritage
in Danger. The question arises: In danger from whom?
Certainly not from us, who seek to preserve our
Christian heritage.
It is also forgotten that Kosovo was populated
by Albanians most intensively only in the past two
centuries, especially during the dictatorship of the
Communist leader Enver Hoxha, from whom they fled
Albania to Kosovo and Metohija and were received by
Serbs in good faith as brothers. It is forgotten that a
unilateral declaration of statehood means nothing if
it is not the result of an agreement with the mother
country and people. That this is right is confirmed by
the constant pressure on Serbia to renounce its territory,
the land where it established its statehood almost 10
centuries ago.
We shall not do that; no one else would. In the
Council we have a guarantee in that certain permanent
members respect international law and support the
integrity and sovereignty of Serbia. We know that some
countries recognized so-called Kosovo out of their own
10/25

27/02/2017

interests, but we also know that more than 70 per cent
of humankind does not share this view.
Perhaps I am speaking to some of those present
here in vain. We in Serbia say that it is futile to whisper
to the deaf or to wink at the blind. Those who do not
have such pain turn their backs on the pain of others. I
would never wish your children to live in the conditions
in which Serbian children in Kosovo and Metohija do.
I would not, because I believe in the right of a child to
grow up in peace, the parents’ right to raise that child
in peace, and people’s right to live out their life, come
the time, in the home of their ancestors. I would not,
because I believe in God.
I would like to be clear once again: Serbia will not
recognize Kosovo, whatever we might be offered in
return and whatever pressures we may be subjected to.
This has everything to do with the defence of principles
and a permanent adherence to justice. Those who adhere
to principles and fight for justice are always right.
On behalf of the citizens of Serbia, I would like
to thank all of the countries that respect international
law and support our position. The political leaders of
Pristina should be aware of all of this so as finally to be
able to embark on reasonable negotiations and to keep
the promises they have made, just as their ancestors did.
On this occasion, I call on those States that have
not recognized the unilaterally declared independence
of Kosovo to resist the shameless pressure brought
to bear by the powerful and to remain true to their
principled respect for international law, the Charter of
the United Nations and the supreme authority of the
Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security. I call on those States that have
recognized Kosovo to reconsider their decision
and thereby contribute to efforts to find mutually
acceptable solutions.
Serbia is ready for agreements, but not for
blackmail. It is ready for talks, but not for ultimatums
or unilateral solutions. It is ready for the substantial
autonomy of Kosovo and Metohija, but never for an
independent State of Kosovo. And it is ready, in a
context of substantial autonomy, to guarantee all rights
to national communities, rights that, in the context
of Serbian laws and everyday life, exceed by far the
standards of most countries.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Çitaku.
17-05153

27/02/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Ms. Çitaku: Before I read out my remarks, I wish
to stress that I will abide by the 10-minute time limit
that you, Sir, proposed, out of respect for your time
as President and out of respect for the members of the
Security Council.
Secondly, allow me to convey our deep condolences
in connection with the passing of Ambassador Vitaly
Churkin. We disagreed on almost everything, but we
appreciate his role and contribution.
Ten days ago, Kosovo celebrated the ninth
anniversary of its independence. We all remember vividly
that cold day in Pristina: the emotions, expectations and
dreams. All the suffering that Kosovars were subjected
to, the years of discrimination, exclusion, mass killings,
ethnic cleansing, rape and deportation, did not deter
us from pursuing our destiny. We persevered, and we
succeeded. The lessons of Kosovo are quite simple; you
can win if you are right and if the cause is just, even if
you are not the powerful one.
Furthermore, humankind is capable of miracles.
When there is solidarity among the free nations of
the world, life prevails over death and good prevails
over evil. We will forever be grateful for the role the
Council has played, but the time has come to move
on. Coming here every three months, taking up the
Council’s valuable time and hearing the same old
stories represents an unjustified use of the Council’s
valuable time. Spending millions to maintain a mission
in Kosovo that no longer has a function or purpose is
an unjustified expenditure of United Nations resources
given that we know very well that they could be put to
much better use.
Frankly, I will not go through every topic mentioned
in the relevant report of the Special Representative. If
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo criteria were used also to write reports about
the countries of the representatives sitting around this
table, trust me, many reports would have to be produced.
I will just mention briefly several issues. First,
with respect to the incident that took place in the city
of Gjakova, what the report failed to mention is that in
1998-1999, 1,665 civilians were killed in that city. That
is 13 per cent of the entire population. In the village of
Mejë alone, 373 civilians were killed in less than an
hour. Three thousand women were raped. Hundreds
went missing. Houses, schools and religious sites were
destroyed. Yet the mayor of Gjakova, Ms. Mimoza

S/PV.7891

Kusari, has been working hard to accommodate
minority communities in her municipality.
For the record, the municipality has invested in the
reconstruction of the Serbian Orthodox church there.
The church does not pay for any utilities; the municipality
covers all costs. Moreover, the municipality has
invested in a small farm on the premises of the church
in order to be even more accommodating to the people
who are living and serving there. The Orthodox Church
in Gjakova was never attacked, and there is good
cooperation. The incident to which the report refers
has to do with a very specific situation, that of people
who were involved in war crimes coming to visit the
site. This is the whole story. The context is everything,
and often the reports of the Special Representative
fail to provide that. While we heard from my Serbian
counterpart about a parallel universe, let me please tell
the Council what is happening in the real world.
First, Kosovo is a free, independent and sovereign
State recognized by the overwhelming majority of
the free nations of the world. Just today, Bangladesh
recognized the Republic of Kosovo, and we wish to
thank its Government and its people. We wish also to
thank the people and the Government of Singapore,
which recognized Kosovo previously, in December. It
is very clear that this process is unstoppable.
Kosovo is a member of more than 50 regional and
international organizations and on a clear path towards
becoming a member of the European Union, and
soon, hopefully, a Member of the United Nations. The
legitimacy of our cause was sealed by the crystal-clear
ruling of the International Court of Justice. The Court
ruled that States exists for the population, not vice
versa, thereby confirming without any ambiguity
that we did not break any international law when we
declared our independence.
Secondly, just because Serbia refuses to accept us
as a State does not make us any less of a State. That only
signifies that Serbia is a neighbour that remains hostage
to its own hegemonic and neo-colonial past. Its attitude
is clearly demonstrated by the abuse of the issuance of
an INTERPOL red notice, as we recently witnessed in
the case of the detention of the former Prime Minister
of Kosovo, Mr. Ramush Haradinaj. Mr. Haradinaj was
twice acquitted at The Hague tribunal, and we have
absolutely no doubt that the justice system in France
will function professionally and release him. That is
long overdue.

17-0515311/25

S/PV.7891

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

This is not justice. This is not prosecution. This
is persecution. Furthermore, this is a desperate act by
Serbia to reverse history. As a reminder to everyone,
Serbia conducted and levelled similar trials and charges
against all Western leaders in 2000, including Bill
Clinton, Tony Blair, Jacques Chirac, Gerhard Schröder
and Javier Solana, among others. We have no doubt
that this Kaf kaesque process will end soon and that
Mr. Haradinaj will return to Kosovo where he belongs,
but the really disturbing element in all of this drama
is Serbia’s failure to deal with its own past — with the
real and not the fictional crimes that were committed in
Kosovo during the war.
Just last month, the Humanitarian Law Center
in Belgrade published a shiver-inducing report
substantiated by facts and figures of unprecedented
measures that Serbia undertook to hide traces of war
crimes, going so far as building structures on top of
the mass graves. According to Serbian logic, Churchill,
De Gaulle, Roosevelt and Eisenhower should have
faced the Nuremberg trials — not the Nazis. Let
us imagine just for one second those thousands of
families in Kosovo who are demanding answers and a
proper burial for their loved ones. Instead of finding
the strength to deal with their own past, catharsis and
de-Nazification, Serbia has chosen the path of denial.
Zero is the number of Serbians charged or convicted
for war crimes committed in Kosovo. Instead, they are
being promoted to high-level positions, such as in the
case of General Diković, the current Chief of Staff of the
Serbian Armed Forces, who, as has been documented,
is responsible for the killing of 1,400 civilians.
The Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) is and was not
a terrorist organization. The KLA has been the most
successful liberation movement in recent history.

27/02/2017

stop the train, and after seeing our resolve, just before
it reached the border, Serbia decided to stop the train.
Frankly speaking, there is no reason to praise Serbia for
doing that. It is playing the roles of both pyromaniac and
fireman. It should not be rewarded for fixing a problem
that it created in the first place. We experienced a
similar situation with regard to the wall that was built
in the centre of the city of Mitrovica and later removed
by those who put it there in the first place. Those kinds
of games should end.
Serbs living in Kosovo should not be held hostage
by Serbia and played as pawns in order to create
leverage. They should be masters of their own lives.
Kosovo institutions have gone to great lengths to
accommodate their needs. Unprecedented legislative
and constitutional measures have been put in place in
order to make sure that their rights are guaranteed. We
will, in accordance with our Constitution, implement
all the agreements that we reached in Brussels. We
will establish the association/community of Serbmajority municipalities but only in accordance with
our Constitution, without their having any legislative
or executive power.
We will not allow Serbia to hold us back and
hostage to its own troubling past. We understand that
dealing with the past is sometimes more difficult for
the perpetrator than for the victim. Questions need
to be answered and, for some, that past is shameful.
We will not discuss with Serbia or with anyone else
the establishment and the creation of our own armed
forces. That is a legitimate and a sovereign decision for
the Kosovo authorities to make.

What we face on an almost daily basis from Serbia
are one-sided provocations aimed at destabilizing
Kosovo. There is a train service that runs twice daily
between Kosovo and Serbia. People commute from
one side of the border to the other. There was never
a problem, until one day in mid-January when Serbia
decided to send a train fully-loaded with hatred to
Kosovo covered with the slogan “Kosovo is Serbia”
translated into 21 languages, including Albanian.

Although the President of Kosovo established the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission because we
believe that every family and every victim, regardless
of ethnicity, deserves truth and justice, what we heard
from Serbian President in January was a call for war.
Now, obviously, there will be no war — we all know how
the last one ended — but in order to build sustainable
peace, the absence of war is not enough. I should be
clear that we in Kosovo will not be distracted. We
know exactly who we are, and we know exactly what
we want. We want peace, dialogue and reconciliation,
but never submission.

Now, really, does anyone have any idea of what
Serbia thinking? Would any Council member sitting
around this table allow the same thing to happen in his
or her country? Kosovo, of course, took measures to

Young, dedicated and selfless people in Kosovo are
writing history and making us proud every day. These
include Majlinda Kelmendi, who once again won the
world judo championship, and Arta Dobroshi and Shpat

12/25

17-05153

27/02/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Deda, who collaborated with British producers and just
brought home our first award from the British Academy
of Film and Television Arts.
In the real world, beyond politics and political
turmoil, there is a Kosovo in which youngsters try
hard, challenge the boundaries imposed by politics,
dream big and never let us down. I would like to invite
everyone here to come and visit, so that they can see
with their own eyes what Kosovo looks like today.
The President: I thank Ms. Çitaku for her statement.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of the President of Serbia, His Excellency
Mr. Tomislav Nikolić, and share the serious concerns
he expressed about the situation in Kosovo. We thank
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and his team for their briefing on
the work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), highlighting that serious
problems persist in the region. Many of those problems,
however, have been urgently awaiting solutions for
years. We categorically refuse to accept the practice
of directing unilateral and offensive insults at Serbia
and its people. One should first cast out the beam from
one’s own eye.
The report of the Secretary-General on the Mission
in Kosovo (S/2017/95/Rev.1) is generally objective
and deserves to be commended. It and Mr. Tanin’s
briefing this morning reflect the growing level of
tension between the parties and the presence in the
region of outstanding issues, most of them in key areas,
particularly those relating to the protection of the
political, economic, social and religious rights of the
Serb community. It is becoming clear why the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina, which has already been
in a prolonged deadlock, is in danger of breaking down.
That is primarily the result of the biased attitude of the
European Union, which, as intermediary, has not exerted
the proper degree of influence on the Kosovo-Albanian
side regarding implementation of the agreements.
Above all, what is at issue is the fundamental question
of the establishment of an association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities of Kosovo, which, we must
not forget, is a key point of the agreement of 19 April
2013 on the principles of the normalization of relations
between Belgrade and Pristina. There has been plenty

S/PV.7891

of discussion and many pronouncements about national
reconciliation and the creation of a multi-ethnic society
in Kosovo, but no sign whatever of practical steps to
achieve those things.
We also categorically refuse to accept the attempt
to distance Belgrade from the process of resolving some
of the most important issues surrounding the protection
of the lives of the Kosovo’s Serbian community. No
one — neither Serbia nor Serbs living in Kosovo — will
ever accept that. Many members of the international
community will not accept it. We are disturbed at the
lack of an appropriate reaction among the international
community to Pristina’s ongoing attempts to wrest
away economic assets that belong to Serbs, including
the Trepča industrial complex and major electric power
facilities. During the recent exacerbation of tensions,
not even feeble attempts were made to urge Kosovars to
comply with the sensitive agreements. On the contrary,
it is always the Serbs who are leaned on from the other
side, time after time.
We note Belgrade’s constructive attitude. On
5 February, the Serbs began to dismantle the walls
around a pedestrian zone in North Mitrovica, something
that, let us not forget, the Pristina authorities had
insisted on. Serbia fulfilled its obligations regarding
the
International
Telecommunication
Union’s
establishment of a separate telephone code for Kosovo.
Thanks to Belgrade’s restrained position, an escalation
of conflict was avoided when, on 14 January, heavily
armed units of Kosovo-Albanian police invaded
Serb-populated areas of Kosovo in order to prevent
the resumption of train service between Belgrade
and North Mitrovica; this unprovoked measure was a
gross violation of the current agreement on freedom
of movement across the administrative boundary line.
Pristina should have no security forces in northern
Kosovo, where the Serbian population lives. That is a
key element of the agreements.
The dialogue’s effectiveness is undermined by the
fact that some countries that pay lip service to the idea
of dialogue are playing a double game. They encourage
the unilateral attitude in Kosovo to applications
for membership in international bodies, prompting
other States to recognize Kosovan sovereignty. The
renewed declarations by Pristina of its intention to seek
membership in the Council of Europe, INTERPOL
and UNESCO are nothing but open provocations.
Incidents, including some involving physical violence
towards non-Albanian nationalists, continue to

17-0515313/25

S/PV.7891

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

occur. Stone-throwing at buses carrying Serbian
schoolchildren and Orthodox Christian pilgrims is
commonplace. Kosovo’s law enforcement bodies react
extremely sluggishly, and in most cases the perpetrators
are never found. All of this creates obstacles to the
already almost paralysed process for returning refugees
to the region.
On 4 January, we noted the arrest in France, at the
request of Serbia, of Ramush Haradinaj, the leader of the
Alliance for the Future of Kosovo and former Kosovo
Liberation Army insurgent. We await the completion
of all the formalities necessary to enable the launching
of a special investigation into the Kosovo Liberation
Army’s crimes as soon as possible. If the perpetrators
are not brought to justice, regardless of the positions they
may currently occupy, it will be impossible to achieve
national reconciliation or a comprehensive settlement.
We consider enabling the creation of a KosovoAlbanian armed force on territory under a United
Nations mandate unacceptable. Such an act contravenes
resolution 1244 (1999), which supports the presence
on Kosovo’s territory of a multinational force under
international control, exclusively. When dealing with
any issues related to Kosovo security forces, the views
of Serbia and Kosovo Serbs must be taken into account.
As long as we are talking about national reconciliation
and a multi-ethnic society, those views must be taken
into consideration. One indisputable priority should be
ensuring the security of the Kosovo Serb community,
for which the Kosovo-Albanian authorities and
international organizations in the region are responsible,
particularly the Kosovo Force, whose mandate includes
relevant provisions in that regard.
Serious issues regarding the protection of Serbian
religious and cultural heritage continue. The Serbian
Orthodox Church is encountering obstacles in gaining
access to religious sites, which they need to be able to do,
among other things, in order to put them back in order in
the wake of acts of vandalism. The Kosovo authorities
have long prevented the completion of the construction
of the church of Christ the Saviour in Pristina, and now
they have also blocked the reconstruction of the church
of Saint Nicholas in the Holy Archangels Monastery in
Prizren by refusing building permission to the Serbian
Orthodox Church. This very typical act does not jibe
with Kosovo’s professed desire to become a member
of UNESCO.
14/25

27/02/2017

The task of countering the spread of Islamic
radicalism and terrorism in Kosovo has lost none of its
urgency. It is a worrying fact that the region is used
for recruiting insurgents to fight with extremists in the
Middle East and to prepare acts of terrorism in other
countries. Incidentally, major Western publications
often feature reporting on the subject of the fact that
when these insurgents get done fighting and return
home they create the problem of what to do with them.
Given the current situation, we see no grounds
for reviewing the Security Council’s quarterly
consideration of the question of Kosovo. On the
contrary, the regional dynamics require us to intensify
our attention to the situation in Kosovo, and any talk
of reducing the level of the United Nations presence in
the region provided by UNMIK, under the leadership
of Ambassador Tanin, is inappropriate. There can be
no doubt that he is playing a key role in the situation in
Kosovo, or that UNMIK remains the central instrument
for international monitoring and contributes to
normalizing the situation, in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999) — which remains in force in its entirety.
The resolution cannot be changed unilaterally. That is
an absolute political taboo.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to thank Mr. Tomislav Nikolić,
President of the Republic of Serbia, for his presence and
participation here today. At the same time, I would like
to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for his informative briefing.
One of the main principles of the foreign policy of
Uruguay is respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States. In exercising their sovereignty,
States are free to alter their borders, provided that it
is in keeping with international law and done through
peaceful means and agreements that have been freely
consented to. Uruguay takes this opportunity to
reaffirm compliance with resolution 1244 (1999),
adopted by the Security Council.
We express our concern about reference in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/95/Rev.1) to
the fact that tensions between Belgrade and Pristina
have reached worrying levels. Uruguay calls for a
committed dialogue that would lead to stability in the
region, as well as progress and an improvement in the
situation of the people living in the area. I hope that
17-05153

27/02/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

the high-level meetings that took place in January and
early February within the framework of the Belgrade
dialogue, facilitated by the European Union, will yield
positive results in order to reduce the tension that arose
during the period covered by the report.
The topic of human rights should be at the centre of
any reconciliation process. In order to lay the foundation
for the future, we must heal the wounds of the past.
In that respect, it is crucial to clarify the situation of
all missing persons. Also crucial to the reconciliation
process is resolving the situation of the internally
displaced persons and guaranteeing conditions for their
safe return.
Another fundamental aspect that I would like to
point out is the question of migrants. In that respect,
considering the special circumstances in the Balkans as
a route for migrants, I would like to stress the necessity
of protecting the rights of migrants and refugees. We
therefore welcome the statement by the SecretaryGeneral that asylum seekers in the zone have been dealt
with in accordance with international humanitarian law.
I would like to acknowledge the important work
that is done on the ground by UNMIK, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo
Force, which are acting in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999). I would also like to highlight the recent
campaign carried out by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe on the protection of
journalists in Kosovo with a view to promoting the
freedom of the press and ending the insecurity those
professionals often face, as well as the impunity enjoyed
by their attackers.
There are many areas where we are seeing progress,
and there are many that still require work. However,
with the commitment of political leaders and both
communities and with the support of the Council and
the international system, it will be possible to achieve
peace and security in a stable environment in which the
communities can coexist peacefully.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Zahir Tanin, for his detailed update on the activities of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We also welcome the presence of
the President of Serbia, Mr. Nikolić, and recognize the
presence of Ambassador Çitaku.

S/PV.7891

We welcome the detailed report (S/2017/95/Rev.1)
presented by the Secretary-General on the situation in
Kosovo and on the activities of UNMIK. That should
actually be the main purpose of our meeting today. We
want to stress that the report highlights some progress
as well as some critical issues, and clearly depicts a
situation that continues to remain fragile due to internal
political problems, as well as to an overall deterioration
of relations among western Balkan countries.
We are very concerned by the rising tensions in
recent weeks, leading to the use of heated rhetoric and
hampering the improvement of relations between the two
sides. We call on both Belgrade and Pristina to abstain
from inflammatory statements and backward-looking
language. In that regard, I would like to emphasize our
strong support to the normalization of their relations
and encourage them to constructively advance the
dialogue facilitated by the European Union (EU). We
commend the effort of the High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
and Vice-President of the European Commission,
Ms. Federica Mogherini, to convene at the highest
level the latest rounds of the dialogue in Brussels on
24 January and 1 February, where the parties agreed
to defuse tensions, refrain from unilateral acts and
continue to work together.
Remarkable progress has already been achieved
with important steps forward in the areas of
integration of the judiciary, freedom of movement and
telecommunications. But much remains to be done to
implement the agreements already reached. We strongly
encourage Belgrade and Pristina to work in that
direction and to find pragmatic and mutually acceptable
solutions to the advantage of both communities, starting
with the establishment of the association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo.
The normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina will have a crucial impact on regional
equilibrium. Allow me to underscore once again
that key to the path towards the European Union is
durable peace, stability and prosperity in the western
Balkans, which are inherently linked to progress in
the EU-facilitated dialogue. Losing momentum now
could open the way to a counterproductive backlash,
to the detriment of both parties and the entire region.
Our support of this process is unwavering at both the
bilateral level and in multilateral forums.

17-0515315/25

S/PV.7891

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

We stand at the front line to assist in the
consolidation of Kosovo authorities and to improve local
ownership, as seen in our long-standing contribution to
UNMIK, the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo Force. In that vein,
we welcome the entry into force of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement with the European Union.
At this point, it is of primary importance that Pristina
step up efforts in the fight against corruption and
organized crime, and that it ratify the border agreement
with Montenegro. Effective reconciliation is at the
foundation of any democratic and functional society. We
welcome the results achieved so far, with the assistance
of EULEX, in the rule of law and justice sector, and we
look forward to the time when the Kosovo Specialist
Chambers are fully operational.
I have two other main messages. First of all,
international assistance to Kosovo must be based on the
principles of sustainability and ownership. At present,
given the volatile situation highlighted by the SecretaryGeneral in his report, including the threat of violent
extremism, we acknowledge his view on the current
adequate configuration of UNMIK, and we support
its role in facilitating dialogue and reconciliation at
the community level. Nonetheless, we stand ready to
discuss a reconfiguration of the Mission according to
the evolution of the situation on the ground and that
is consistent with the overall reform of peacekeeping
operations. We look forward to the recommendations
of the Secretary-General in that regard.
Secondly, we emphasize the pivotal role of the
European Union in the normalization of relations
between Belgrade and Pristina, and call on both to send
out a message of détente and constructive commitment
to the European Union-facilitated dialogue, for the sake
of their own populations and the stability of the entire
region. We attach primary importance to the regional
dimension. Boosting integration in the western Balkans
is crucial to bringing them closer to Europe while
improving their resilience to emerging threats and
triggering their development potential.
As Chair of the Berlin process in 2017, which
will culminate with the western Balkans summit
in Trieste on 12 July, we focus on economic growth,
infrastructure, interconnectivity, innovation, youth and
the rule of law. In these priority areas, shared with the
European Union and at the core of its cooperation with
western Balkans countries, we are engaging all actors
in an inclusive dialogue. We encourage all of them to
16/25

27/02/2017

actively participate, beginning with the implementation
of soft measures on cooperation with neighbours, which
are essential if the process is to be fruitful.
Within the framework of the Berlin process, we
will also provide assistance to the adoption of reforms
against organized crime and corruption by promoting
the development of a network of anti-corruption
agencies to strengthen Governments’ capacity in
confronting the phenomenon at the regional level.
Mr. Klein (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Tanin for his update on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We appreciate the United Nations efforts over the
years to help Kosovo build multi-ethnic, democratic
institutions that uphold the rule of law and respect
human rights. We are pleased that these efforts have
largely been accomplished. However, even given
those accomplishments and the requests of several
Council members during our briefing in November
(see S/PV.7811) for the United Nations to seriously
reconsider UNMIK’s resources, we were surprised
that the report of the Secretary-General notes the
“importance of ensuring that UNMIK is appropriately
resourced to address current and emerging challenges”
(S/2017/95/Rev.1, para. 41).
We believe that UNMIK is overresourced
and overstaffed incomparison with its limited
responsibilities. Last year, UNMIK had high levels
of underspent funds in its budget. The Mission should
return such resources to United Nations Headquarters
rather than create unnecessary projects. And yet
UNMIK, a mission that should be drawing down, is
putting permanent solar panels on a building that it is
renting. Kosovo is a success story and UNMIK deserves
a lot of credit, but it would be unfortunate for UNMIK
to be remembered not for its brave work in supporting
the establishment of a new country but for lingering
past its relevance.
It is time for the Secretariat to downsize UNMIK’s
structure, size and tasks in line with realities on the
ground. The situation in Kosovo is drastically different
from what it was in 1999, when the Security Council
created the Mission, or in 2008, when the Secretariat
restructured it. We are aware of the frictions and
provocations that have occurred over the past few
months, but we also note that they have been resolved
calmly, collaboratively and without violence.
17-05153

27/02/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Recent frictions highlight the importance of the
efforts of Kosovo and Serbia to pursue the normalization
of relations through the Brussels dialogue, facilitated
by the European Union (EU). We appreciate the recent
convening by EU High Representative Mogherini
of both Kosovo’s and Serbia’s leaders at a high-level
meeting. We continue to support the vital role of the
EU as a facilitator of the dialogue. Leaders in Belgrade
and Pristina must continue taking the needed steps and
making the difficult but necessary decisions in order
to progress in the talks. We call on both Belgrade
and Pristina to fully implement dialogue agreements
without further delay, and to work more actively
towards the normalization of relations.
The United States reaffirms its support for
Kosovo as it develops as a prosperous, peaceful and
mult-ethnic democracy. A democratic, stable and
independent Kosovo is a force for regional stability.
We continue to strongly support full international
recognition of Kosovo and Kosovo’s membership in
all relevant international organizations, including the
United Nations. We encourage United Nations Member
States that have not yet done so join the more than 100
Members that have already recognized Kosovo as an
independent State.
The United States is pleased to see progress
towards establishing the Kosovo specialist chambers,
and we encourage Kosovo to continue its commitment
to that body. Kosovo needs to make greater progress
in strengthening the independence of its judiciary
and improving the rule of law to combat corruption,
attract foreign investment and accelerate its
overall development.
Finally, we again strongly urge the Council to
adjust the reporting and briefing period for UNMIK
from three months to six. That longer reporting period
would reduce the burden on the Secretariat and the
Council, both of which have far more pressing business
at hand.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative Tanin for his briefing.
Let me start by welcoming President Nikolić and
Ambassador Çitaku to the Council today.
In the interests of keeping this meeting to time, and
noting that we have many pressing issues to discuss in
the Council, I shall keep my remarks brief this morning.

S/PV.7891

Like so many others here, the United Kingdom is
committed to the stability and security of the western
Balkans. A central part of that is our full support for the
normalization of relations between Kosovo and Serbia
and the prosperity and stability that normalization
would bring for both their peoples. Since we last met on
this issue (see S/PV.7811), there have been many positive
steps made by Kosovo towards that goal. The economy
is growing and some steps have been taken to deal with
corruption, including with support from the United
Kingdom Government, although there is still more to
do. Kosovo has secured its own international dialling
code, as well as recognition from Singapore and, just
this morning, from Bangladesh, as Ambassador Çitaku
has already mentioned.
I would also like to note the success of the BritishKosovo film Home, which won the award for best short
film from the British Academy of Film and Television
Arts. It is Kosovo’s first. Following the Oscar
nomination of Shock last year, it is clear that Kosovo’s
cultural sector is going from strength to strength.
But in light of the continued progress in Kosovo,
we cannot help but be concerned by the heightened
tension between Serbia and Kosovo over the reporting
period. At a time when both countries should be
looking towards a prosperous future, we instead find
ourselves here today discussing provocative acts that
belong firmly in the past. At the heart of so many of
these issues — whether the inflammatory train incident
or the illegal wall in Mitrovica — lie narrow-minded
politics and electioneering. Stirring up nationalist
sentiments to advance short-term political agendas
not only enflames tensions, but also distracts from the
many more important issues that Kosovo and Serbia
need to deal with, most particularly the implementation
of important dialogue agreements.
We welcome the intense engagement of High
Representative Mogherini and the European External
Action Service to help bring about a resolution of
those disputes. I should like to highlight specifically
the excellent cooperation between the Government of
Kosovo and the Kosovo-Serb Mayor of North Mitrovica
on the wall issue. Such cooperation shows that, at the
local level, people want to work together to improve
their lives rather than be drawn into political squabbles.
It is that spirit that we all should channel here in the
Security Council. It is a spirit of integration and
cooperation, not division. It is a spirit of dialogue. It is

17-0515317/25

S/PV.7891

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

a spirit that both Serbia and Kosovo claim to support in
their discussions in Brussels.
And yet, here in the Council today, we have
witnessed yet another meeting that has descended into
lengthy exchanges and unproductive statements. It is
long past time for the Council to stop contributing to
the tensions in the region by holding such incendiary
briefings on so regular a basis. I therefore call again for
a reduction in the number of these meetings and in the
number of these reports. In that spirit, let me join the
United States and others in again calling for increased
efficiencies to be found in the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and for the further
downscaling of the Mission, in line with its mandate.
We also suppport calls for the Secretariat to present
proposals for restructuring the Mission in the next
report — something that we note has not materialized
on this occasion.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Representative Zahir Tanin for his detailed briefing
and his efforts and commitment to bringing peace
to Kosovo.
The situation in Kosovo needs the continuing
attention of the Council as an ongoing item on its agenda.
Our priorities should be to continue promoting dialogue
between the parties by launching confidence-building
measures in the political, military, economic,
environmental and human dimensions. That should be
in compliance with resolution 1244 (1999) and with the
efforts of the European Union, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and other relevant
organizations, which must act as security providers at
the global, regional and national levels.
Moreover, while the peaceful dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade is ongoing, a number of difficult
issues remain to be solved. Action must therefore be
taken to integrate the judiciary, build transitional
justice, transfer the functions and assets to local
authorities and lay the foundations of good governance
and the rule of law. Social stability will be achieved
only with the full engagement of the United Nations
country team, regional organizations and civil society
groups working towards peacebuilding and conflict
prevention and mediation in Kosovo.
Upholding human rights is critical, with a special
focus on implementing resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, and subsequent resolutions on
enhancing gender equality and empowerment.
18/25

27/02/2017

We also believe that the rich cultural heritage of
Kosovo should be preserved as a bridge-builder for
community relations and good-neighbourly relations.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): Please allow me to thank
His Excellency President Nikolić of Serbia and Her
Excellency Ambassador Çitaku of Kosovo for their
briefings. I also thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Tanin for his briefing and
continued service.
As indicated in the report (S/2017/95/Rev.1) of the
Secretary-General, the escalation of tension between
Pristina and Belgrade is a matter of concern. Violent
extremism, radicalization and terrorism continue to
pose a threat to security in Kosovo and the region.
However, the risk and intensity of violence are
considerably less than those in other regions often
taken up by the Security Council, such as Africa or the
Middle East. Limited peacekeeping resources should
be allocated to areas where there is an urgent need for
them. If the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is indeed still necessary
in its current configuration, as suggested by the
report of the Secretary-General, the Council must
identify the activities that specifically require such an
UNMIK presence.
The efficient and effective functioning of the
Council should also take priority. Indeed, improving
working methods is of keen interest to all Council
members. In that regard, we do not see any reason that
meetings on UNMIK need to be held as frequently
as during the time of the adoption of resolution
1244 (1999). A meeting and report every six months
is sufficient. In spite of it all, personally, I myself
appreciate the opportunity every three months to recall
my memories of Kosovo. I mentioned wine the last
time (see S/PV.7811); today I would like to talk about
business opportunities.
The Trepča mines hold the largest natural resources
in Kosovo and could potentially generate large sums of
tax revenue. However, it is regrettable that challenges
remain in the business of operating the mines. At
the same time, there are other types of businesses in
Kosovo. Allow me to share one example here. In 2013,
a Japanese company established a farm and factory in
Mitrovica, which produces shiitake mushrooms. By
making use of Japanese high technology, the company
has a production capacity of eight tons of mushrooms
a day. It exports its produce to 12 countries in Europe
17-05153

27/02/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

and North America. I have not brought any mushrooms
with me today, and will not mention the name of the
company. But I can share its contact details and home
page later if anyone is interested.
Kosovo also has rich tourism resources. There
is a magnificent waterfall in Mirusha, and Gadime e
Poshtme is proud to be home to a mysterious limestone
cavern. People can enjoy trout raised in fish farms
in Istog at a restaurant adjacent to the farm. I even
found a good natural hot spring — known as onsen in
Japanese — near Peja, and I myself had a bath there.
The sulphurous white water is pleasant and warm, just
the right type of onsen for Japanese people like me.
Mosques in Prizren and Orthodox monasteries in Dečani
and Gračanica are breathtaking. Such sites appear in all
Kosovo travel guides — such as the one I have here,
which members can find in book shops — and represent
great potential for tourism development in Kosovo. Let
us take a trip to Kosovo and explore the country.
I would like to emphasize the following to
the people of Kosovo. For Kosovo to be seen as a
genuinely mature democracy, the greatest challenge
is reconciliation between communities. Prior to the
conflict in Kosovo, Kosovar Albanians and Kosovar
Serbs lived in the same space. I have a female friend
in Kosovo who is Kosovar-Albanian. She was very
sad when the conflict broke out. Kosovar Albanians
and Kosovar Serbs once lived together, but Kosovar
Serbs were forced to flee in the wake of the conflict.
The majority of them have not returned. Reconciliation
must now be accelerated before the memories of a more
harmonious time fade and are lost for good. As long
as animosity and injustice remain in Kosovo society,
tourists and foreign companies will hesitate to visit
or invest. In that regard, Japan highly values the high
level of commitment by both sides to resolve issues
even after several incidents that heightened tensions.
I ask both sides to demonstrate the rich, diverse
cultures and societies of Kosovo through efforts to
achieve reconciliation and tolerance, including the
establishment of the association/community of Serbmajority municipalities in Kosovo.
In concluding my remarks, I would like to recall
three outstanding colleagues from my time as Chief
Political Officer in UNMIK 17 years ago: Ms. Nadia
Younes, Mr. Jean-Selim Kanaan and Ms. Fiona Watson.
Ms Younes was UNMIK spokesperson, and her office
was right next to mine. Mr. Kanaan and Ms. Watson
were advisers to then Special Representative of the

S/PV.7891

Secretary-General Kouchner. Mr. Kanaan was also my
partner on winterization projects in Kosovo. They all
worked very hard and contributed greatly to Kosovo’s
recovery from devastation and chaos. Three years
later, a United Nations office was established in postSaddam Hussein Iraq. Then-Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Sérgio Vieira de Mello, keenly
aware of the high calibre of the three officers, brought
them to Iraq. On 19 August 2003, Mr. De Mello
convened a regular senior staff meeting with those three
people present. A truck parked beside the building. A
strong explosion occurred, turning the building into
rubble. The attack killed whoever happened to be at
the site, including those persons just mentioned best,
the brightest of United Nations personnel. People with
talent and bravery like them are tirelessly working at
the forefront of peacekeeping missions to bring about
peace and justice, at times in dangerous environments.
We must never forget the dedication and sacrifice
that many brilliant people have made in order to
achieve peace.
In the hope that somehow they can hear me, I would
like to report to those three great colleagues of mine
that, in Kosovo, peace and stability, democracy and
economic development have made steady progress.
Mr. Arancibia Fernández (Plurinational State
of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Tomislav
Nikolić, President of Serbia, for his statement. I also
thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for his briefing on the current situation in Kosovo.
Bolivia calls for the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999), including full respect for the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Serbia. We think that the
resolution is the international legal basis for resolving
the situation in Kosovo.
In relation to the security situation in Kosovo, we
would like to express our concern about the region,
in particular the political instability that endangers
the lives of minorities. With that in mind, we believe
that the parties must be open to ongoing dialogue to
reach solutions that promote progress and stability.
We therefore welcome attempts by the parties to make
progress in the dialogue under the auspices of the
European Union in order to arrive at a lasting solution
that will put an end to the disputes that affect the
region. However, we are concerned that in practice the

17-0515319/25

S/PV.7891

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

parties do not seem able to implement the agreements
that are the outcomes of those meetings. We urge the
parties to maintain the dialogue through political
determination, without it being hindered by the lack of
a real commitment to a peaceful settlement.
Bolivia welcomes the agreement on telecommunications
that confirms the assignment of a local area code
for Kosovo.
We also call on the parties to join forces to help
internally displaced persons return to their homes.
We also wish to call attention to the growing
number of extremists in the region who support the
Islamic State, which is a clear threat. We commend the
efforts made to apprehend people associated with those
activities. However, since this is an underlying and
ongoing problem, we call for regional organizations
and all the parties involved to focus on containing this
evil, which is afflicting all humankind and is showing
itself to be a clear threat to peace and stability of the
region. Bolivia condemns terrorism in all its forms, and
we believe that it is a duty for all States to combat it and
seek its eradication.
The parties are called on to prevent the commission
of acts of aggression that undermine the Charter of the
United Nations and its embedded principles, in order
to work towards a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
Every effort should be made to achieve lasting peace,
which in the long run will be beneficial to the region,
with the parties primarily resolving their differences
through dialogue and negotiation and with the assistance
of regional organizations.
Finally, Bolivia takes note of the work of UNMIK.
Mr. Kandeel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere thanks to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his comprehensive briefing to the
Security Council on the report (S/2017/95/Rev.1) of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). I also welcome Mr. Tomislav Nikolić,
President of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Çitaku, and thank
them both for their briefings.
Egypt welcomes the progress achieved Kosovo
in the economic and security spheres, as well as
with regard to the rule of law, which will necessarily
have a positive impact on peace and security in the
region. However, we would also express our concern
20/25

27/02/2017

in connection with what is stated in the report about
the increased tensions between Pristina and Belgrade
and the diminished commitment to dialogue between
the two.
We call on both sides to exercise self-restraint and
avoid incitement and unilateral solutions that may lead
to escalation. We reiterate that there is no alternative to
dialogue as a means of resolving disputes, and therefore
urge the leadership in Belgrade and Pristina to revive
and reinvigorate the high-level dialogue between them
under the auspices of the European Union without
delay. That is how we can achieve consensual, fair and
sustainable solutions that are acceptable to both sides
and that lay the foundations for peace and stability in
the region.
Accordingly, Egypt welcomes the efforts aimed at
implementing the agreements reached between the two
sides in August 2015 under the auspices of the European
Union. In that context, we refer to the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the progress achieved in some areas,
particularly in terms of the integration of the judiciary,
freedom of movement, and telecommunications. But
we would also like to express our disappointment at
the lack of progress in a number of other areas related
to those agreements, particularly in relation to the
establishment of an association/community of Serbianmajority municipalities in Kosovo, which was one of
the critical provisions of the agreements. We would
therefore like to reiterate the importance of establishing
such a community in order to guarantee institutional
protection for the Serbian community in Kosovo.
Egypt’s foreign policy is a pillar upholding security
and stability in different regions. In that context, we
underscore the importance of the Kosovo Parliament
adopting the agreement on the border with Montenegro.
In conclusion, we reiterate Egypt’s support for the
efforts by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, particularly in relation to supporting the
authorities in Kosovo in counter-terrorism and allowing
them to better address the existing and emerging
challenges that threaten security and stability in
the region.
Mrs. Gueguen Mohsen (France) (spoke in
French): I would add my thanks to those expressed
by other members of the Security Council to the
Special Representative of the Secretary General,
Mr. Zahir Tanin, as well as to the President of Serbia,
17-05153

27/02/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Mr. Tomislav Nikolić, and to the Ambassador of
Kosovo, Ms. Vlora Çitaku.
I should like to begin my statement by recalling
once again France’s wish to revise the frequency with
which the Security Council reviews the situation in
Kosovo. Given that the Council is facing an increasingly
burdensome workload, there no longer appears to be
any justification for maintaining quarterly briefings on
the question of Kosovo, whose situation is in no way
comparable to crises for which the Council’s intensive
commitment is crucial.
We believe also that the positive developments
we have seen in recent years in Kosovo in terms of
strengthening institutions justify our desire to continue
to refocus the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and to ensure their
coordination with the other international actors present
in Kosovo. We call once again on the SecretaryGeneral to make recommendations on this issue in the
framework of his next report.
France is convinced that the future of Kosovo can
no longer be seen as a priority in the Council, but, rather,
within the framework of a political dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina, led by the European Union.
It is therefore important in this regard for the parties
to demonstrate a proactive commitment at the highest
level. We expect that all of the agreements reached will
be implemented as swiftly as possible, including as
concerns the establishment of a community association
of Serb-majority municipalities, which is a key element
of the dialogue. We therefore urge the Kosovo and
Serbian authorities to step up their efforts, particularly
on this latter issue, in order to achieve more concrete
outcomes in the months to come. This is an issue that
we will follow very closely.
We are deeply concerned about the tensions that we
have seen in recent months on the ground as well as by
the regrettable provocations that have fuelled them. We
expect all actors to show responsibility and restraint.
The agreement reached on the demolition of the wall
in Mitrovica is in this respect a positive development.
The normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina remains, generally speaking, a prerequisite for
their progress on the path to European rapprochement,
which was once again encouraged at the Paris-Balkans
2016 summit, held on 4 July last.

S/PV.7891

The efforts under way to strengthen the rule of
law in Kosovo must remain a priority and include
fighting radicalization in all its forms. We therefore
welcome the unconditional commitment of Kosovo in
this regard, both locally and within the international
coalition against Da’esh.
France will also continue to provide its support to
the efforts undertaken by the authorities of Kosovo in
favour of international recognition of their State.
Lastly, I would like to conclude my statement
by pointing out that the action under way in France
against Mr. Ramush Haradinaj is a part of a judicial
proceeding initiated on the basis of an arrest warrant
issued by INTERPOL. This order was carried out as
a matter of routine, in keeping with our international
commitments. It does not have a political dimension
and does not alter in any way the relation of trust that
we traditionally have with Kosovo or our support for
reconciliation in the region and the implementation of a
dialogue between Belgium and Pristina.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We express our appreciation
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Ambassador Zahir Tanin,
for his briefing on the latest situation in Kosovo and the
activities of the Mission. I also welcome the presence of
His Excellency Mr. Tomislav Nikolić, President of the
Republic of Serbia, at today’s meeting and would like to
thank him for his statement. I also thank Ambassador
Çitaku for her statement.
Since this is the first time that we are speaking
on this issue, we would like to take this opportunity
to reaffirm our support for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Serbia, for the peaceful and
amicable resolution of all outstanding issues and for
the scrupulous observance and implementation of the
Brussels Agreement. We believe that resolution 1244
(1999) remains an important framework for resolving
the Kosovo issue through dialogue and negotiation.
We welcome the progress made in the
implementation of the agreement reached within the
framework of the European Union-facilitated dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina, specifically in the areas
of integration of the judiciary, freedom of movement
and telecommunication.
However, we also take note of what the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2017/95/Rev.1) states with

17-0515321/25

S/PV.7891

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

27/02/2017

regard to the lack of progress on the establishment
of the Association/Community of Serb-majority
municipalities in Kosovo and the delays in the
implementation of the agreement on freedom of
vehicular movement.

emerging challenges on the ground. In this regard,
we welcome the continued engagement of UNMIK
with Belgrade and Pristina as well as the communities
in Kosovo and regional and international actors in
carrying out its mandate.

It is important that the parties remain fully
committed to implementing the agreement that they
have reached through the European Union dialogue
process for the sake of promoting lasting peace and
stability in Kosovo and the region as well as the building
of trust and the normalization of their relations.

Mr. Skau (Sweden): I would like to start by joining
others in thanking Special Representative Tanin for his
comprehensive briefing to the Council today. I would
also like to thank President Nikolić and Ambassador
Çitaku for their statements to the Council.

The report about the tense political situation
between Belgrade and Pristina, on the one hand, and
the strained relations between the governing and
opposition parties and between parties within the
governing coalition in Kosovo is a matter of concern.
All parties need to refrain from escalating tension
and seek peaceful avenues and dialogue to address
any disputes.
We take note of what the Secretary-General stated
in paragraph 37 of his report with regard to some
leaders who show
“sincere commitment, courage and the vision of a
better future, free of the zero-sum approach that
undermines the real interests of the people that
they serve”.
We believe that this is the kind of spirit that should
guide all the parties in addressing difficult and sensitive
issues in order to reach a fair compromise.
The growing threats of terrorism and violent
extremism have been a recurring theme over the course
of this month, including during the debate on conflicts
in Europe and the briefing on the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. Kosovo and the
region are not an exception to this, as highlighted in
the report of the Secretary-General. The recruitment of
fighters for the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
the arrest of several individuals suspected of planning
terrorist attacks, as well as the weapons and explosives
seized by the Kosovo authorities, are a clear indication
of the seriousness of the threat, which needs to be given
particular attention.
Finally, we appreciate the efforts of UNMIK in
engaging all the parties and communities to promote
security, stability and respect for human rights in
Kosovo and the region. We believe that the role of the
Mission remains important in addressing current and
22/25

Much progress has been made since the end
of the conflict in Kosovo, in June 1999; however,
building peaceful and prosperous societies requires
constant vigilance and an unwavering commitment by
political leaders from both parties as well as from the
international community that stands with them. We
are therefore concerned over the recent rise in tensions
between Kosovo and Serbia, and we call on both sides
to redouble their efforts for peace by showing restraint
and refraining from inflammatory rhetoric and
provocative actions.
The experience of the European Union has shown
us that lasting stability can be built through dynamic
European Union (EU) integration processes. The
peoples of Serbia and Kosovo are looking towards a
future, together, within the European Union, rather
than to the divisions of the past. The focus of all
efforts should be on the normalization of relations
between Serbia and Kosovo within the context of
the EU accession process. Therefore, we encourage
Pristina and Belgrade to engage constructively in the
EU-facilitated dialogue. By realizing their European
perspective, Kosovo and Serbia can cement a stable,
democratic and prosperous future for their populations.
It is essential that the status issue does not hinder
Kosovo on its European path or prevent its membership
in international organizations. The goal of the Security
Council should also be to support the normalization
of relations and a smooth transfer of responsibility to
the peoples living in Kosovo. In that regard, we are
ready to engage in discussions concerning the future
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo.
We call on all Kosovar politicians from both the
Government and the opposition to overcome their
disagreements through dialogue and refrain from
disruptive behaviour in order to implement the crucial
17-05153

27/02/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

reforms needed to benefit the people in Kosovo and the
wider region.
Sweden is ready to play its part. We look forward
to continuing our bilateral development cooperation
as well as our political support to Kosovo’s progress
in the areas of democracy, human rights, the rule of
law, gender equality and sustainable and inclusive
economic development.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I thank and commend the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, our friend
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, for his excellent presentation
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/95/Rev.1)
and reassure him once again of the full support of the
Senegalese delegation in his mission. I also welcome
the presence of His Excellency Mr. Tomislav Nikolić,
President of the Republic of Serbia, and of Ambassador
Vlora Çitaku of Kosovo, and thank them for their
statements, which have certainly elucidated our
understanding of the situation under review.
Just last week in this very Chamber, we discussed
the conflicts that are currently taking place in Europe
(see S/PV.7886), which was an occasion for SecretaryGeneral António Guterres to remind us that what are
known as frozen conflicts will continue to threaten
international peace and security only until they are
peacefully and definitively settled. In the opinion
of the Senegalese delegation, the Kosovo conflict is
emblematic of such conflicts. My delegation is therefore
concerned by the recent and persistent tensions cited
in the Secretary-General’s report, which are somewhat
undermining the significant progress that has been
made since the end of the conflict by the stakeholders
from both sides.
Accordingly, with a view to relaunching a dynamic
that will promote building and durably sustaining
stability, not only for Kosovo but for the entire Balkan
region, the Senegalese delegation strongly encourages,
on the one hand, the Kosovar political stakeholders to
work to maintaining a peaceful political environment,
which largely depends on the quality of the political
dialogue with Belgrade; and, on the other hand, the
Serbian authorities to maintain and strengthen their
commitment in a constructive and calm dialogue with
Pristina. In that regard, Senegal welcomes the progress
that the two parties have made, in particular within
the framework of the dialogue conducted under the

S/PV.7891

auspices of the European Union, and encourages those
partners with influence on both sides to continue to use
it to promote and guide talks.
In order to consolidate the results that have been
achieved in that framework, we believe that the
agreements reached to date must be implemented and
that the political leaders of both parties must fully
commit in a consultative manner to resuming talks.
Everyone here has said that that is only path towards
resolving the crisis.
The recent developments described in the report
of the Secretary-General — in particular the slowness
in establishing the association/community of Serbmajority municipalities, the arrest of the former Prime
Minister and the current leader of the main opposition
party in Kosovo, Mr. Ramush Haradinaj, on 4 Jaunuary
in Paris, and the diplomatic incident provoked by trains
originating in Serbia — recall the absolute necessity for
the Council to continue to support talks at the highest
levels within a dynamic of cooperation at the United
Nations and subregional organizations.
My delegation believes that those difficulties can
be overcome and that they must in no way slow the
progress that has been made — it must be noted — such
as the assignment of an international dialling code for
Kosovo as well as the implementation of the agreement
allowing that country to host a special tribunal to
investigate crimes committed during the conflict in
Kosovo. In that same vein, we welcome the high-level
meeting that took place in Brussels on 24 January and
was organized by Ms. Mogherini, High Representative
of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, in which the Presidents of Serbia and Kosovo
participated. During that meeting, commitments
were made to resume talks under the auspices of the
European Union.
The Senegalese delegation agrees with the
Secretary-General that we must pursue our efforts in the
context of the humanitarian situation and human rights,
as Ms. Karima Bennoune, the Special Rapporteur in
the field of cultural rights, stated following her visit
to Serbia and Kosovo in October 2016. We believe
that the activities carried out within the framework of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
the mandate of which has been extended to 14 June,
are helpful because they contribute to enhancing
achievements related to defending and promoting the

17-0515323/25

S/PV.7891

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

27/02/2017

rule of law and human rights, as well as the fight against
terrorism and organized crime.

rapprochement so that a lasting and appropriate solution
can be found gradually to the question of Kosovo.

Furthermore, the Senegalese delegation welcomes
the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo in promoting
reconciliation, transitional justice, human rights and
support for the normalization of relations between
Belgrade and Pristina. In addition to encouraging
dialogue, Senegal urges stakeholders to redouble and
strengthen confidence-building measures by laying the
groundwork for the easing of tensions and development,
notably by promoting the implementation of the
agreements of 25 August 2015 in northern Kosovo.

The achievement of national reconciliation is
essential to resolving the Kosovo question. The parties
concerned should endeavour to improve the well-being
of the people, strengthen protection for the rights and
benefits of all communities in Kosovo, refrain from
any rhetoric or action that might escalate tensions,
and safeguard peace, stability and development in the
Balkan region.

The Senegalese delegation therefore reiterates its
full support for the joint European Union-United Nations
programme aimed at strengthening trust between
communities, in particular through the protection of
cultural heritage, and calls for the strengthening of
cooperation on information sharing with a view to
resolving the painful question of missing persons.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Mr. Tanin, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing. China
welcomes the presence of His Excellency Mr. Nikolić,
President of the Republic of Serbia, and the statement
that he made. We also listened attentively to the
statement made by Ms. Çitaku.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia and understands its legitimate
concerns on the question of Kosovo. China acknowledges
the positive efforts of Serbia in the search for a political
solution to the question of Kosovo. Resolution 1244
(1999) constitutes the legal foundation for the solution to
the question of Kosovo. China supports the efforts of the
concerned parties to search for an appropriate solution,
acceptable to all, through dialogue and negotiations,
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and within the framework
of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Currently, the overall situation in Kosovo remains
calm. Underlying complex questions, however, remain
and defy efforts to finding a solution. China hopes
that all parties will continue to search for a political
solution, engage in high-level political dialogue, settle
their differences through practical and constructive
dialogue, implement the agreements reached so far,
build upon progress, increase mutual trust and seek
24/25

The Security Council should continue to follow
the question of Kosovo and persist in efforts to find
an appropriate solution. China appreciates the work
done by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) under the leadership
of Special Representative Tanin. China supports
the constructive cooperation of UNMIK with all
the parties in accordance with its mandate. China
hopes that UNMIK, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo, and the Kosovo Force will further
their coordination and gradually improve the situation
in Kosovo, thus playing a constructive role in finally
resolving the question.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ukraine.
I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his comprehensive
briefing on the developments in Kosovo. I would like
to reiterate Ukraine’s full support to him as he carries
out his important functions. I am also grateful to His
Excellency Mr. Tomislav Nikolić, President of the
Republic of Serbia, and to Ms. Vlora Çitaku.
We note that throughout the reporting period there
have been a series of regrettable events that caused a
significant increase in tension. Those tensions are a
matter of concern, as they could impede the process
of normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina, and negatively affect the lives of all of
Kosovo’s residents.
Ukraine welcomes the role of the European
Union (EU) in diffusing tensions and commends the
resumption of high-level meetings between Belgrade
and Pristina in Brussels. We call upon the political
leaders in Belgrade and Pristina to actively work to
avoid provocation, confrontation and an escalation into
17-05153

27/02/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

conflict. It is important that, in the spirit of restraint and
responsibility, they put aside their political abitions and
focus on further progress in the implementation of the
agreed commitments, which would benefit the people
in the region and enhance their European prospects.
We are encouraged by the tangible results in the
implementation of the agreements concluded in the
framework of the EU-led dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina, in particular on freedom of movement,
telecommunication and justice. Ukraine looks forward
to further progress in the fulfilment of outstanding
commitments, including on the establishment of
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities.
Ukraine continues to support the important role
played by UNMIK, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force, in which
Ukrainian peacekeepers contribute to preserving peace
and stability in Kosovo.

S/PV.7891

At the same time, like other delegations, we believe
that it is time to reconsider the frequency of UNMIK
periodic reports. It might be appropriate to adopt a more
flexible approach. Resolution 1244 (1999) requests
the Secretary-General to report at regular intervals,
without specifying how often. We believe the Council
could agree to have regular reports twice a year, with
the option of spot reports as may be required by the
situation on the ground.
Finally, it is also time to review the role of the United
Nations in Kosovo, including vis-à-vis its regional
presence and possible steps towards its rationalization.
We believe that converting UNMIK into a special
political mission should be considered as an option, as
that would appropriately reflect its current role.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

17-0515325/25
