United Nations

S/PV.5109

Security Council

Provisional

Sixtieth year

5109

th meeting
Tuesday, 11 January 2005, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mayoral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Argentina)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Benmehidi
Mr. Adechi
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Wang Guangya
Ms. Løj
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Oshima
Mr. Baja
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Denisov
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Mahiga
Mr. Danforth

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the Sudan pursuant to paragraphs 6, 13 and
16 of Security Council resolution 1556 (2004), paragraph 15 of Security
Council resolution 1564 (2004), and paragraph 17 of Security Council
resolution 1574 (2004) (S/2005/10).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

05-20461 (E)

*0520461*

S/PV.5109

The meeting was called to order at 3.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
pursuant to paragraphs 6, 13 and 16 of Security
Council resolution 1556 (2004), paragraph 15 of
Security Council resolution 1564 (2004) and
paragraph 17 of Security Council resolution
1574 (2004) (S/2005/10)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jan Pronk, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Sudan and head of the
peace support operation.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Pronk to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
photocopies of the report of the Secretary-General on
the Sudan pursuant to paragraphs 6, 13 and 16 of
Security Council resolution 1556 (2004), paragraph 15
of Security Council resolution 1564 (2004) and
paragraph 17 of Security Council resolution 1574
(2004). The report will be issued under the symbol
S/2005/10.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Jan Pronk, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Sudan and head of the
peace support operation. I now give the floor to
Mr. Pronk.
Mr. Pronk: The Council has before it the report
on the month of December, which was drafted by us
quite some time ago: it is now 11 January. I will try to
concentrate in particular on an update in the light of
developments, in particular since the end of the month.

2

Like some members of the Council, I flew
straight to New York from Nairobi, where I
participated in the signing ceremony of the
comprehensive peace agreement between the
Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement. That was a milestone. It heralds
the definitive end of nearly four decades of brutal
conflict. Hundreds of thousands of people have been
killed. Four million have been uprooted and displaced.
More than half a million have had to take refuge in
neighbouring countries.
The people of the Sudan can be congratulated.
The peace agreement is the result of political talks at
the negotiation table. A war can be ended other than by
winning and defeating the enemy. A war — a civil war
also — can be ended by talking one’s way out of it, by
negotiating with former enemies and accommodating
mutual concerns, by closing the book and by not
focusing anymore on past divisions and past splits but
on future diversity in unity and unity in diversity. That
is what happened in Naivasha and was confirmed two
days ago in Nairobi.
Of course, the agreement is not the end of
everything. An agreement at the negotiation table
marks the beginning of a long and arduous process of
peacebuilding within society itself. There will be many
stumbling blocks on the road ahead. Former
combatants will have to be disarmed and demobilized.
Displaced people and refugees will need to return and
participate in the economy and in society, claiming a
share in the resources, including land. Former
battlefields will have to be demined so that there are no
no-go areas in a time of peace. Other southern militant
groups that did not participate in the peace talks will
have to be incorporated in new structures that were
created without them. And people’s expectations
concerning welfare, growth, education and other social
and economic needs have to be met. All those tasks are
as much a risk as they are a challenge. Failure may
endanger stability and feed new conflicts.
Anyway, the first step has been taken and its
importance cannot be overestimated. There is no room
for cynicism. An end has come to the century’s longest
war in Africa, with the largest number of victims.
Peace has been proclaimed, and now the Sudanese
themselves, together with their partners in the
international community, are going to make it work.

S/PV.5109

Can such a scenario also apply in Darfur? Yes, it
can. It must. We can make it work. As a matter of fact,
the question is two-fold: first, how would further
fighting in Darfur impact the implementation of the
north-south peace agreement, and, secondly, how can
the achievement of peace between the northern and
southern Sudan be used to improve the climate for
talks to end civil war in Darfur?
The first question has already been answered by
many members of the Security Council in their
statements at the historic meeting of the Council in
Nairobi in November last year. It is hard to imagine
that the peace dividends promised by the Nairobi
Agreement will be reaped without an end to the
suffering in Darfur. International aid will not flow and,
more importantly, in the Sudan itself the achievements
will turn out to be vulnerable. As long as there is war
in some part of the country, resources will be spent on
weapons, not welfare; investors will be reluctant;
entrepreneurs will hesitate; young people with brains
and initiative will want to leave the country; displaced
people will wander around.
Peace is indivisible in the Sudan as well, however
large and diversified the country may be. Thus, after
the conclusion and signing of the comprehensive peace
agreement between north and south, there can be no
question as to what the priority tasks for 2005 should
be. The fighting in Darfur must be stopped, the conflict
must be resolved and the people affected must be able
to return to their homes.
At the beginning of this new year, the security
situation in Darfur is still bad. The humanitarian
situation is poor. Regarding humanitarian access, the
picture is mixed. Politically, Darfur finds itself at a
stalemate. Let me elaborate on each of those
dimensions of the crisis.
On security, new problems came into focus in
December. Violence, hitherto a source of fear on the
fringes of centres for internally displaced persons and
in conflict areas, is seeping into the camps themselves
and directly affecting humanitarian workers. Some
national
staff
members
of
non-governmental
organizations have been abducted and are still missing;
others are harassed. The internally displaced persons
continue to suffer. Refugees are not returning in
sufficient numbers to allow the planting of crops to
sustain their families for the coming year. The

restriction on freedom of movement is causing
livestock to be lost on a huge scale.
The armed groups are rearming and the conflict is
spreading outside Darfur. Large quantities of arms have
been carried into Darfur in defiance of the Security
Council decision taken in July. December saw a
buildup of arms; attacks on positions, including air
attacks; raids on small towns and villages; increased
banditry and more looting. New rebel movements are
emerging and launching attacks in the area of oil
facilities in West Kordofan. We may move into a
period of intense violence unless swift action is taken
and new approaches are considered.
That is all the more necessary in the light of the
poor humanitarian situation. The volume of assistance
and access has expanded over the past six months, but
the number of conflict-affected people has increased as
well, leaving many still beyond the reach of assistance
and, consequently, short of food, water, sanitation and
shelter. The objective is to meet the international
standards for humanitarian assistance per capita — say,
for instance, around 2,000 calories per capita per day.
In mid-2004, we were far below those standards.
Towards the end of the year, we were close to meeting
them for food, nutrition and health services, though not
for water, sanitation or shelter.
At the same time, the total number of persons to
be helped is still increasing, due to recent
displacements following the fighting in November and
December, and, as a result of the fighting, it is now
even more difficult to reach them than before. The
fighting now affects humanitarian work more
frequently and more directly than bureaucratic
restrictions ever did, with fatal, tragic consequences.
The road-clearing operation launched by the
Government in December in order to make the roads
safe for traffic, including commercial traffic, and the
transport of fuel and food for the markets, as well as
for humanitarian purposes, resulted at first not in more
safety but in less. The looting and pillaging continued;
banditry is on the increase; trucks have been stolen at
gunpoint and some drivers killed.
Talks between the parties on Darfur have not
yielded concrete results or much narrowing of the gap
on the issues concerned. Despite regular statements to
the contrary, the parties have yet to commit in practice
to the implementation of the humanitarian ceasefire.
The delay in reaching agreement between Khartoum

3

S/PV.5109

and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement has also
produced a stalemate in the talks on Darfur. This
applies both to the implementation of the Ndjamena
ceasefire agreement and to the Abuja talks on the
political dimension of the conflict.

circle. The parties must be persuaded by a combination
of pressure and assurances from influential Member
States that it is truly in their interests to respect the
ceasefire and to pursue a settlement through peaceful
means.

This stalemate at the negotiating table has led to a
worsening of the security situation on the ground, and
that, in turn, has not contributed to the willingness of
the parties to engage in a dialogue on the root causes of
the conflict and on political objectives and reform.
Standstill is regress and regress produces a vicious
circle: meagre results at the negotiating table, no
implementation, more insecurity, less willingness to
talk, no results and so on.

Let me offer some suggestions for such an
approach.

From now on, that can change. It ought to
change. Now that the bridge has been crossed in
Nairobi, the road towards security and agreement in
Darfur lies open. It is high time to take that road in
earnest. Will that be done? In the long term, the
signing of the north-south peace agreement offers
opportunity for Darfur and will improve capacity to
solve the conflict. However, I do not exclude the
possibility that the signing of the Agreement will be
followed in the short term by an intensification of
violence in and around Darfur.
Why? Among those on the ground in Darfur
responsible for the recent aggression, there are some
who perceive the conclusion of North-South peace as
providing cover for their actions, offering them a brief
window of immunity from international criticism on
their behaviour in Darfur. Government forces may be
tempted to think that, after the signing of the northsouth agreement, for which they have received much
praise, the international community would not dare to
put the implementation of that Agreement at risk. That
could lead to the suggestion that now is the time to
deliver a decisive blow to the enemy. In turn, the rebel
movements may perceive the north-south agreement as
an indication that they have been marginalized further
or as proof that an intensification of military activities
would be the only option for them to be taken seriously
as a party in political talks.
Both perceptions would be false, both reactions
dangerous. Both have to be countered by pressure,
reason and the offering of an alternative. The
comprehensive agreement will remove some of the
stumbling blocks and pave the way for an approach
that can help the parties to break through the vicious

4

First, de-link the talks on the political future of
Darfur from those concerning security and
humanitarian access. Concentrate the Abuja talks on
the future political configuration of Darfur, including
questions relating to the sharing of power and wealth.
Pursue those talks whether the ceasefire is kept or not,
and concentrate the talks relating to security and
humanitarian access in the AU Ceasefire Commission
and in the Joint Commission.
Second, empower the Darfur ceasefire institutions
in the same way as the north-south ceasefire
institutions that resulted from the agreement in
Nairobi. That means making the assessment of whether
or not the ceasefire has been breached independent
from the parties and enabling those institutions to make
binding recommendations that should be implemented
unconditionally.
Third, after Nairobi, both the Government and the
rebel movements should exercise full restraint: no
attacks, no retaliation. The Government should refrain
not only from bombing — which it had already said it
would do — but also from carrying out military flights
over rebel-held positions. The Government should also
refrain from further so-called road-clearing operations.
In turn, the rebel movements should refrain from
attacks on the police and on towns and infrastructure.
The AU could assist by patrolling roads and clearing
flights before they take off in the direction of rebelheld areas. That would result in both more protection
and less suspicion.
Fourth, in order to show their good will, the
Government and the rebel movements should all
withdraw behind reasonable and well-defined lines,
such as those that prevailed on 8 December, before the
commencement of road-clearing operations by the
Government. Each should give up the positions it has
taken and declare that it will not occupy the positions
given up by the other party. Thereafter, the AU could
move in to protect the areas concerned. That would be
the beginning of a demilitarization of parts of Darfur.
The parties should also communicate full details of

S/PV.5109

their troop locations to the AU Ceasefire Commission
and declare their willingness to agree on a plan of
separation of forces, to be drawn up by the
Commission.
Fifth, the parties must identify practical means to
ensure that the basic survival needs of their forces are
met, including food supplies for the combatants,
without violating the ceasefire. That would stabilize
the situation, diminish the urge to steal, loot and kill
and make the rendering of relief assistance to people
without weapons less dangerous than it has become
during the past month.
Sixth, the Government should make a new start
by disarming the Popular Defence Forces, as
announced in August of last year. It should provide the
names and numbers of those disarmed to the AU and
store weapons in safe locations, with AU oversight.
Seventh, the rebel movements should commit
themselves not to block or disrupt peaceful seasonal
movements of nomadic tribes and their cattle. Such
actions deprive tribes of their usual source of
livelihood and provoke tribal militias into attacking the
civilian population. The Government, in turn, should
control and restrain those militias, either through force
or through tribal reconciliation. In addition, joint action
involving the Government, the Sudanese Liberation
Army (SLA) and the African Union should be planned,
in order to stop banditry and the bandits.
Eighth, the Government should make haste in
arresting those responsible for major violations of
human rights and crimes against international
humanitarian law. It should do so whether those
perpetrators are Janjaweed or not. The Government has
often declared that that could not be done easily
overnight. That is to be granted. However, it is not
credible to wait half a year after the commitment made
to the Secretary-General in the joint communiqué of
early July. The Government would be wise not to wait
for the publication of the report of the Commission of
Inquiry, and to show that not only the international
community but also the Government itself wants to
seriously address crimes, maintain human rights and
put an end to impunity.
Many of those eight steps require active and
adequate third-party involvement to patrol roads — as
I mentioned — clear flights and protect demilitarized
areas. That third party is the African Union. The
strengthening of the AU force on the ground has

proved to be effective, not only in performing
monitoring tasks but also, more importantly, in
protecting the civilian population through a
combination of deterrence, mediation and good offices.
By its presence and its actions to mediate and forestall
violent actions, the AU force, which is itself currently
under threat of attack, has done more than any other
outside agent to improve the security situation on the
ground. The AU has not been able to put in as many
forces as originally hoped, and they need help from the
international community to make it happen. We need to
do whatever is required to accelerate the rate of
deployment and to ensure that we have more AU
troops on the ground in order to guarantee the parties’
commitment to agreements and to dissuade attacks.
In order to protect both people and their land,
those third-party troops have to be everywhere that
violence may erupt: in the locations that I mentioned
earlier — demilitarized areas and unsafe roads — but
also in and around all displaced people’s camps, in all
towns and villages under threat and in all areas where
refugees and displaced persons would want to return. It
is an enormous task, but the recent history of Darfur
shows that without such an independent and neutral
protection force, women and children, older persons,
returnees and unarmed persons belonging to adversary
tribes will not be safe.
In the longer term, security, safety, peace and
stability should be home-grown and sustained without
outside help. But it is clear that it will be quite some
time before that is a reality. It will also require serious
political talks between the Government and the rebel
movements, more serious than have taken place thus
far. They will have to agree on a declaration of
principles that addresses the core issues of power and
wealth-sharing. Moreover, it is time to prepare a
national conference including all political opponents in
order to reach a consensus about the modalities of a
peaceful future for the country, thereby integrating the
Darfur peace talks into the wider process of
peacemaking in the Sudan and making peace in Darfur
sustainable.
However, the Darfur talks themselves should not
wait until such a national conference is feasible. On the
contrary, although the current negotiating process
between the Government and the Sudan Liberation
Movement (SLM) and the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM) should proceed, it would be useful to
start thinking about including tribal leaders in the

5

S/PV.5109

search for political solutions even before reconciliation
has taken place. That may include tribes that have thus
far been beyond the control of the Government or the
rebel movements and that have been fighting to protect
their own interests. Parallel to such broader talks,
reconciliation efforts will have to be continued,
broadened
and
intensified.
The
international
community would also be wise to support those efforts,
including with material assistance on an experimental
basis, in order to make clear that home-grown
reconciliation is valued, even if it takes place in a
different way than it does elsewhere in the world. It is
also clear that such reconciliation will have to include
those who refused to take up arms and — last but not
least — the victims of war and violence.
Can all this be done? The time is ripe to renew
and redouble our efforts. The climate is improving.
There is a north-south comprehensive peace agreement.
We have witnessed positive reactions, both in Rumbek
and in Khartoum. We are also seeing positive reactions
among the people, in both the north and the south —
albeit sometimes mixed with hesitation based on
scepticism and earlier experience. We are seeing the
parties exercise a certain restraint. Contrary to many
people’s expectations, the Sudan Liberation Army did
not launch an attack on the day of the signing of the
peace agreement. From Christmas to that particular
day — Sunday — it was relatively calm in Darfur on
all fronts. Last week, despite earlier breaches of the
ceasefire, all parties declared that they would respect
days of tranquillity to vaccinate all children in the

6

Sudan under the age of five against polio. And this
weekend, the Government declared that it would be
willing to reconsider some of its previous hard-line
positions, thereby reaching out to the rebel movements.
Yesterday, the same Government followed this up by
declaring, before the meeting of the African Union
Peace and Security Council in Libreville, that it is
willing to withdraw its force to the pre-8 December
positions.
All of this is positive. It is not yet much; nor is it
definitive. It could easily fade away. But it is a sign
that it is justified to hope and expect that the spirit of
Nairobi will affect Darfur. The political momentum is
there. It is fragile; it could easily be spoiled. Taking
advantage of that momentum requires innovative
action, consensus among all international actors, steady
cooperation, perseverance and a well defined common
strategy.
The second stage of the war between the north
and the south lasted two decades. Why should we
allow the war in Darfur to last more than two years?
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Pronk for his comprehensive briefing.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I would like to invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.
