18

General A■aembl:,-Twenty-S.ftb Senion

f

crete progress towards disarmament, Ving the highest
priority to nuclear disarmament, military expenditure
IS likely to increase at an even greater rate during the
1970s,
Deeply concerned that the arms race, nuclear and
conventional, constitutes one of the heaviest burdens
which peoples everywhere have to bear and that it
absorbs immense material wealth, human energy and
intellectual resources,
Deeply convinced that the elimination of the enormous waste of wealth and talent on the arms race,
which is detrimental to the economic and social life
of all States, would have a positive impact, especially
on the developing countries, where the need for skilled
personnel and the lack of material and financial re..
sources are most keenly felt,
Convinced that a halt in the arms race, a reduction
of military expenditures and concrete progress towards
disarmament would greatly facilitate the achievement
by nations of their economic and social goals and
would contribute effectively to the improvement of international relations and the maintenance of world
peace and security,
Conscious that it is the fundamental task of the
United Nations to promote, in accordance with the
Charter, the establishment and maintenance of international peace and security with the least diversion for
armaments of the world's human and economic resources,
Determined to take appropriate steps to bring the
arms race to a halt and to make progress towards
rneral and complete disarmament, which is the most
tmportant question facing the world today,
Wishing to promote the elaboration and implementation of a comprehensive programme for disarmament,
which would also facilitate the United Nations development programmes during the 1970s,
Believing that thorough consideration of the main
aspects of the arms race would facilitate a better understanding and evaluation of its negative consequences
and of the great dangers with which it is fraught,
1. Calls upon all States to take effective steps for
the cessation and reversal of the arms race and for
the achievement of steady progress in the field of disarmament;
2. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to continue to pay urgent attention to all
questions meant to put an end to the arms race, particularly in the nuclear field;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, with
the assistance of qualified consultant experts appointed
by him, 26 a report on the economic and social consequences of the arms race and of military expenditures;
4. Calls upon all Governments to extend their full
co-operation to the Secretary-General to ensure that
the study is carried out in the most effective way;
5. Calls upon non-governmental organizations and
international institutions and organizations to co-operate with the Secretary-General in the preparation of
the report;
2e The Group of Consultant Experts on the Economic and
Social Consequences of the Arms Race and Military Expenditures is composed of the following persons: Mr. Gheorahe
Dolgu, Mr. William F. Duisenberg, Mr. Vasily S. Bmelyanov,
Mr. Placido Garcfa Reynoso, Mr. Vojin Guzina, Mr. Douglas
Le Pan, Mr. Ladislav Matejka, Mr. Akira Matsui, Mr. Jacques
Mayer, Mr. Maciej Perczynski, Mr. Mullath A. Vetlodi, Mr.
Henry Wallich, Mr. Kiffe Wodajo and Sir Solly Zuckerman.

6. Requests that the report be transmitted to the
General Assembly in time to permit its consideration
at the twenty-sixth session.
1919th plenary meeting,
7 December 1970.
2668 (XXV). Question of Korea
The General Assembly,
Having noted the report of the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea,
signed at Seoul, Korea, on 13 August 1970,2-,;
Reaffirming its resolution 2516 (XXIV) of 25
November 1969 and its previous resolutions on the
question of Korea,
Recognizing that the continued division of Korea
does not correspond to the wishes of the Korean people
and constitutes a source of tension which/revents the
full restoration of international peace an security in
the area,
Recalling that the United Nations, under the Charter,
is fully and rightfully empowered to take collective
action to maintain peace and security and to extend
its good offices in seeking a peaceful settlement in
Korea in accordance with the purposes and principles
of the Charter,
Anxious that progress be made towards creating conditions which would facilitate the reunification of
Korea on the basis of the freely expressed will of the
Korean people,
Concerned at reports of further events in Korea
which, if continued, could hamper efforts to create the
peaceful conditions which are one of the prerequisites
of the establishment of a unified and independent
Korea,
1. Reaffirms that the objectives of the United Nations in Korea are to bring about, by peaceful means,
the establishment of a unified, independent and
democratic Korea under a representative form of govemmem; and the full restoration of international peace
and security in the area;
2. Expresses the belief that arrangements should be
made· to achieve these objectives through genuinely
free elections held in accordance with the relevant
resol"ittldns of the General Assembly;
3. Calls for co-operation in the easing of tensions
in the- area and, in particular, for the avoidance of
incidenft and activities in vioL n of the Armistice
Agreemi,nt of 1953;
4. Notes with approval the efforts made by the
United Nations Commission for the Unification and
Rehabilitation of Korea, in pursuit of its mandate, to
encourage the exercise of restraint and the easing of
tensions in the area and to secure maximum support,
assistance and co-operation in the realization of the
peaceful reunification of Korea;
5. Requests the United Nations Commission for the
Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea to pursue these
and other efforts to achieve the objectives of the United
Nations in Korea, to continue to carry out the tasks
previously assigned to it by the General Assembly and
to keep members of the Assembly informed on the
situation in the area and on the results of these efforts
through regular reports submitted to the SecretaryGeneral, and to the General Assembly as appropriate;
21 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 26 (A/8026 and Corr.l ).

19

Re1olutlon11 adopted on the reports of the First Committee

6. Notes that the United Nations forces which were
sent to Korea in accordance with United Nations
resolutions have in greater part already been withdrawn, that the sole objective of the United Nations
forces at present in Korea is to preserve the peace and
security of the area, and that the Governments concerned are prepared to withdraw their remaining forces
from Korea whenever such action is requested by the
Republic of Korea or whenever the conditions for a
lasting settlement formulated by the General Assembly
have been fulfilled.
1919th plenary meeting,
7 December 1970.

2733 (XXV). International co-operation in the
peaceful uses of outer space
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2453 B (XXIII) of 20
December 1968 whereby it established a Working
Group of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space to study and report on the technical feasibility
of communication by direct broadcast from satellites
and the current and foreseeable developments in this
field, as well as the implications of such developments
in the social, cultural, legal and other areas,
Taking note with appreciation of the reports prepared by the Working Group on Direct Broadcast
Satellites during its three sessions, 28
Noting that the first satellite-borne instructional television experiment for direct reception into community
receivers will be undertaken in India as early as
1973/1974, thereby making it possible to enrich life
in isolated communities,
Noting that the potential benefits of satellite broadcasting have particular significance with regard to
better understanding among peoples, the expansion of
the flow of information and the wider dissemination
of knowledge in the world, and the promotion of
cultural exchanges,
Recognizing that the use of satellite-home television
for educational and training purposes, particularly in
developing countries, can in many instances contribute
towards national programmes of integration and community development and economic, social and cultural
development in such areas as formal and adult education, agriculture, health and family planning,
Taking note of the concern of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in considering the
practical interests of all States, in particular the interests of the developing countries, regarding the
efficient use of the geostationary orbit and the frequency spectrum,
Recognizing that the effective deployment and use
of direct satellite broadcasting requires large-scale international and regional co-operation and that further
consideration may have to be given to the legal principles applicable in this field,
Endorsing the Working Group's conclusions on the
applicability to such broadcasting of certain existing international legal instruments, including the Charter of
the United Nations, the Treaty on Principles Govem28 /bid.,

Twenty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 21A (Al
7621/Add.1), annexes III and IV; and ibid., Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/8020), paras. 48-59.

ing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use
of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other
Celestial Bodies and the applicable provisions of the
International Telecommunication Convention29 and
Radio Regulations,
1. Recommends, on the basis of the probable patterns of use of satellite broadcasting systems outlined
by the Working Group on Direct Broadcast Satellites
of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Sface,
that Member States, regional and internationa organizations, including broadcasting associations, should
promote and encourage international co-operation at
regional and other levels in order, inter alia, to allow
all participating parties to share in the establishment
and operation of regional satellite broadcasting services
and/or in programme planning and production;
2. Draws the attention of Member States, specialized a,$Cncies and other interested international or-ganizattons to the potential benefits to be derived from
direct broadcast satellite services, especially in developing countries, for improving their telecommunications infrastructure, thereby contributing to general
economic and social development;
3. Recommends, with a view to makin~ available
the benefits of this new technology to countries, regardless of the degree of their social and economic development, that Member States, the United Nations Development Programme and other international a$encies
should promote international co-operation in this field
in order to assist interested countries to develop the
skills and techniques that may be necessary for its
application;
4. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space to keep under review the question of
reconvening the Working Group on Direct Broadcast
Satellites at such time as additional material of substance on which further useful studies might be based
may have become available;
5. Recommends that the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space should study through its Legal
Sub-Committee, giving priority to the convention on
liability, the work carried out by the Working Group
on Direct Broadcast Satellites, under the item on the
implications of space communications;
6. Invites the International Telecommunication
Union to continue to take the necessary steps to promote the use of satellite broadcasting services by
Member States and to consider at the 1971 World
Administrative Radio Conference for Space Telecommunications the appropriate provisions under which
satellite broadcasting services may be established;
7. Requests the International Telecommunication
Union to transmit, when available, to the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space all information
about the use of the geostationary orbit and the fre::iuency spectrum;
8. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization to continue to promote the
use of satellite broadcasting for the advancement of
education and training, science and culture and, in consultation with appropriate intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations and broadcasting associations, to direct its efforts towards the solution of
problems falling within its mandate.

1932nd plenary meeting,
16 December 1970.
20 Signed at Montreux on 12 November 1965.
