V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

term effects on developing countries, in particular those
that import food.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988
43/192.

Report of the Committee on the Development
and Utilization of New and Renewable Sources
of Energy

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions concerning new and renewable
sources of energy, in particular resolution 41/ 170 of 5
December 1986,
Stressing that trends in the energy sector do not diminish
the importance of the continued development of new and
renewable sources of energy,
Considering that new and renewable sources of energy
could constitute a significant share of total world energy
supplies, particularly in developing countries,
Noting the continuing need to strengthen the activities of
the United Nations in the field of development and utilization of new and renewable sources of energy,
l. Takes note of the report of the Committee on the
Development and Utilization of New and Renewable
Sources of Energy on its fourth session49 and endorses the
resolutions and decision contained therein;
2. Reaffirms the importance of the Nairobi Programme of Action for the Development and Utilization of
New and Renewable Sources of Energy 50 as the basic
framework for action in that field and calls for its speedy
and full implementation;
3. Urges the States members of the Committee, at its
fifth session, to consider further measures to strengthen
the activities of the United Nations in this field, particularly to enable the Committee to assure full and more effective implementation of the Nairobi Programme of Action;
4. Invites interested States to inform the Committee, at
its fifth session, oftheir ongoing technical and scientific activities and/or evaluations with regard to selected substantive themes, and invites interested States, organizations of
the United Nations system and other interested organizations to convene technical and scientific meetings, related
to the substantive themes, that would contribute to the examination of such themes in depth, and to inform the
Committee, also at its fifth session, of the results of those
meetings;
5. Calls upon the international community to implement effectively the proposals contained in the conclusions and recommendations of the Colloquium of Highlevel Experts on New and Renewable Sources of Energy,
held at Castelgandolfo, Italy, in 1987, as contained in
paragraph 2 of resolution 2 (IV) of 8 April 1988 of the
Committee, 51 which are aimed at giving new ímpetus to
the implementation of the Nairobi Programme of Action,
and requests the Secretary-General to convene an ad hoc
panel of experts to prepare specific recommendations regarding information systems on new and renewable
sources of energy;
49 Officia/ Records of the General Assembly. Forty-third Session.
Suf¡1ement No. 36 (A/43/36).
Report of the United Nations Conference on New and Renewab/e
Sources of Energy, Nairobi, 10-2 I Augusr 1981 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.81.1.24), chap. I, sect. A.
51 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-third Session,
Supplement No. 36 (A/43/36), annex.

145

6. Reiterates the need to pursue actively ways and
means of mobilizing adequate additional financial resources commensurate with the needs of developing countries in the field of new and renewable sources of energy
and emphasizes the need to utilize existing channels fully,
including the United Nations Trust Fund for New and
Renewable Sources of Energy, and urges donor countries
to continue voluntary contributions to that Fund;
7. Reaffirms the importance of increasing inter-agency
co-operation within the United Nations system, as well as
co-ordination of development activities for new and
renewable sources of energy at ali levels.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988
43/193.

Development of the energy resources of developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration and the Programme of Action
on the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order, contained in its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States, contained in its resolution 3281
(XXIX) of 12 December 1974, its resolution 3362 (S-VII)
of 16 September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation, and the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade, contained in the annex to its resolution 35/56 of 5
December 1980,
Recalling also its resolution 40/208 of 17 December
1985 on the development of the energy resources of developing countries,
Reaffirming the importance of the development of the
energy resources of developing countries and the need for
measures by the international community to assist and
support the efforts of the developing countries, in particular the energy-deficient among them, to develop their energy resources, in order to meet their needs through cooperation, assistance and investment in the field of
conventional and of new and renewable sources of energy,
consistent with their national plans and priorities,
l. Reaffirms its resolution 40/208 and calls for the effective implementation of ali its provisions;
2. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on
energy exploration and development trends in developing
countries;' 2
3. Notes with concern that these trends have been on
the decline in recent years, and therefore requests the Secretary-General to outline a programme of action aimed at
the acceleration ofthe exploration and development ofthe
energy resources of developing countries;
4. Welcomes the convening of symposia and other
similar undertakings called for in resolution 40/208 and
calls upon interested Member States, in co-operation with
the appropriate organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system, to continue to explore ways and
means to support the efforts of developing countries in the
exploration and development of their energy resources;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to undertake appropriate studies and analyses of trends in energy exploration and development of energy resources of
developing countries, taking into account the activities of
relevant organizations of the United Nations system in
52 A/43/476 and Corr. 1

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

146

this field, and to report to the General Assembly at its
forty-fifth session, through the Economic and Social
Council at its second regular session of 1990.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988

43/194.

Examination of long-term trends in economic
and social development

The General Assembly,
Reca/ling its resolutions 3508 (XXX) of 15 December
1975, 32/57 of 8 December 1977, 34/57 of 29 November
1979, 37/249 of 21 December 1982 and 40/207 of
17 December 1985,
Recognizing that restoration of the economic and social
development process of the developing countries is indispensable for the sustained growth of the international
economy and world-wide well-being,
Considering that an examination of long-term social and
economic trends, and their forecasted interaction, would
be useful in the elaboration of the international development strategy for the fourth United Nations development
decade, called for in its resolution 42/193 of 11 December
1987,
Conscious ofthe expediency of continuing to identify potential problem areas and critica! issues in the world
economy in order further to strengthen the capability for
anticipating and responding to them by means ofmutually
supportive, co-ordinated policies,
Aware ofthe role that the United Nations is mandated to
play and capable of playing in the formulation of futureoriented common approaches to key international economic and social issues,
1. Takes note with interest of the report of the Secretary-General on the overall socio-economic perspective of
the world economy to the year 2000;53
2. Requests the Secretary-General to update, as appropriate, the report on the overall socio-economic perspective of the world economy to the year 2000, in cooperation with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, taking
into account the debate in the General Assembly at its
forty-third session and the earlier discussion in the Economic and Social Council at its second regular session of
1988 as well as the views expressed by the Committee for
Development Planning, so as to enhance its utility as one
of the background documents for the preparation of the
international development strategy for the fourth United
Nations development decade;
3. A/so requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
comprehensive report, in time for the middle of the
decade, on the basis ofthe updated overall socio-economic
perspective of the world economy to the year 2000, and to
consider the preparation of a subsequent report towards
the end of the decade, selecting for topic-oriented studies
the areas of common concern which warrant the special
attention of the international community.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988

53 A/43/554.

43/195.

International co-operation for the eradication
of poverty in developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a N ew International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter ofEconomic Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on
development and international economic co-operation,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1988/47 of 27 May 1988 on extreme poverty,
A ware that the ad verse economic situatiop of developing
countries, exacerbated by large structural imbalances in
the world economy, has hindered the development process
in those countries and their capacity to undertake social
and economic programmes for, inter a/ia, the eradication
of poverty,
Deeply concerned that a significant percentage of the
world's population lives in conditions of absolute poverty
and that, in developing countries, poverty can be a threat
to social and political stability,
Stressing that the eradication of poverty is one of the
most important development objectives requiring action
by the international community at all levels,
Noting the importance of achieving effective international co-operation designed to support national efforts
aimed at the eradication of poverty,
Aware that the eradication ofpoverty is made more difficult by a range of factors in the international economic
environment that impede growth and development in the
developing countries, such as the worsening in the terms
oftrade, intensified protectionism, high real interest rates,
depressed commodity prices and the heavy burden of externa! debt,
Deeply concerned that negative effects of structural adjustment programmes in developing countries have exacerbated poverty, particularly among vulnerable groups
in those countries, and have Iimited the ability of those
countries to attain their socio-economic objectives,
Emphasizing the need for new and imaginative approaches to the eradication of poverty in developing countries as an integral part of the promotion of growth and developmen t in those countries,
l. Urges the international community to create, as a
priority, a supportive international economic environment
for growth and development that will reinforce the efforts
of developing countries to revitalize their development
process and eradicate poverty;
2. Requests the regional commissions, in accordance
with their mandates, to contribute more effectively to the
strengthening of regional and subregional co-operation
and to study options, including new approaches oriented
towards the revitalization of growth and development in
developing countries, in order to enable those countries to
address effectively the eradication of poverty;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session a report
analysing the impact of the economic crisis in developing
countries on the intensity of poverty in those countries and
containing recommendations for effective international
policy measures for the urgent and permanent eradication
of poverty in accordance with the present resolution.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988
