General Assembly-Seventh Session

24
ARTICLE XIU

The Secretary-General c ~ the United Nat ions shall. notif Y
the States referred to in article VI ( l) of the following:
(a) Signatures, ratifications and accessions received in accordance with articles VI and VII ;
(b) The date upon which the present. Convention comes
into force in accordance with article XIII;
(c) Denunciations received in accordance with article X
(1);

(d)
(e)

Abrogation in accordance with article XI;
Notifications received in accordance with article XII.
ARTICLE XIV

1. The present Convention, of which the Chinese, Englis~,
French Russian and Spanish texts shall be equally authentic,
shall b~ deposited in the archives of the United Nations.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall
transmit a certified copy to each State referred to in article
VI (1).
3. The present Convention shall be registered with the Secretariat of the United Nations on the date of its coming into
force.

631 (VII). Future work of the United Nations in
the field of freedom of information
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that freedom of information is a fundamental human right and is the touchstone of all the
freedoms to which the lJnited Nations is consecrated,
the promotion of which is one of the fundamefltal
tasks of the United Nations,
Considering that in 1946 the General Assembly initiated' the study in the United Nations of the problems of freedom of information and continues to take
great interest in the said problems and to concern
itself with them directly,
Considering the continuing need for study, inquiry
and investigation with a view to positive action for the
removal of obstacles to the free flow of information,
Considering that the Third Committee has not studied the draft Convention 5 on Freedom of Information
during the sixth and seventh sessions of the General
Assembly,
Noting the decision of the Economic and Social
Council in its resolution 442 C (XIV) of 13 June 1952
to appoint, for an experimental period of one year,
and in a personal capacity, a rapporteur on matters
relating to freedom of information,
N otitig that the rapporteur designated by the Council
has already undertaken, in co-operation with the Secretary-General, ~he speciali~ed age~cie~, in particular
the United Nations Educational, Sc1ent1fic and Cultural
Organization, and the professional organizations concerned, both national and international, the preparation,• for submission to the Council in 1953, of a sub-

stantive report covering major contemporary problems
and developments in the field of freedom of information, together with recommendations regarding pra~tical action which might be taken by the Council: m
order to surmount those obstacles to the fuller enJoyment of freedom of information which can be surmounted at the present time,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to communicate
the records of the Third Committee on the subject of
freedom of information to the Economic and Social
Council, in order that they may be taken into consideration by the Council during its studies and discussions;
2. Decides to consider further at its eighth session
the problem of promoting and safeguarding f~eedom
of information, including the draft Convention on
Freedom of Information, on the basis of the rapporteur's report to the Economic and Social Council in
1953 and after the Economic and Social Council has
had an opportunity to examine the rapporteur's report;
and accordingly,
3. Invites the Economic and Social Council to submit to the General Assembly at its eighth session a
statement of its views and plans regarding future work
in connexion with freedom of information.
403rd plenary meeting,
16 December 1952.
632 (VII). Sub-Commission on Freedom of In•
formation and of the Press
The General Assembly,
Considering the constructive work done by the SubCommission on Freedom of Information and of the
Press during its five sessions,
Considering that it has not hitherto had an opportunity to express an opinion on the work of the SubCommission,
I. Decides to express its appreciation for the work
which the Sub-Commission on Freedom of Information and of the Press has accomplished;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to convey its
thanks for the service which the Sub-Commission has
honourably rendered in discharging its duties.
403rd plenary meeting,
16 December 1952.

633 (VII). Information facilities in underdeveloped regions of the world
The General Assembly,
C onsidenng that it is essential for the proper development of public opinion ii:t ~nder-deyeloped co~ntries that independent domestic mfonnat1on enterpnses
should be given facilities and assistance in order that
they may be enabled to contribute to the spread of information, to the development of national culture and
to international understanding,
Convinced that the development of infdrmation
media contributes greatly to the economic and social
progress of peoples,
1

• See resolution SP (I).
1 See document A/AC.42/7. anaa A.

• See doclllMDt E/2MS,

Reeolutiona adopted on reporta of the Third Committee

Convinced that the time has arrived for the elaboration ofa concrete programme and plan of action in this
respect,
Taking note with approval of the decision taken by
the Economic and Social Council in resolution 442 E
(XIV) of 13 June 1952 with regard to the study of
ways and means of encouraging and developing independent domestic information enterprises,
Noting, however, that the above decision only refers
to the encouragement and development of independent
domestic information enterprises, including Press,
radio, newsreels and television, therefore,
1. Invites the Economic and Social Council to
consider, in the light of the discussions at the seventh
session of the General Assembly, the desirability of
expanding the area of its study of this question; and,
to that end,
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in preparing the
report called for under the above-mentioned resolution of the Council, also to elaborate a programme of
concrete action which would include, inter alia:
(a) Measures to reduce economic and financial
obstacles in the field of information;
( b) Measures to organize and promote among
countries the exchange of information personnel;
( c) Measures to assist the training of information
personnel, the raismi of professional and technical
standards, the provision of fellowships and the holding of regional seminars;
(d) All nec~ssary measures in connexion with the
supply of newsprint;
3. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council to
submit the above-mentioned programme, together with
recommendations thereon, to the General Assembly at
its eighth session ;
4. Further invites the Council to recommend to
the organizations participating in the technical as,;istance and other programmes providing aid or assistance
at the request of Member States that they give sympathetic consideration to requests which governments
may submit for such aid or assistance within the
framework of those programmes with a view to improving information facilities and increasing the quantity and improving the quality of information available to the peoples of the world, as one means of implementing the right of freedom of information as enunciated in the provisions of Article 1, paragraph 3, and
Article 55 of the Charter of the United Nations and in
article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights.

403rd plenary meeting,
16 December 1952.
634 (VD). Question of fabe or distorted
lnfonnation

The General Assembly,
Considering that the dissemination of false or distorted information by national as well as international
information enterprises is one of the causes of the lack

2S

of mutual understanding among nations, to the detriment of international harmony,
Considering that this specific problem should be
studied in connexion with the general item entitled
"Freedom of information",
Decides to recommend that United Nations bodies
studying the problems of freedom of information
should consider appropriate measures for avoiding the
harm done to international understanding by the dissemination of false and distortea information.
403rd plenary meeting,
16 December 1952.

635 (VD). Freedom of information and of the
Presa: draft International Code of Ethics

The General Assembly,
Noting the action taken by the Economic and Social
Council in resolution 442 B (XIV) of 12 June 1952
on the draft International Code of Ethics 7 drawn up
by the Sub-Commission on Freedom of Information
and of the Press at its fifth session,
Considering that all further work connected with the
draft Code should be undertaken by professional members of information enterprises with no interference
from governments, either on the national or the international level,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, if a representative group of information enterprises and of national
and international professional associations expresses a
desire to do so, to co-operate with it in organizing an
international professional conference for the purpose
of:
(a) Preparing and adopting a final text of an International Code of Ethics ;
( b) Taking such further steps concerning implementation of the Code as it may deem advisable ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the text
of the present resolution to the notice of the information enterprises and national and international professional associations to which he communicated the draft
Code.
403rd plnuwy meeting,
16 D,cember 1952.

636 (VD). Dluemlnation of ~lution1 of the
United Nationa
The Genwal Assembly,
Having r,gard to resolution 442 D (XIV) adopted
by the Economic and Social Council on 13 June 1952.
1. Urg,s governments, on receipt of any reaolutions dealing with questions of substance adopted by
any principal organ of the United Nations, to make
every effort to disseminate such resolutions through
the customary channels;
' See OIUal R•&OrtU of 11w BcOflllM - ' Soriol COMdl,
Fo•rt•mtTs S•111Dft, S•nf....,., No. 4 A, Annexes.
