64

General .A.1embl;r-Sixteenth Session

who died with him in the service of the United Nations
as a result of the air crash :
Mr. Heinrich A. Wieschhoff,
Mr. Vladimir Fabry,
Mr. William Ranallo,
Miss Alice Lalande,
Mr. Harold M. Julien,
Mr. Serge L. Barrau,
Mr. Francis Eivers,
Mr. S. O. Hjelte,
Mr. P. E. Persson,
Mr. Per Hallonquist,
Mr. Nils-Eric Aahréus,
Mr. Lars Litton,
.
Mr. Nils Goran Wilhelmsson,
Mr. Harold Noork,
Mr. Karl Erik Rosén;
2. Ofjers its sincere condolences and deep sympathy
to the families of Mr. Hammarskjold and the other
victims;
3. Decides that an investigation of an international
character, under the auspices of the United Nations,
should be held immediately into all the conditions and
circumstances surrounding this tragedy, and more particularly as to:
(a) Why the flight had to be undertaken at night
without escort ;
( b) Why its arrival at N dola was unduly delayed,
as reported ;
( c) Whether the aircraft, after having established
contact with the tower at N dola lost that contact, and
the fact of its having crashed did not become known
until severa! hours afterwards, and if so, why;
(d) Whether the aircraft, after the damage it was
reported to have suffered earlier from firing by aircraft
hostile to the United Nations, was in a proper condition
for use;
4. Further decides to appoint a Commission of five
eminent persons to carry out such an investigation, and
request the Commission to report its findings to the
President of the General Assembly within three months
of its appointment;
5. Requests all Governments and parties concerned
and the appropriate specialized agencies of the United
Nations to extend their full co-operation and assistance
to the said Commission in making this investigation;
6. Decides to consider, in the appropriate Committee
during the current session, the question of offering
suitable remuneration to the families of the victims of
this grave tragedy.
1042nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1961.

*

* *

At its 1074th plenar:::,, meeting, on 8 December 1961, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the President of the
Assembly, appointed the members of the Commission established
under paragraph 4 of the above resolution.
The Commission is composed as follows: Mr. S. B. J ones
(Sierra 'Leone), Mr. Raúl Quijano (Argentina), Mr. Alfred
Emil Sandstrom (Sweden), Mr. Rishikesh Shaha (Nepal) and
Mr. Nikola Srzentié (Yugoslavia).

1630 (XVI). Admission of the Mongolian People'a
Republic to memhership in the United
Nations
The General Assembly,
H aving received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 25 October 1961 that the Mongolian People's Republic should be admitted to membership in the
United Nations, 3
.
H aving considered the application for membership of
the Mongolian People's Republic,4
Decides to admit the Mongolian People's Republic to
membership in the United Nations.
1043rd plenary meeting,
27 October 1961.
1631 (XVI). Admission of the Islamic Repuhlic
of Mauritania to membership in the United
Nations
The General Assembly,
H aving received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 25 October 1%1 that the Islamic Republic
of Mauritania should be admitted to membership in the
United Nations, 6
Having considered the application for membership
of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania, 6
Decides to admit the Islamic Republic of Mauritania
to membership in the United Nations.
1043rd plenary meeting,
27 October 1961.
1640 (XVI). Appointment of an acting
Secretary-General
The General Assembly,
Acting in accordance with the recommendation of the
Security Council of 3 November 1961,7
Appoints His Excellency U Thant as Acting Secretary-General of the United Nations for a term of office
ending on 10 April 1963.
1046th plenary meeting,
3 November 1961.
1650 (XVI). The status of Algerians imprisoned
in France
The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned at the grave international repercussions and the serious threat to the prospects of a negotiated, peaceful settlement of the Algerian question in
consequence of the hunger strike of thousands of Algerians imprisoned in France,
• !bid., document A/4940.
'See documents A/687 and Add.1; Official Records of the
Security Council, First Year, Second Series, Supplement No. 4,
annex 6, document S/95, and !bid., Twelfth Y ear, Supplemenl
for Ju/y, August and September 1957, documents S/3873 and
Add.1.
• Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixteenth Se.<sion,
Annexes, agenda item 92, document A/4941.
• !bid., document A/4604.
• !bid., Annexes, separate fascicle (Appointment of an acting
Secretary-General), document A/4953.

65

Resolutions adop,ted without reíerence to a Committee

Recalling its resolution 1573 (XV) of 19 December

1960, by which it recognized its responsibility to contribute towards a just solution of the Algerian question,
Recalling further its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14
December 1960, which emphasized in paragraph 4:
"AH armed action or repressive measures of all
kinds directed against dependent peoples shall cease
in order to enable them to exercise peacefully and
freely their right to complete independence ... ",
Appeals to the Government of France, in accordance
with established international practice and humanitarian
principles, to redress the legitimate grievances of t1:e
Algerian prisoners in recognízing their status as pohtical prisoners with a view to making possible the immediate termination of the hunger strike.
1055th plenary meeting,
15 N ovember 1961.
1651 (XVI). Report of the lnternational Atomic
Energy Agency
The General Assembly,
Takes note of the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency to the General Assembly for the year

1960-1961.8

1062nd plenary meeting,
23 November 1961.

1654 (XVI). The situation with regard to the im•
plementation of the Declaration on the
granting of independence to colonial coun•
tries and peoples
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples contained
m its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Bearing in mind the purposes and principles of that
Declaration,
Recalling in partic.ular paragraph S of the Declaration
providing that:
"Immediate steps shall be taken, in Trust and NonSelf-Governing Territories or all other territories
which have not yet attained independence, to transfer
all powers to the peoples of those territories, without
any conditions or reservations, in accordance with
their freely expressed will and desire, without any
distinction as to race, creed or colour, in arder to
enable them to enjoy complete independence and
freedom",
N oting with regret that, with a few exceptions, the
provisions contained in the aforementioned paragraph
of the Declaration have not been carried out,
N otin,g that, contrary to the provisions of paragraph 4
of the Declaration, armed action and repressive measures continue to be taken in certain areas with increasing ruthlessness against dependent peoples, depriving
them of their prerogative to exercise peacefully and
freely their right to complete independence,
Deeply concerned that, contrary to the provisions of
paragraph 6 of the Declaration, acts aimed at the partial
• Annual report of the Board of Governors to the General
Conference, 1 luly 1960-30 ]une 1961, Vienna, July 1961, and
supplementary report ( A/ 4883 and Add.1) .

or total disruption of national unity and territorial integrity are still being carried out in certain countries in
the process of decolonization,
Convinced that further delay in the application of the
Declaration is a continuing source of international conflict and disharmony, seriously impedes international
co-operation, and is creating an increasingly dangerous
situation in many parts of the world which may threaten
international peace and security,
Emphasizing that inadequacy of political, economic,
social or educational preparedness should never serve as
a pretext for delaying independence,
l. Solemnly reiterates and reaffirms the objectives
and principles enshrined in the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples
contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960;
2. Calls upan States concerned to take action without further delay with a view to the faithful application
and implementation oí the Declaration;
3. Decides to establish a Special Committee of
seventeen members to be nominated by the President
of the General Assembly at the present session;
4. Requests the Special Committee to examine the
application of the Declaration, to make suggestÍons and
recommendations on the progress and extent oí the implementation of the Declaration, and to report to the
General Assembly at its seventeenth session;
5. Directs the Special Committee to carry out its
task by employment of all means which it will have at
its disposal within the framework of the procedures and
modalities which it shall adopt for the proper discharge
of its functions ;
6. Authorizes the Special Committee to meet else.
where than at United Nations Headquarters, whenever
and wherever such meetings may be required for the
effective discharge of its functions, in consultation with
the appropriate authorities;
7. Invites the authorities concerned to afford the
Special Committee their fullest co-operation in carrying
out its tasks;
8. Requests the Trusteeship Council, the Committee
on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
and the specialized agencies concerned to assist the
Special Committee in its work within their respective
fields;
9. Reqttests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with all the facilities and the personnel necessary for the implementation of the present
resolution.
1066th plenary meeting,
27 November 1961.

*

*

*

The President of the General Assembly, in pursuance of the
above resolution, appointed the members of the Special Committee established under paragraph 3 .of that resolution. At its
1094th plenary meeting, on 23 January 1962, the General Assembly took note of that appointment.
The Special Committee is composed as follows: AusTRALIA,
ETHIOPIA, INDIA, ITALY, MADAGASCAR, MALI, Po-

CAMBOD1A,

LAND, SYRIA, TANGANYIKA, TUNISIA, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND
NORTHERN lRELAND, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, URUGUAY,
VENEZUELA and YUGOSLAVIA,
