S/PV.7635

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7635th meeting

Monday, 29 February 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ramírez Carreño. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of))

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mr. Ibrahim
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Gasso Matoses
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-05404 (E)
*1605404*

S/PV.7635

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Frank-Walter
Steinmeier, Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Germany,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Steinmeier.
Mr. Steinmeier: It is an honour for me to address
the Security Council today as Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), the largest regional arrangement under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
First of all, allow me to pay tribute to the late
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali. His “Agenda
for Peace” (S/24111) not only marked a milestone for
the international order after the Cold War. It was also
Boutros-Ghali who recognized the important role of
regional organizations in conflict settlement. He laid
the foundation for the strong relationship between the
United Nations and the OSCE — a relationship we
would like to strengthen even further in 2016.
Nobody will deny that the challenges we are facing
are enormous. As an European organization, I have to
start with our own region. Violent crises and conflicts
surround us, even on our own continent of Europe — and
it is not only about Ukraine. In a very real sense, the
Russian annexation of Crimea brought back to our
agenda concerns about our common European security.
At the same time, violence has spiked in regions of the
Middle East and Northern Africa. Oppression, terror,
religious radicalism and regional rivalries have led to
immeasurable human suffering, especially in Syria.
The brutal conflicts in the Middle East have also
reached the European continent. Hundreds of thousands
of people have been forced to flee their homes and are
seeking shelter in Europe, many of them, as members
know, in Germany.
2/22

29/02/2016

All of those developments are challenging our
common security more fundamentally than we long
thought possible. Maintaining international peace and
security, that is what the Charter of the United Nations
provides for; while a new era of democracy, peace and
unity in Europe was the vision in the Charter of Paris.
However, this vision of a Europe whole and free has
not yet materialized and, even worse, the principles
of international law, as stipulated in the Charter of
the United Nations and OSCE documents, seem to be
coming under more and more pressure. How should
we respond? What should our guiding principles be in
these uncertain times?
First, let us face this world with a realistic
eye — with the eye of today not of yesterday. We are not
reliving the Cold War, and we should not talk as if we
were. The world of today is different; its conflicts are
of a new kind — more complex, with more actors and
more conflicting interests — so yesterday’s arguments
are, from my point of view, not only inappropriate; they
are counterproductive.
Secondly, I am convinced that the principles to
which we have all agreed in the United Nations and the
OSCE, such as the territorial integrity and sovereign
equality of nations, must still form the bedrock of how
we live together as nations. These commitments still
form the basis for overcoming divisions, provided that
all States muster the necessary political will.
Thirdly, we need strong multilateral organizations
to help safeguard and implement these principles, to give
us tools for conflict resolution, and to provide us with
opportunities for debate to overcome our differences.
The United Nations was created to do exactly that, and
the same holds for the OSCE. I firmly believe that these
two organizations continue to give us the best tools we
have to shape the future of a rules-based international
order and to prevent the fragility of our time from
turning into perpetual disorder. That is why these
two institutions are so important, particularly in our
turbulent times. We want the OSCE to help us overcome
the fragile security situation, in close cooperation with
the United Nations. Let me highlight some focal areas
of our chairmanship.
The first is Ukraine. The developments in and
around Ukraine have shown how indispensable the
OSCE is when it comes to unite our strength to
maintain international peace and security, as the
Charter of the United Nations says. Without the OSCE
16-05404

29/02/2016

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

and particularly the courageous men and women of the
Special Monitoring Mission we would not have made
the progress we have seen on military de-escalation and
at least a partial withdrawal of weapons. However, we
remain deeply concerned over the continuing violations
of the ceasefire and the restrictions of access for the
Mission. I strongly believe that implementing the
Minsk agreements is the only way towards a sustainable
political solution, and I call on both sides represented in
the Council to live up to their responsibilities. Together
with our French colleagues, we remain committed to
supporting this process within the Normandy format,
and I count on the support of the Council in this regard.
Secondly, I would like to highlight conflicts that
are often referred to as “frozen” or “protracted”. I
believe that we should not adopt this kind of fatalism.
For many years, these conflicts have brought hardship
to the people affected and stagnation to the regions
involved. During our OSCE chairmanship, we want
to make every effort to return to more constructive
approaches, to stabilize ceasefires, and to rebuild trust
by building confidence in small but tangible steps.
In the Nagorno Karabakh conflict, we are
concerned about the high number of deadly incidents
along the line of contact and the border between
Armenia and Azerbaijan. We need to intensify efforts
under the auspices of the OSCE Minsk Group. We must
find ways to reduce the number of casualties quickly,
and we should not be disheartened in seeking a lasting
solution to the conflict on the basis of the principles of
territorial integrity and the non-use of force.
In Georgia, we have seen at least some progress
on practical cooperation between the sides. I want to
commend the efforts undertaken by the United Nations,
jointly with the OSCE and the European Union, in the
Geneva international discussions. We want to underpin
this momentum with more confidence-building
measures and humanitarian action. We will also use
the chairmanship to revive the 5+2 negotiations on the
Transnistria conflict.
My third point concerns security- and confidence­
building measures. Whether we look at Ukraine, Russia
or Turkey, we are currently seeing increased military
activities and a high risk of military incidents between
OSCE member States. In these times, confidence- and
security-building measures are more important than
ever. One important element is the Vienna Document.
The Ukraine conflict has revealed that it needs to be

S/PV.7635

updated substantially. Progress will be difficult, of
course, when confidence is low, but I am convinced that
the proposals we have made would lead to better crisis
prevention and risk reduction. On the basis of these
confidence-building measures, I do hope that we will
eventually return to a broader dialogue on European
security. We should adhere to the long-term vision
of renewed arms control and cooperative security
in Europe.
The OSCE and the United Nations share the task of
preventing armed conflicts. I believe we should make
every effort to strengthen OSCE capabilities in this
field, from early warning to crisis management to postconflict rehabilitation. We will also address the role
of women in conflict management and the protection
of women in violent conflicts, in line with resolution
1325 (2000). The experience of the United Nations in
all these areas can enrich this process. I believe that
we are more likely to be successful if we work closely
together and combine our toolboxes.
The same is true when it comes to addressing the
many other global challenges we face, from terrorism
and extremism to organized crime. I believe that
the pressing issue of migration should figure more
prominently on our agenda. I welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s initiative to organize a global summit
on migration in September. The OSCE has a lot of
expertise in this field, from human rights standards
and best practices in labour migration to combatting
human trafficking. That is why we want to discuss how
the OSCE can contribute to the international efforts, in
line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1).
Human rights and fundamental freedoms are top
priorities of our chairmanship. I believe that we need
to intensify the fight against discrimination, racism,
xenophobia and intolerance throughout Europe,
including in my own country. In Germany, people’s
overwhelming readiness to help arriving refugees has
recently been overshadowed by xenophobic assaults.
These are despicable acts that we must not and will
not tolerate.
Finally, I would like to highlight the fact that
security within the OSCE area is intrinsically tied to
the security of its neighbours. The OSCE is a unique
organization, but my hope is that its principles can
provide a glimmer of hope to other regions, particularly
in the Middle East. Let us remember that the road to

16-054043/22

S/PV.7635

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Helsinki began when the Cold War was at its coldest.
At the start of the negotiations, who would have dared
to hope that at the end of it, the Berlin Wall would fall?
Of course, one cannot transfer a security architecture
to another region. But perhaps our experiences can
highlight useful principles and processes, and maybe
they can encourage the parties in the Middle East to
live up to their responsibility and explore new paths
to political settlements. This is a discussion that we
started at the OSCE conference in Amman last year and
on which we would like to build.
Germany is fully aware of the responsibility
attached to assuming the OSCE chairmanship in
these turbulent times. I am convinced that we have to
remain firm with respect to our principles. At the same
time, I believe that we need to promote dialogue and a
cooperative approach so as to overcome our differences
and put us back on track towards restored security.
We should remind ourselves of the spirit of Helsinki:
persistent dialogue and a cooperative approach can
pay off in the end. This very hope is expressed in our
motto for 2016: “Renewing dialogue, rebuilding trust
and restoring security”. This embraces the spirit of the
United Nations Charter. Rebuilding trust will not be
easy, and there is no quick fix. But if we want to be able
to look future generations in the eye and say that we
did everything possible to return to peace in Europe,
we have to work on it together, in the OSCE and in the
United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Steinmeier for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to welcome the presence in the Council today of
His Excellency Mr. Frank-Walter Steinmeier, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Germany, and to thank him for
his particularly enlightening statement. On behalf of
my country, I should like also warmly to congratulate
Germany on its assumption of the chairmanship of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) this year. Of course, we intend to closely
cooperate, with full confidence, with our German
friends in this body in the months to come. They
know that they can count on our full support in the
implementation of their programme of work, which is
rightly focused on the issues he mentioned, including
4/22

29/02/2016

the relaunching of dialogue, the rebuilding of trust and
the restoration of security.
I wish to touch on two points: the central role of
the OSCE in our efforts to put an end to the Ukrainian
crisis, and the priority challenges on which the OSCE
should, in a more general manner, be concentrating
its efforts.
The crisis unfolding today in eastern Ukraine is
one of the most serious and dangerous violations of the
founding principles of the OSCE, as adopted in Helsinki
more than 40 years ago. It is therefore fitting that this
issue has dominated the agenda of the organization
for more than two years now. The OSCE has risen to
the challenge and shouldered its responsibilities by
deploying swiftly a Special Monitoring Mission and
playing a central role in the implementation of the
Minsk agreements. The OSCE must continue to play
this core role in the context of the international efforts
aimed at resolving the crisis. Our goal here remains a
return of control for Ukraine across its internationally
recognized borders, which includes reinstating its
authority over Crimea. Our position on this issue, which
is in keeping with international law, will not change.
We welcome the fact that the mandate of the Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine was extended several
days ago for an additional year upon the initiative of
the German chairmanship. Germany’s chairmanship
means that we can strengthen the links between the
various crisis-management tools available, including
the Normandy format, which is the priority negotiation
format for parties, and the OSCE, which is providing
follow-up on the ground and mediation on a daily basis.
For France, resolving the Ukrainian crisis remains
a priority. We are determined to continue our efforts in
the Normandy format to ensure the full implementation
of the Minsk agreements, which represents the only
possible framework to achieve a peaceful settlement.
This is one of the messages that Minister Steinmeier
conveyed, alongside his French counterpart, during
their joint visit to Kyiv last week. In terms of content,
our position is clear: we are deeply worried about the
ongoing violations of the ceasefire, whose number has
increased in recent weeks, and we deplore the piecemeal
application of the Minsk agreements on the ground.
The Minsk agreements are an international
commitment whose provisions must be implemented by
all parties. This includes the effective implementation
of the ceasefire, which is the only possible basis for
16-05404

29/02/2016

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

moving forward, as well as the implementation of the
other measures planned for by the Minsk framework,
namely, the adoption of a constitutional reform on
decentralization and a special electoral law for Donbas,
given the fact that the definition of a political horizon
is the only way to ensure that the security situation
remains stable.
All of these questions will be on the agenda of the
next ministerial meeting in the Normandy format, to be
held on Thursday in Paris. This will be a crucial time
with respect to our mediation and to the conflict, and
all parties must shoulder their responsibilities. We call
upon other members of the Council to urgently convey
this message. In the meantime, more generally, it is vital
that the Special Monitoring Mission of the OSCE be in
a position to fully and without hindrance discharge its
mandate. We once again call for respect of the freedom
of movement of the monitors and firmly condemn any
violation of that principle, be it through intimidation,
threats or prohibition of access to certain areas. We
should also think about how to give the organization the
ability to better monitor the border between Russia and
Ukraine and to set up a new advance presence in areas
currently under separatist control. The commitment
of the OSCE to ensuring security for local elections
in Donbas will also be necessary, on the basis of
arrangements yet to be determined.
Beyond Ukraine, the OSCE remains a key
instrument for promoting peace and security in Europe
in a context characterized by a broad spectrum of
threats. This situation should encourage its 57 members
to give up political posturing and embrace once again
the Helsinki spirit of which Minister Steinmeier just
spoke, which enabled a shared vision of security in
Europe and which was reiterated in the 2010 Astana
commemorative declaration of Heads of State and
Government, entitled “Towards a security community”,
based on the three well-known dimensions on which
the organization focuses.
In this context, we believe that the work of the
OSCE must today emphasize the following issues
in particular.
First, let me touch on the settlement of regional
conflicts. Beyond the Ukrainian crisis, we cannot accept
the continued existence of frozen conflicts throughout
Europe, be it in Nagorno Karabakh, Transdniestria or
Georgia, which was mentioned earlier. We share the
belief of the German chairmanship that the OSCE’s

S/PV.7635

role is key in all of these situations, within established
mediation formats, so as to promote dialogue and
re-establish confidence.
I turn now to the issue of bolstering the OSCE’s
capacities in the cycle of conflict. Conflict prevention
is an issue on which we deem it not only possible
but also urgent to make headway together. Here we
welcome the decision of the German chairmanship
to attach priority importance to arms control and the
adoption of confidence-building measures during this
year, in which important timelines are coming up with
respect to the Vienna Document and the Treaty on
Conventional Armed Forces in Europe.
With respect to upholding the vital importance of
the democracy and human rights pillar in the work of
the OSCE, although a multidimensional approach has
always been at the heart of the OSCE’s work, we are
nevertheless concerned at the increasing tendency on
the part of certain members to politicize or even reject
consideration of issues related to the human dimension.
The approach taken by the German chairmanship of
relaunching work in this area while focusing on issues
such as combating discrimination, racism, xenophobia
and intolerance is welcome, on the understanding that
such work cannot overshadow the efforts that must be
made in the area of democracy and human rights.
With regard to developing the central role of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
to certain emerging challenges — I am thinking in
particular about migration, combatting radicalization
and even climate change — it is important with all
of those issues, which are so important for European
security, that the OSCE work towards specific
responses beyond public posturing. We fully support
the desire of the German chairmanship to encourage
the Organization to focus on those areas of expertise,
such as in the fight against human trafficking in the
context of migration, for example. Particular attention
should be paid to the impact of climate change on
security. We think that would be quite timely, following
the Paris agreement.
I conclude my statement by recalling the common
ground that exists between the activities of the OSCE
and the United Nations. Whether it be in the field or in
their respective missions in the Balkans, the Caucasus
or Central Asia, they must always act in an integrated
manner. There is also common ground in terms of
principles with the defence of a common approach that

16-054045/22

S/PV.7635

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

encompasses security, development and human rights.
France is convinced that the founding principles of the
OSCE remain more relevant than ever to guarantee
security in Europe. Unlike those who believe today that
there is a need to abandon or change such principles,
we think that it important to collectively mobilize to
ensure those principles are upheld.
Once again, on behalf of my country I would
like to wish Germany every success as it assumes the
chairmanship and pledge France’s resolve to support its
programme of work at the head of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan) (spoke in Spanish): I am
honoured to take the floor to speak on the last day of
Venezuela’s presidency of the Council.
(spoke in English)
I would first like to welcome the Foreign Minister of
Germany, Mr. Frank-Walter Steinmeier, to the Security
Council. I thank him for his comprehensive briefing
on the priorities of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in 2016 in his capacity
as its Chairperson-in-Office.
Japan became the first OSCE partner for
cooperation almost 25 years ago, in 1992. Since then,
Japan has always participated in OSCE summits and
ministerial councils at a high level. We already hosted
four Japan-OSCE conferences and we are convinced
that Asia and Europe have a lot to learn from each
other. With the members of the OSCE, Japan shares
fundamental values, such as freedom, democracy and
basic human rights. Japan will continue to be an active
partner with the OSCE.
I wish to touch upon the situation in and around
Ukraine, which Minister Steinmeier referred to. First
of all, we will not accept any unilateral attempts to
change the status quo in Ukraine or any other country
or region in the world. The sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine must be respected. We commend
the dedicated efforts made thus far by the OSCE and
its Chairperson-in-Office on Ukrainian issues. The
role played by the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
(SMM) continues to be critical. In order to support this
Mission, Japan has contributed €2 million and has been
sending a regional expert to the SMM since last August.
We are concerned that the SMM continues to report
systematic disruption of access to certain areas. Japan
6/22

29/02/2016

would like to stress that SMM observers must be given
full and unrestricted access to the entire conflict zone.
This month marks the one-year anniversary
of the signing of the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements. However, the
situation in Ukraine is far from a final resolution. It is
unfortunate that the number of violations of ceasefire
agreements reported by the SMM has increased
recently. The Minsk agreements are the only guidelines
for the improvement of the situation in Ukraine. Japan
urges all parties to fully and promptly implement the
Minsk agreements.
Counter-terrorism is one of the areas in which
the OSCE is playing an important role. We believe
that the strengthening of border control is among the
most effective counter-terrorism measures. That is
why Japan has been financially supporting the OSCE
Border Management Staff College since 2013. I wish to
add that Japan values cooperation between the OSCE
and the United Nations under the framework of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Finally, I wish Minister Steinmeier every success
during his chairmanship and assure him of Japan’s
support to him and to the OSCE.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin by recognizing the presence in the Chamber
of, and express my gratitude to, the Chairperson-inOffice of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE), Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Gernmany, Mr. Frank-Walter Steinmeier.
For Uruguay, cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations under Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations is an essential
component of the structure of international relations.
As a member of strong regional organizations that
have long been in existence, such as the Organization
of American States and the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States (CELAC), Uruguay
believes that the role played by regional organizations
is very important. We believe that this role will again
be a central focus, for example in the work that the
Organization will be doing to support the peacebuilding
process in Colombia, specifically with the participation
in that process by the States members of CELAC.
We greatly appreciate the value of the role played
by the OSCE as a platform for dialogue in a very vast
region. In that region, issues related to security, early
16-05404

29/02/2016

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

warnings, the settlement of conflicts, the management
of crises and post-conflict rehabilitation are all of
crucial importance. In general terms, we share the
values, principles and objectives of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. In particular,
we value its contribution on the ground to addressing
the various areas of conflict that fall within its remit.
We believe that the United Nations and the OSCE share
work in a number of similar areas and that cooperation
between the two entities should always be a part of the
principles of both organizations.
Finally, I would like to firmly reaffirm that
Uruguay understands that the principle of the
territorial integrity of States is a fundamental pillar in
international relations.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by congratulating the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Germany, Mr. Frank-Walter Steinmeier, on
his assumption of the chairmanship of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
by thanking him for his very complete briefing on the
priorities of the OSCE for this year. I would also like
to thank him for his comments with regard to former
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali and for his
recognition of Mr. Boutros-Ghali’s efforts to realize
peace in the wake of the Cold War.
We have often insisted on the importance of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations with regard to the maintenance of
international peace and security, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
In that regard, we place high value and importance
on the efforts of the OSCE to re-establish stability in
conflict zones in Europe and in Asia. I would cite, in
particular, the conflicts in Nagorno Karabakh, Ukraine
and elsewhere.
Progress has been made as a result of OSCE efforts
in the areas of preventive diplomacy, mediation and
good offices, and we would encourage the OSCE to
continue its efforts. We believe that the role of the OSCE
should be complementary to that of the United Nations,
and that the latter should contribute to strengthening
OSCE efforts undertaken within the framework of its
mandate. We also support the strengthening of dialogue
and cooperation with our Mediterranean partners in
the light of the close link between the countries of the
Mediterranean and the European continent. I would cite
in particular such issues as the Syrian crisis, the need to

S/PV.7635

re-establish stability in Libya, and the fight against the
terrorism and extremism that threaten the aspirations
of the peoples of the region.
Moreover, it is necessary to strengthen dialogue
among civilizations and religions, and to address issues
related to migration, the protection of refugees and
the trafficking of human beings in the Mediterranean
region. In that context, we particularly appreciate
the efforts of the OSCE to pool international efforts
with a view to reaching a sustainable solution in
Ukraine, in accordance with the Minsk agreements.
We believe that those agreements provide the best
framework within which to achieve a sustainable
peace. In that context, the implementation of the
ceasefire is particularly important, as are the necessary
constitutional reforms and the organization of elections
in the Donbas region. And let us not forget the need
to respond to the humanitarian consequences of the
conflict in cooperation with all stakeholders, without
exception. Egypt welcomes the decline in hostile acts,
which helps to provide conditions that are favourable to
peace and stability. It is essential that all parties honour
their commitments in accordance with the Minsk
agreements, and we urge them to engage in dialogue
and to seek a peaceful resolution to the conflict that
takes into consideration the aspiration of their peoples.
Finally, we would be extremely pleased to see
strengthened cooperation with the OSCE in order
to arrive at a common vision on a number of issues,
including Islamophobia in Europe, dialogue among
civilizations and religions, as well as the combat against
terrorism and extremism. The latter two constitute two
of the greatest security threats we face today. We call for
strengthened joint efforts that include the participation
of all parties and organizations concerned, including
the OSCE, in order to eradicate terrorism. Those efforts
should be carried out using a comprehensive approach
that is not limited to only security and military
solutions, but that includes cultural and economic
aspects as well. That will help to improve the lives of
all the populations in the region. In that vein, Egypt,
which is a Mediterranean partner, will spare no effort
to achieve our shared goals.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): At the outset, I join my
other colleagues in congratulating Mr. Frank-Walter
Steinmeier, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany,
on his assumption of the position of Chairperson-inOffice of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) for 2016, and welcome him to the

16-054047/22

S/PV.7635

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Security Council. My delegation is grateful for his
briefing, which clearly outlined the priorities of the
OSCE under Germany’s chairmanship.
Malaysia welcomes the reaffirmation by the
Chairperson-in-Office to continue the close cooperation
between the OSCE and the United Nations. Over the
years, the OSCE has proven its relevance and resilience
as the world’s largest regional security organization. Its
inclusive and cooperative nature is its key strength in
responding to various security threats and challenges
in the Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian regions. We greatly
value its contribution and commend the holistic
approach of the OSCE to dealing with wide-ranging
security challenges, including conflict prevention,
conflict management, combating terrorism, arms
control and ensuring respect for human rights.
The significant role of the OSCE was thrust into
the limelight with the crisis in Ukraine. The OSCE’s
engagement in Ukraine through its Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine, its participation in the Trilateral
Contact Group, and the observer mission at the Russian
checkpoints Gukovo and Donetsk, deserve the Council’s
strong support. We acknowledge the significant progress
made in Ukraine relating to military de-escalation and
the withdrawal of weapons. However, we remain deeply
concerned that the agreed ceasefire remains fragile and
that the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission still does
not have access to the entire conflict zone, particularly
the rebel-held areas.
We strongly urge all relevant parties to abide by
the obligations laid down by the package of measures
for the implementation of the Minsk agreements last
year, which was endorsed by the Council in resolution
2202 (2015). We wish to see the full cooperation of
all parties with the OSCE to enable it to carry out its
mandate. Malaysia also calls on the parties to intensify
efforts to implement outstanding provisions of the
package of measures, including releasing all hostages,
withdrawing foreign troops and weapons, allowing
humanitarian access, and organizing local elections in
the conflict areas.
I wish to take this opportunity to commend
the role played by the OSCE in the aftermath of the
downing of flight MH-17 in eastern Ukraine, including
in facilitating the recovery and investigation efforts
despite the challenging security situation on the ground.
With respect to the various frozen conflicts,
including in Central Asia, the Southern Caucasus
8/22

29/02/2016

and Moldova, we hope that the focus on dialogue,
confidence-building measures and mediation by the
German chairmanship will provide new impetus
towards resolving the conflicts, in line with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, various United Nations resolutions, as well as
the Helsinki Final Act. We reiterate the need for the
conflicting parties to respect the principles of territorial
integrity and sovereignty, and the inadmissibility of the
use of force for the acquisition of territory, and to focus
on the de-escalation of conflict and peaceful settlement
of disputes.
Malaysia recognizes and fully supports the
stabilizing role played by the OSCE in the Western
Balkans, including its missions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in Kosovo. The OSCE has been vital in
building institutions and promoting reconciliation in the
region, and has brought about great strides in political,
judiciary, electoral, economic and social reforms in
post-conflict societies. I wish to also highlight and
welcome the conference organized by the OSCE earlier
this month in Vienna to identify strategies to counter
intolerance against Muslims in the OSCE regions. We
commend the priority accorded by the OSCE to address
discrimination, racism and xenophobia, particularly
in view of the rising sentiment of Islamophobia in the
OSCE regions.
In conclusion, Malaysia reiterates its support for the
OSCE and the priorities set out by the Chairperson-inOffice to renew dialogue, rebuild trust, and restore
security in the region. We wish Germany success
for its chairmanship, and we reaffirm our continued
commitment to cooperate closely with the OSCE in
maintaining peace and security in the region, under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank Foreign
Minister Steinmeier for his briefing. We look forward
to his return to the Security Council in his capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany, permanently,
before too long. In the meantime, he has our full
support, both in Vienna and here in New York, in taking
forward the priorities of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) this year.
Like the United Nations, the OSCE was founded
on the principles of dialogue and respect for peace and
stability. Together, the two organizations are therefore
at the forefront of the rules-based international system.
Sadly, as the Council well knows, that system is
16-05404

29/02/2016

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

seldom left unchallenged, so it is incumbent upon both
organizations to work closely together to advance peace
and security, and in doing so to uphold the Charter of
the United Nations and the Helsinki principles. That
strong cooperation is most clearly seen in our response
to the continuing crisis in Ukraine. At the outset, I
wish to reaffirm the United Kingdom’s full support for
Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity and our commitment to the return of Crimea to
its rightful place as part of Ukraine. I would also like to
take this opportunity to express the United Kingdom’s
gratitude for the leading role played by Germany, and
by the German OSCE chairmanship, in the Normandy
group, and in support of the Special Monitoring Mission
and the Trilateral Contact Group.
One year since our previous meeting on the OSCE
(see S/PV.7391), can we really say that the overall
situation has changed for the better in the east of
Ukraine? That meeting focused on the regular breaches
of the ceasefire, the use of heavy weapons and the
continued presence of convoys crossing the international
border. To that list one can now add the unacceptable
aggression directed against OSCE monitors. I am
saddened and deeply worried to say that, one year later,
we seem no closer to a resolution of the crisis. Since
the crisis began, over 9,000 people have lost their lives,
and over 3 million are now in need of humanitarian
assistance. It is clear that that toll will only continue to
grow unless a truly sustainable ceasefire is put in place
and all sides meet their Minsk commitments in full. To
that end, three clear steps must be taken.
First, it is imperative that the Monitoring Mission,
ably directed by Ambassador Apakan, be permitted to
carry out its mandate in full. The threats and aggressive
behaviour towards monitors must end. The Mission
must have unrestricted access to all of Ukraine,
especially those parts of the border with Russia not
under Ukraine’s control. The Russian Federation should
use its influence on the separatists to ensure that that
happens without delay, as they it is obliged to do.
Secondly, while there have been some welcome
exchanges of prisoners over the last year, at least 134
Ukrainian prisoners remain in detention. We again call
on Russia to release all illegally detained Ukrainian
citizens, including those held in Russia and in the
illegally annexed Crimean peninsula. Those include
Nadiya Savchenko and Oleg Sentsov. We also reiterate
that all hostages and illegally detained persons related

S/PV.7635

to the crisis in and around Ukraine must be released, as
stipulated under the Minsk agreements.
Thirdly, even more important, what is most needed
is a truly sustainable ceasefire and genuine political
will to restore Ukrainian sovereignty. The Russian
Federation must demonstrate that will and live up
to its international commitments. It must withdraw
its weapons and personnel and use its considerable
influence over the separatists to bring an end to the
crisis and prevent the deaths of more people. That is
the best way to end the fear and suffering of ordinary
people in eastern Ukraine and to allow the Ukrainian
Government to focus on much-needed programmes of
governance and reform.
Until those steps are taken, we will be working
with our European Union partners to ensure that
sanctions remain in place. The onus is on Russia to
demonstrate a clear commitment to act in line with the
principles that guide the OSCE, the Council and other
international organizations.
Finally, beyond Ukraine, we in the Security
Council should not lose sight of the need to work closely
with the German OSCE chairmanship to resolve other
issues affecting the region. Those include protecting
fundamental freedoms, which continue to come under
growing pressure in some OSCE States, addressing the
need for greater military transparency and tackling the
protracted conflicts that continue to blight the lives
of people across the OSCE region, most notably in
Georgia. We need dialogue based on respect for, and
the implementation of, commitments. Without that
we face continuing deadlock, which is damaging and
debilitating to all sides. Russian actions in Ukraine cast
a shadow over efforts to build confidence and security
across OSCE States. We must lift that shadow and, as
Foreign Minister Steinmeier said, rebuild trust, renew
dialogue and restore security.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): We welcome His
Excellency Mr. Frank-Walter Steinmeier, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Germany, and thank him for
the very clear and comprehensive briefing delivered
to the Security Council this morning in his role as
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
The
priorities
set
for
the
German
chairmanship — renewing dialogue, rebuilding trust
and restoring security — address fundamental concerns
of international life and our quest for peace and security.

16-054049/22

S/PV.7635

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Since its inception, the OSCE’s work has been a relevant
factor in that endeavour, and we commend its tangible
contribution to international peace and security, its
upholding of the purposes and principles of the United
Nations and its cooperation under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. During the 40 years of
its existence, the OSCE’s agenda has been effectively
aligned with the three pillars of the United Nations, that
is, peace and security, human rights and development.
Angola needs a Europe in peace, marked by
stability and growing economies. We therefore attach
great relevance to the programme set by the German
chairmanship of the OSCE, focused on the fight
against threats such as terrorism, radicalism, drug
trafficking, as well as on countering the abuse of
cyberspace, by addressing youth radicalization through
a comprehensive approach to security and the efforts
that it has been deploying to address today’s growing
security challenges. Angola supports and appreciates
the OSCE’s outstanding role in that regard.
In addition, the organization’s efforts to strengthen
dialogue and cooperation in areas such as arms control
are of relevance, as are initiatives aimed at managing
cross-border movements and the social and political
impact of migration, based on the organization’s
commitment to human rights and the promotion of
tolerance and non-discrimination, which are solid
foundations for lasting solutions to the critical problems
affecting the international community. We welcome
the German chairmanship’s objective of holding a
conference on those issues later this year in Berlin.
With regard to specific country situations, we praise
the OSCE’s active support to the current negotiations
and mechanisms for solving conflicts in Nagorno
Karabakh and to the Transnistria talks on Georgia,
as well as its fundamental role in the stabilization of
Kosovo and in monitoring the Minsk agreement on
eastern Ukraine.
Angola values with great appreciation the contribution
of regional and subregional organizations to the
maintenance of international peace and security. They
play a key role in strengthening the multilateral system
and complement the work of the United Nations through
the specific knowledge of their respective regions,
particularly with regard to the root causes of conflict.
Finally, we would like to stress the importance
of dialogue between the Security Council and the
OSCE, as well as with other international, regional
10/22

29/02/2016

and subregional organizations, in prevention and crisis
management and tackling issues that are threats to
regional peace and stability in Europe.
Angola wishes the German chairmanship great
success and thanks the Chairperson-in-Office for
coming to New York.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): We appreciate the
opportunity to hear directly from Minister Steinmeier
on the priorities that Germany will pursue as
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We welcome in
particular the Chairperson’s goal of strengthening
OSCE capacities in all aspects of conflict, from early
warning and prevention to ending conflict and restoring
lasting peace. This aligns closely with the Council’s
mandate, including areas where it needs to improve,
especially in terms of conflict prevention.
New Zealand is a strong advocate of the positive
role of regional organizations in addressing conflict.
Experience in our region has shown that regional
organizations can be highly effective and support
the United Nations efforts to prevent conflict and
restore stability. It is therefore not surprising that
on many occasions we have highlighted the need for
enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations.
The OSCE is no exception. It has a long history
of defusing conflict and promoting human rights and
democratic principles, and it continues to demonstrate
its relevance today in a number of conflict zones and
across a wide array of security issues, all of which
complement the Council’s mandate of maintaining
international peace and security. With respect to
territorial disputes, the OSCE is carrying out important
work to reduce tensions and engage parties in dialogue.
We also welcome its programmes aimed at countering
other threats to security, such as violent extremism,
radicalization and human trafficking.
The OSCE’s stature and reputation mean that it is
often the best suited to tackle security challenges or
support conflict resolution in its region. We applaud the
OSCE’s continuing and important role in maintaining
security in many parts of Europe that have been
and continue to be troubled by conflict, as outlined
by Minister Steinmeier this morning. This is most
obviously evident in Ukraine, where the parties have
bestowed particular and difficult roles on the OSCE to
monitor and verify compliance with the terms of the
16-05404

29/02/2016

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Minsk agreements. The Minsk agreements remain the
best path to a durable peace. This was recognized by the
Council, which endorsed the package of measures for
implementing the Minsk agreements and the OSCE’s
important role in monitoring them when it adopted
resolution 2202 (2015) last February.
Yet on almost all counts, implementation by the
parties is far from perfect. Lives continue to be lost,
the humanitarian situation is poor and the availability
of weapons presents the ongoing risk of a resumption
of conflict. As we have heard today, the OSCE reports
almost daily that its monitors are encountering
freedom-of-movement restrictions, mostly in separatistcontrolled areas. We commend the OSCE monitors for
their work under challenging circumstances, and call
on all parties to ensure their safety and security at all
times. OSCE monitors must be allowed to access all
areas necessary to verify a ceasefire and the withdrawal
of proscribed weapons. We repeat our call on Russia to
use its influence over the separatists to ensure that they
comply with all aspects of the Minsk agreements.
The parties to the Minsk agreements decided that
local elections in eastern Ukraine would be held in
accordance with OSCE standards and monitored by the
OSCE. These elections will need to take place in a safe
and stable environment, which is another reason why
security aspects of the Minsk agreements need to be
implemented urgently.
As Foreign Minister Steinmeier noted, the United
Nations and the OSCE share many common goals and
responsibilities. As others have mentioned here today,
we hope that the two organizations can strengthen
their cooperation to mutually reinforce their efforts to
maintain peace and security.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): Today
is the last day of February. China thanks Venezuela,
in its capacity as Council president this month, for
leading the Council to conduct its work efficiently
and practically. I also wish Angola every success in its
Council presidency in March.
I thank you, Sir, for convening today’s open
meeting. I welcome Foreign Minister Steinmeier
of Germany to today’s meeting in his capacity as
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). I listened carefully
to his briefing.

S/PV.7635

In recent years, the OSCE has made positive efforts
in preventive diplomacy, enhancing security and mutual
confidence, and mediating regional disputes. China
commends the OSCE for its efforts and welcomes
the priorities defined by the German chairmanship
for enhancing dialogue, rebuilding mutual trust
and restoring security. We hope that the OSCE shall
continue to play its constructive role in maintaining
regional peace, security and stability.
China consistently advocates for political solutions
to regional hotspot issues through dialogue and
negotiation, and supports regional and subregional
organizations in conducting preventive diplomacy,
defusing differences and settling conflicts by
peaceful means so as to contribute to the promotion of
regional peace and security. The activities of regional
organizations should conform to the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, in
particular the principle of respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of all countries.
The Security Council and regional and subregional
organizations have their respective advantages in
maintaining international peace and security. The
United Nations and the Security Council should, in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, continue to deepen cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations so as to be
mutually complementary in their efforts to jointly
uphold the Charter and the basic principles guiding
international relations. The OSCE is an important
partner of the United Nations. We support the Security
Council’s engagement in efficient and practical
cooperation with the OSCE in maintaining regional
peace and security.
The overall situation in eastern Ukraine is relatively
calm. All relevant parties, including the OSCE, have
made positive efforts in this process. A comprehensive
settlement of the Ukraine issue must follow the general
direction of a political solution, taking fully into
account the legitimate rights, interests and demands
of all regions and ethnic groups within Ukraine, while
paying due attention to the legitimate concerns of all
relevant parties. China supports all relevant parties
in fully implementing the Minsk agreement, as called
for in resolution 2202 (2015), and in continuously
advancing a political solution to the Ukraine issue. The
international community should enable the Normandy
and Minsk mediation mechanisms to play their full

16-0540411/22

S/PV.7635

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

roles and jointly advance the early achievement of
peace, calm, stability and development in Ukraine.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome to the Security
Council the Vice-Chancellor and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Germany, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, in his
capacity as Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We
thank him for his substantive briefing.
We have consistently stood for developing and
improving cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional mechanisms on the
basis of the Charter of the United Nations, first and
foremost Chapter VIII. It is on this very foundation
that cooperation between the United Nations and the
OSCE should be based. Cooperation between the two
organizations is regular and multilateral in nature,
covering all dimensions of security, as well as crossdimensional issues.
We share the emphasis of the German chairmanship
on the “all-weather” dialogue, for which the OSCE
has a solid foundation in the form of the genuine
equality of all States parties and a broad-based agenda,
which reflects the interests of all. As is well known,
in the OSCE not a single State or bloc of States can
freeze matters of common interest and of paramount
importance for European security. There are collective
means of crisis management, which enjoy high
credibility in the region. That must remain the OSCE’s
philosophy of dialogue in the future.

29/02/2016

solve the conflict with different regions and to a lack
of good political leadership. The agenda was imposed
by radicals. That is the reason not only for the complete
disarray in the economic and political life of Ukraine,
but also of Kyiv’s failure to implement a number of key
provisions of the package of measures agreed upon in
Minsk by the leaders of Normandy quartet and endorsed
in resolution 2202 (2015).
We believe that one of the primary tasks for the
German chairmanship of the OSCE should be the full
implementation of the package of measures. In that
regard, it is quite convenient that Germany is also
an active member of Normandy format, and indeed,
thanks to its international prestige, Germany has given
the package of measures more weight. Nevertheless,
the OSCE has neither the political nor the moral right
to lose sight of the investigation of the tragedy on the
Maidan in February 2014 and in Odessa on 2 May 2014.
We called attention to the brash assertion of certain
participants at the events in the Maidan, recently widely
publicized in Ukraine, who openly acknowledged that
they were the instigators of killings of law enforcement
officers, who, unarmed, were ensuring public order in
the capital of Ukraine in those days. No charges have
been levied against them, nor are investigations under
way. We cannot indulge in their impunity.

The OSCE has entered into its fifth decade
of existence, having accumulated considerable
international experience and created its own
mechanisms. Unfortunately, the ideals that were at the
heart of the creation of the organization have not always
been implemented in practice, nor has cooperation
between States become a key rallying factor. Sometimes,
one has the impression that geopolitical egoism or a
narrowness of political thinking has the upper hand.

We think that the current format of cooperation
between the United Nations and the OSCE in Ukraine
is sufficient. We base this on the fact that the parties
themselves have the primary responsibility for
implementing the practical solutions to stabilize the
situation — demining, rehabilitation of infrastructure,
exchange of prisoners and so on. It is important to
recall the dangers of attempts to blur or reinterpret the
existing mechanisms, such as the Contact Group or the
Normandy format, and to launch new initiatives that
only distract us from the necessity to fully implement
the package of measures.

Who would have thought that in the heart of Europe
there could have been such a violent armed coup d’état
as took place in Ukraine, and even with the support of
some members of the OSCE? In that context, the people
of Crimea were free to decide to join Russia. The
instruments that were proposed by the OSCE to settle
the crisis, including the Swiss road map, remained on
the table, first and foremost due to Kyiv’s lack of desire
to seek a solution based on an inclusive dialogue to

On the whole, we support the activities of the
OSCE Monitoring Mission in Ukraine. We believe
that monitors could pay more attention to monitoring
on the territory under the control of the Ukrainian
army — in particular the Dnepropetrovsk, Kharkov and
Zaporozhye regions, where armaments and equipment
are being accumulated — and provide more complete
reporting on their activities. However, despite those
criticisms, the OSCE Monitoring Mission in Ukraine is

12/22

16-05404

29/02/2016

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

the only mechanism that can work with all parties to the
conflict: Kyiv and Donetsk and Luhansk.
It is of the utmost importance that the monitoring
activities be carried out in a manner that is equal on both
sides of the line of contact, and not concentrated mainly
in the territories under the control of the militias. Due to
such distortions, mistrust arises on the part of Luhansk
and Donetsk, which in particular is then reflected in the
problems of access by monitors to sites in the republics.
We would like to note that Monitoring Mission staff
regularly visit districts along the Ukrainian-Russian
border, and nothing suspicious has been documented in
their reports.
An important element in establishing a global
unifying agenda is strengthening the OSCE as a
format for dialogue and cooperation with regard to
transnational threats and challenges. We support the
efforts of the German chairmanship in that regard. It
would be advisable to conduct a joint assessment of
threats to common security. We hope that documents
already adopted by the United Nations and the OSCE
on the fight against terrorism and drug trafficking
will provide more results. We note the contribution of
Berlin to the preliminary agreement on 12 February
in Vienna of the additional list of confidence-building
measures in the use of information and computer
technologies. We believe that the OSCE can contribute
to the response to the migration crisis, which requires
in-depth discussion.
On the military-political front, a common
understanding of shared goals in arms control and
confidence-building measures is needed. But for this
one needs to overcome the logic of containment, a mode
of thinking again prevailing among NATO strategists.
We recognize the relevance of including an item on
sustainable connectivity on the agenda of economic and
environmental baskets. Harmonizing and calibrating
the integration processes in Europe and Eurasia
are designed to reduce the potential for conflict on
the continent. We think that the upcoming business
conference in Berlin on economic connectivity on
18 and 19 May will allow progress on that path.
The humanitarian dimension of the OSCE should
be depoliticized, cleansed of double standards.
Russian priorities in that regard are well-known — the
protection of universal traditional values; countering
aggressive nationalism, radicalism and neo-Nazism;
preventing attempts to falsify the history of the Second

S/PV.7635

World War; the fight against ethnic and religious
intolerance, including against Christians; and the
protection of journalists working in conflict zones.
Ensuring the rights of children and the disabled,
non-intervention in private life and agreement on
common rules for monitoring elections are among other
topics that the OSCE should pay more attention to. The
whole spectrum of social, economic and cultural rights
require equal attention.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to welcome the convening of this
Security Council meeting devoted to the briefing by
the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which
is the product of the vision and the commitment of
57 countries from Europe, North America and Asia for
peace through cooperation. On this important occasion,
my delegation also welcomes the presence among us
of Mr. Frank-Walter Steinmeier, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Germany in his capacity as the OSCE
Chairperson-in-Office. I thank him for his briefing.
As a follow-up to the open debate (see S/PV.7621) on
respect for the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations as a key element for the maintenance
of peace, we are meeting this morning to discuss an
organization whose vision and actions are inspired
by those principles. As a witness to two world wars
in the space of a generation, Europe has put in place
an instrument for regional cooperation in the fields of
early warning, conflict prevention, crisis management
and post-conflict rehabilitation. The ups and downs
that have marked the existence of the OSCE since the
signing of the Helsinki Final Act and the subsequent
Conference for Security and Cooperation in Europe
attest to the urgent nature of the OSCE’s mission with
regard to the scope of the challenges still to be met.
That is why I would like to welcome the strategic option
of structuring the OSCE’s action around the political,
military, economic and environmental dimensions, as
well as the human and security dimensions.
The German chairmanship of the OSCE comes
at a time when Europe is experiencing one of its
most turbulent periods since the end of the Cold War.
From Georgia to Nagorno Karabakh to Donetsk in
Ukraine — in all of those regions the OSCE is facing
daunting challenges, in addition to transnational
threats such as terrorism, arms control challenges,
crime, cybercrime, migration and trafficking in drugs,
weapons and human beings. That is why I welcome

16-0540413/22

S/PV.7635

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

the approach that Mr. Steinmeier intends to use in his
chairmanship — that of renewing dialogue, rebuilding
trust and restoring security. For its part, Senegal, as a
firm believer in the peaceful settlement of conflicts in
Africa and the rest of the world, can only welcome the
choice of Germany, which squares perfectly with the
ideals of the United Nations.
In that regard, I would like to highlight and welcome
the OSCE Permanent Council’s decision to extend the
mandate of the Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine
until 31 March 2017, and that of the Observer Mission
deployed at the Gukovo and Donetsk checkpoints until
30 April of this year. We should remember that those two
Missions, together with the OSCE Project Coordinator
and the Trilateral Contact Group in Ukraine, make up
the institutional mechanisms established to encourage
a diplomatic solution to the Ukrainian crisis. In that
regard, we should support the efforts that have already
been launched to reduce tensions and promote peace,
stability and security, as well as to facilitate among
between the authorities, civil society and ethnic and
religious groups. Combined with strengthened technical
and operational capabilities, the extension should help
to stabilize the ceasefire, the arms withdrawal and
the building of a national dialogue, in accordance
with the Minsk agreements and with respect for the
Normandy format.
The Nagorno Karabakh conflict should also remain
at the centre of the efforts of the OSCE, which should
continue to work to convene a conference capable of
serving as the basis for a peaceful negotiated settlement
of the crisis, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. If that is to be achieved, it is
important to intensify efforts aimed at concluding an
agreement on a cessation of hostilities and setting up a
peace process under the auspices of the Minsk Group
with respect for the States’ territorial integrity and
the sovereignty.
I would also like to highlight the importance
of continuing the efforts to resolve the conflicts in
Transnistria under the 5+2 negotiations format, and
in Georgia through the international discussions in
Geneva. While it is clear that those tasks remain complex
and highly challenging, if they are to succeed the OSCE
will have to work to strengthen confidence-building
measures among the various parties. Hence the
importance of a dynamic partnership with the United
Nations, whose cooperation in that regard will continue
to be valuable. Overall, however, we feel reassured by
14/22

29/02/2016

the commitment of the Chairperson-in-Office to the
Helsinki+40 Process, to the Review Conference on
the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe
scheduled for this autumn and to combating common
threats such as terrorism.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming Senegal’s
full support for the ideal on which the Helsinki Final
Act was founded, establishing on the basis of shared
principles and objectives a Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian
community from Vancouver to Vladivostok that is free,
democratic, united and indivisible.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We warmly welcome
Mr. Steinmeier and would like to thank him for his tireless
efforts on Ukraine, which have been demonstrated
once again in his briefing to the Security Council
today. I would like to express Ukraine’s support for the
priorities for 2016 of Germany’s Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). We particularly commend Germany’s
determination to focus its efforts on practical responses
to the grave threats to security in the OSCE’s area of
operations. The Russian aggression against Ukraine in
Crimea and the Donbas region remains at the top of that
list. Due to necessity rather than any choice of ours, the
issue of that aggression will continue to be at the centre
of the OSCE’s attention. Germany’s participation in the
Normandy format negotiations will be very helpful to
the OSCE efforts in that regard.
Ukraine fully shares and supports the German
chairmanship’s motto — “Renewing dialogue,
rebuilding trust, restoring security”. It is a very accurate
description of what is needed for the situation not just
within the OSCE’s purview but all over the world. Instead
of dialogue, we frequently witness bitter exchanges of
mutual accusations. These days, instead of a climate of
trust, an overriding sense of mutual suspicion sets the
tone in international politics. Instead of having a sense
of secrity and confidence, States increasingly feel
threatened in the current environment of systematic
violations of international law, including the Charter
of the United Nations, and of a lack of international
instruments adequate to holding the perpetrators of
such violations to account. Under the circumstances
of these difficult times, Germany’s commitment to
leading the OSCE is highly commendable. The German
chairmanship has set itself an ambitious and noble task.
It is a high bar, and I would like to assure Mr. Steinmeier
of our full support for his efforts.
16-05404

29/02/2016

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

The Security Council is vested with the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. Still, one can hardly avoid noticing that the
dominant trend is worsening. The growing potential for
conflict across the globe is shaping our new security
reality, and one permanent member of the Security
Council has repeatedly resorted over the past decade
to the most problematic area of that reality — armed
aggression against neighbouring States in Europe that
has resulted in occupation and, even more alarmingly,
in the attempted annexation of part of the territory of
another country, the first such attempt since the Second
World War.
We have all been dealing with the Russian hybrid
war against Ukraine, which is marked by the invention
of artificial grounds for invasion, the deployment of
regular troops without insignia and the use of pervasive,
virulent propaganda. That has led to the illegal
occupation of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and
the city of Sevastopol and the plunging of the Donbas
region into a bloody conflict. Ukraine, like other
European States, also has to counter regular attempts
to destabilize its internal situation. The overall style of
such subversive activities is recognizable through its
use of similar tools such as marginal nationalist forces
operating under pseudo-patriotic slogans, including,
in the countries of the European Union, those voicing
anti-immigrant sentiments.
I have to express our deep concern about the fact
that the situation in Donbas remains fragile and prone to
escalation, despite the significant efforts of Ukraine and
the international community, including Mr. Steinmeier’s
personal contribution as a member of the Normandy
ministerial framework. Ukraine’s efforts to implement
the Minsk agreements have not been reciprocated in
Russia. Moscow still relies on the pseudo-republics it
has manufactured as a tool that may be activated at any
time the Kremlin considers expedient, including by
triggering new phases of conflict.
For Ukraine, the Minsk agreements remain the
agreed basis for a peaceful resolution to the situation
in Donbas. Since the initial documents were signed,
in September 2014, we have regularly initiated steps
aimed at silencing the weapons there. It is profoundly
regrettable that, a year after the Minsk package of
measures was agreed on, its initial security provisions
have yet to be implemented by Russia and its proxies.
We are ready to fully implement the agreements and
move forward with all aspects, including holding local

S/PV.7635

elections in various areas of Donbas, which must be
conducted in accordance with Ukrainian legislation
and OSCE standards in order to produce legitimate
regional representatives. Our constitutional reform
and decentralization will encompass the elected
representatives and provide them with powers,
responsibility and accountability. What we need in
order to move forward is a solid security foundation,
and in particular a comprehensive and sustainable
ceasefire, the verified withdrawal of heavy weapons
and unfettered monitoring by the OSCE throughout the
conflict area, including at the border with Russia.
As progress on the security track is long overdue,
we need to take decisive steps to establish the security
conditions necessary for a peaceful settlement in
Donbas. What is required is a genuine disengagement
line rather than a contact line, with weapons effectively
withdrawn, armed provocations by militants rendered
impossible and an enhanced international presence
capable of ensuring security on the ground, in addition
to the monitoring and verification functions that
the OSCE’s Special Monitoring Mission currently
performs. We welcome the recent extension of the
mandate of the Special Monitoring Mission to Urkaine
upon Ukraine’s request. While our invitation to deploy
a United Nations international peacekeeping operation
remains on the table, enhancing the OSCE capacities on
the ground and reinforcing them with a special police
mission under the auspices of the OSCE could become
an effective tool in bringing peace to Donbas.
It is evident that the uncontrolled segment of the
Ukrainian-Russian border makes the impact of all
international efforts on de-escalation very limited,
as replenishments to the illegal armed groups with
weapons and manpower from Russia continue. As
an agreed initial step until Ukrainian border guards
resume control at the border, permanent monitoring and
verification by the OSCE along all border sections of
concern from both sides of the border should be ensured,
as stipulated by the Minsk protocol of September 2014,
also signed by Russia.
The release of all hostages and illegally detained
persons, including Ukrainian political prisoners in
Russia, will be a crucial benchmark for assessing
Russia’s readiness to embark on the de-escalation path.
It is one of the few provisions of the Minsk agreement
that contains a very specific timeframe, for apparent
humanitarian reasons, that is, within five days of the
withdrawal of heavy weapons from the contact line.

16-0540415/22

S/PV.7635

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

About two years ago Russia launched its aggression
against Ukraine in Crimea, trampling fundamental
international norms and principles, including those
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the
Helsinki Final Act. The united international response
to Russia’s illegal actions was delivered here in New
York on 27 March 2014, when the General Assembly
adopted its resolution 68/262, entitled “Territorial
integrity of Ukraine”.
Echoed by other organizations and States across
the globe, the strong international condemnation
proves that the issue of the illegally occupied peninsula
is firmly on the agenda, whatever Russia claims. I am
absolutely convinced that an international framework
to address the Crimean case will be established sooner
or later, as that is the only way to guarantee the full
relevance of international law. Restoring respect for
the fundamental norms and principles of our peaceful
coexistence and cooperation and seeking their proper
implementation are in the interests of both the United
Nations and the OSCE.
Finally, allow me to express our deepest appreciation
to all colleagues around the table who spoke strongly
today in favour of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of my country. That is an exremely powerful
message for those back home who stand fighting for it.
Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation expresses its appreciation for the
presence of Minister Steinmeier in his capacity as
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to provide us with
Germany’s priorities during its chairmanship. We
trust in the German leadership, given the country’s
political weight, its knowledge of the organization and
its commitment to the search for solutions to conflicts.
Spain extends its full cooperation and support to the
German chairmanship.
Renewing dialogue, rebuilding trust and restoring
security is not only a motto of the Germany chairmanship,
it is also an objective that we share and support. We
have analysed the chairmanship’s priorities and we are
satisfied to note that they correspond to a great extent
with Spain’s priorities within the organization.
The OSCE is the only regional organization that
brings together 57 countries of the Euro-Atlantic,
Euro-Asiatic and Euro-Mediterranean regions in
a single forum and with the same principles and
commitments, including respect for the territorial
16/22

29/02/2016

integrity, sovereignty and independence of States, as
has been reiterated here today. Its multidimensional
security focus from the political, military, economic,
environmental and humanitarian perspectives, as well
as its concept of cooperative security, set forth in the
December 2010 Astana Commemorative Declaration,
among others, makes the OSCE an essential platform
for strengthening the security of all of its member States
and States of the region. None of the challenges that we
face today, ranging from terrorism, the proliferation
of weapons, cybercrime and climate change, can be
addressed solely with exclusive tools or perspectives of
a military or security nature.
Allow me to refer to one of the main challenges
of the OSCE, which has been mentioned repeatedly
in the Chamber today. I refer to the crisis in and
around Ukraine.
Almost a year ago, in its resolution 2202 (2015),
the Security Council adopted the package of measures
for the implementation of the Minsk agreements.
Unfortunately, one year later we continue to have to
call for the implementation of those agreements. While
we recognize the efforts made by the Government of
Ukraine, we call on all the parties to the conflict and
all those that have the capacity to assist to make firm
progress in the implementation of the Minsk agreements.
In particular, putting an end to the ceasefire violations
is essential. The adoption of measures to mitigate the
humanitarian impact of the conflict is also necessary.
Spain recognizes and fully supports the role of the
OSCE in the Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine and
through the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine.
We are aware of the limitations of the Mission and the
challenges before it. Nonetheless, it is the best guarantee
for an international presence in eastern Ukraine, and in
that way to help put an end to the conflict. It is necessary
that all the parties involved help the Mission in carrying
out its mandate in all its areas of operation and that the
Mission’s full freedom of movement is guranteed and
respected. We also recognize the valuable work of the
Normandy format and Germany in efforts to resolve
this crisis. We trust that the next meeting of the format,
scheduled for Thursday, 3 March, will make it possible
to continue to make progress of the various elements of
the Minsk agreements.
Allow me to move on to another region whose
stability is closely linked to the future and the presence
of the OSCE. I refer to the Meditarranean. Germany
played a key role last year to promote cooperation in
16-05404

29/02/2016

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

the southern coastal area of Europe and to revitalize
the Mediterranean Contact Group, which it chaired.
We sincerely appreciate Minister Steinmeir’s personal
involvement in that work and his solid participation
at the OSCE Mediterranean conference in Jordan in
October 2015. Spain believes it is essential to invigorate
and solidify cooperation with the Mediterranean
cooperation partners, including Morocco, Algeria,
Tunisia, Egypt, Jordan and Israel, and to strengthen
the Group. In that regard, we continue to work with
the current Austrian chairmanship of the Group, with
which we are organizing an event in Madrid to be held
in May.
Closely linked to this area, to which the Minister
referred, the OSCE, in its comprehensive view of
security, is a suitable framework to address the
complicated phenomenon of the migration and refugee
crisis, and it can provide important added value. We
support the continued efforts begun last year in Belgade
in the lead-up to the next ministerial council to be held
in Hamburg. We also hope that the next meeting on
security, which will be held in Rome on 4 March, will
also provide it with significant momentum. We place
Spain’s experience on comprehensive management
of the migration phenomenon at the disposal of the
chairmanship-in-office.
As Minsiter Steinmeier noted, the 2011 Vienna
document on confidence-building and security
measures will be reissued this year. It is undoubtedly
an excellent opportunity to do that and align it on the
basis of a constantly evolving security situation. We
recognize the work that Germany is carrying out in that
regard. This year the Council will also be undertaking
the comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2006),
the Committee of which Spain is the Chair. The OSCE
is probably the regional organization with the most
experience in the implementation of the resolution.
Therefore, we hope that we will be able to make a
substantive contribution to the comprehensive review
and, to that end, we make ourselves available to the
chairmanship. The Chair of the Committee will visit
the OSCE next April.
Finally, I wish to refer to one of the fundamental
dimensions of the OSCE, its human dimension, as we
are convinced that security is not possible if human
rights and fundamental freedoms are not respected
by law. We support the German chairmanship in its
effort to continue strengthening this third dimension
of the OSCE, and we agree on the central role of the

S/PV.7635

implementation of the obligations and commitments
related to fundamental freedoms. In particular, we
would like to acknowledge and welcome the references
made by the Foreign Minister today on the issue of
women and peace and security and the importance
of the participation of women. Accordingly, we will
continue to work in the framework of the OSCE to
effectively satisfy the provisions of resolutions 1325
(2000) and 2242 (2015).
Today’s meeting shows that the enhancement of
cooperation between the OSCE and the United Nations
is possible. Spain will contribute to that end through its
membership in both entities. We do not consider it to
be only a formal matter, but necessary in the effort to
come up with synergies and work practices that create
true added value.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
would like to begin by thanking by thanking the
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Foreign Minister
Steinmeier, for his briefing and for being here with us
today. We know that the partnership between the OSCE
and the United Nations remains strong and we welcome
the opportunity to hear about Germany’s priorities in
2016 to advance the OSCE’s efforts in support of peace
and security.
At the Astana summit just over five years ago, all
57 OSCE members recommitted to the principles and
values enshrined in the OSCE common documents,
including that all OSCE norms, principles and
commitments apply equally and without exception to
each participating State and that we are accountable to
our citizens and responsible to each other for their full
implementation. Today, the principles and commitments
embodied by the OSCE face some serious challenges,
both from inside and outside the organization. From
within, there is an uneven application of the Helsinki
norms, principles and commitments, where some States
are re-exerting a sphere of influence at the expense of
other States, while, from without, regional crises and
transnational threats are proliferating.
Efforts to resolve the conflict in Ukraine and the
protracted conflicts in Moldova, Georgia and Nagorno
Karabakh continue to face very frustrating obstacles.
We commend the Chairperson-in-Office’s efforts in
support of resolving the crisis in Ukraine, including
his leadership in obtaining an extension of the mandate
of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine

16-0540417/22

S/PV.7635

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

through 31 March 2017. The roles of both the OSCE
Monitoring Mission and the Trilateral Contact Group
are essential to restoring peace to Ukraine, and the full
implementation of the Minsk agreements, including
the ceasefire and weapons pullback, is critical.
The Monitoring Mission and also plays a critical
role in assessing the humanitarian situation on the
ground and facilitating the delivery of much-needed
humanitarian aid.
The increase in violence along the line of contact
in eastern Ukraine is of enormous concern — the worst
since the ceasefire declaration of 1 September 2015.
OSCE monitoring reports indicate that the number of
ceasefire violations continues to rise — on just one day,
24 February, monitors registered nearly 850 explosions
and firing of small and heavy weapons. The OSCE has
also documented the movement of heavy weapons out
of designated storage sites and placed in areas off-limits
under the Minsk agreements.
When the Special Monitoring Mission was
established, in March 2014, all 57 OSCE participating
States agreed that “Mission members will have safe
and secure access throughout Ukraine”. Yet, more than
a year after the signing of the Minsk memorandum
and protocol and the Minsk implementation package,
Russian-backed separatists do not allow OSCE
observers full access to all areas to monitor and verify
the maintenance of the ceasefire, the withdrawal of
heavy weapons and the presence of foreign fighters.
Russian-backed separatist forces have repeatedly
barred the Monitoring Mission from inspecting heavy
weapons storage sites. Furthermore, the separatist
routinely denied the Mission access to the UkrainianRussian border, while Russia unilaterally blocks the
expansion of the OSCE border observation mission
beyond the two current small checkpoints.
According to OSCE reports, movement restrictions
on the Special Monitoring Mission often go hand-in-hand
with weapons violations and have overwhelmingly
occurred on the separatist side of the line of contact.
In addition, the separatists continue to make direct
threats against the Mission itself. On 15 February, near
Kominternove, they once again threatened to shoot
Mission members, which is the third such incident
since January. The United States reiterates its call on
Russia to direct the separatists it supports and supplies
to immediately honour the ceasefire, withdraw heavy
weapons visibly and verifiably, return those weapons to
18/22

29/02/2016

their designated storage sites and end restrictions on the
movements and activities of the Monitoring Mission.
The United States strongly supports the OSCE’s
efforts to support a peaceful resolution of long-standing
conflicts, such as its mission to broker a comprehensive
settlement to the Transnistria conflict by facilitating
direct dialogue between the sides and by supporting
confidence-building measures. But in Transnistria, like
in Donbas, local so-called authorities refuse to grant
OSCE monitors unfettered access to do their important
work. The United States calls for unrestricted access
for the OSCE Mission to Moldova throughout the
country, including the Transnistrian region, so that it
can perform its activities and fulfil its mandate.
The OSCE continues its dedicated support of a
negotiated settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict.
Regrettably, violence along the line of contact and the
Armenia-Azerbaijan State border has escalated over
the past several months. The United States condemns
the use of mortars and other heavy weaponry, which
have caused civilian casualties, and appeals to the
sides to take immediate steps to reduce tensions and
protect lives. The status quo is neither acceptable nor
sustainable. We remind the sides that there can be no
military solution to this conflict. As a Chair of the OSCE
Minsk group, the United States will continue to work
closely with the sides to achieve a lasting, negotiated
settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict based on
the principles of international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and the Helsinki Final Act.
The United States fully supports Georgia’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity. We
urge the Russian Government to withdraw its troops to
pre-war positions and allow humanitarian agencies and
the European Union Monitoring Mission unfettered
access in the occupied territories there. As a participant
in the Geneva international discussions along with
the OSCE and the United Nations, the United States
remains committed to working with the parties and the
other Chairs to improve the security and humanitarian
situation for all residents of Georgia affected by
the conflict.
There is an immediate need for coordinated response
to the migration and refugee crisis in the OSCE region
and beyond. Addressing the impact of the large numbers
of migrants arriving in Europe requires rights-based
responses to the challenges of migration, including by
prioritizing respect for the human rights of migrants,
16-05404

29/02/2016

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

refugees and asylum seekers, and by developing the
capacity of Governments to integrate new arrivals and
counter anti-migrant sentiment, xenophobia and hate
crimes. The OSCE continues to play a vital role in that
regard, and the OSCE’s role in support of the global
effort to address weapons proliferation, including
through implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), is
critical. We strongly support the commitment of the
OSCE to strengthen member States’ commitments to
implementing the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000)
in order to increase the role of women in peacemaking
and peacebuilding and to end violence against women
in conflict.
The fundamental commitments of the OSCE have
provided clarity, stability and continuity to participating
States for more than 35 years in our common effort to
promote comprehensive security throughout the EuroAtlantic and Eurasian regions. We must all continue
to implement our mutual commitments. We value the
deepening cooperation and coordination between the
United Nations and the OSCE to that end.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The delegation of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela appreciates the briefing and the presence
of the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Mr. FrankWalter Steinmeier, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Federal Republic of Germany. We also wish to extend
our sincere congratulations to Germany on assuming
the chairmanship of the organization.
Venezuela supports the work of regional
organizations in promoting negotiated conflict
resolution under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations as an element of support for the principle
of the peaceful settlement of disputes and where direct
dialogue between the parties is a key element. In that
context, our country supports the work being done
by the OSCE in line with the Helsinki agreements,
which provide it with important tools to respond to
international challenges and to promote peace and
stability in the region.
The OSCE has played an important role in
strengthening relations among its member countries
through dialogue, and, despite their differences,
important consensuses have been successfully achieved
in different situations that required it. The role of the

S/PV.7635

chairmanship of the OSCE has become increasingly
relevant to promoting dialogue and harmony among
its members.
In the context of certain specific issues related
to Ukraine, we wish to stress the need for the full
implementation of resolution 2202 (2015), in support of
the decision reached by the heads of State of Ukraine,
Russia, France and Germany on 12 February 2015 in
Minsk. We must continue efforts to find a political and
diplomatic solution to the humanitarian crisis under
which the parties are committed to working to achieve
a firm and lasting peace. That is why a definitive
cessation of hostilities must not be delayed, and we
hope that this will come to pass.
As the chairmanship has already indicated, the
complex situation in the Middle East has an impact on
security and stability in the European region. Thus the
destabilization of Libya, Syria and Iraq and the rapidly
expanding terrorist phenomenon is an element that,
along with other pending issues such as the settlement
of the question of Palestine, makes it necessary to call
on the European community to take action to prevent
such conflicts and address the emergence of such
phenomena. The destabilization of the Middle East and
the Mediterranean has led to a difficult humanitarian
situation and a desperate outflow of refugees towards
the European region. In this respect, the OSCE can play
a key role in supporting the countries most affected,
based on a vision of identifying and addressing the root
causes of the conflicts that lead to the displacement
of peoples.
The promotion of security and stability and respect
for human rights through the full implementation of
international norms in this area are vital to fighting
the discrimination, racism, intolerance and xenophobia
that have been expressed in the form of attacks against
the humanitarian assistance required for the wave of
refugees, who come from both from the Middle East
and North Africa.
We must continue to work towards the prevention
of conflicts as a complement to the work of the
OSCE, through a multidimensional approach aimed
at addressing current challenges in this complex and
multifaceted situation.
Finally, communication and coordination between
the United Nations and the OSCE must be strengthened
and intensified so as to promote international peace
and security.

16-0540419/22

S/PV.7635

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

We wish the greatest success to Minister Steinmeier
in his chairmanship of the OSCE so that he can carry
out balanced and inclusive work, taking into account
the views of all members of the OSCE, so as to achieve
the objectives set within the framework of the priorities
of this regional organization and thereby promote
international peace and security.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I should like to make a few brief comments.
First, I was surprised to note that, in the context of
the principal issues, I agree with the statement made by
the representative of the United States. First, he quite
rightly noted that one of the most important principles
of the OSCE is the equality of all members before
international law. We fully agree with that and deem it
unacceptable that there have been statements made on
the right of certain States to determine the fate of the
rest of the world.
Another issue that was rightly noted by the United
States representative and with which we agree is the
danger posed by a return to the principle of spheres of
influence. We are critical of the expansion of NATO
into the east and of how the European Union continues
to formulate its policy of Eastern partnership. Eastern
European States are given the choice to be either with
the West or with the East.
As the Council will recall, the crisis in Ukraine
broke out as a result of the fact that Brussels began
to categorically demand that president Yanukovych
immediately sign the agreement on association with the
European Union. Therefore a return to the policy of the
spheres of influence is extremely undermining in terms
of consequences for European security.
Yet another element on which I fully agree with
the representative of the United States is the continuing
dangerous situation in terms of security between
the Kyiv armed forces and rebel battalions that are
continuing to operate in eastern Ukraine and Donetsk
and Luhansk. What the representative of the United
States did not say, however, and what needs to be said
is that to a large extent this exacerbation is due to the
fact that the Ukrainian armed forces took over a neutral
space and began to defend a security zone there with
20/22

29/02/2016

heavy weaponry. This runs totally counter to the logic
and the letter of the Minsk agreements, which speak of
the need for the withdrawal of forces. The Ukrainian
forces are coming dangerously close to the armed
groups, which has led to exchanges of fire and attacks.
In this regard, I cannot but express my
disappointment at the statement made by my Ukrainian
colleague, who repeated several propagandistic slogans
with respect to Russia. I am wondering, when is Kyiv
going to implement the clearly defined elements of the
package? Why was a law not adopted last year on the
special status of Donbas? When will it be adopted?
When will the amnesty law be adopted? When will
there finally be an agreement with the Kyiv authorities
and the Luhansk and Donetsk leadership?
Upon the request of Kyiv and the leadership of Russia
in the Normandy format, we convinced representatives
of Donetsk and Luhansk to postpone the local elections
that were supposed to take place at the end of last year,
but prospects for agreement on how the elections will
be held look rather dim. Indeed, there are difficulties in
the context of the Contact Group, so it seems that Kyiv
once again is really drawing out the process.
In this regard, I should like once again to reiterate
the request that our colleagues in the Normandy format
have heard. We need to be very demanding and act as
a matter of principle. When agreements are reached
at a high level, Kyiv must be required to implement
them. I think that when that happens, other issues —
which, as we heard, Mr. Steinmeier stressed during
his recent meeting with Minister Klimkin— the fight
against corruption and economic reforms will move
forward, because in a conflict situation it is probably
too optimistic to expect some sort of progress on such
fronts.
So Kyiv first and foremost should want to see the
implementation of the package of measures, just as
Russia does. It is time to put an end to the crisis, which
would not have begun in the first place had it not been
for this undermining policy of spheres of influence,
which the United States criticized today.
Finally, quite frankly I did not want to digress
from the issue of Ukraine, but the representative of
the United States spoke about Georgia and criticized
Russia and what is required of us. I should like to recall
that the irreversible political changes that took place
in the Caucasus in 2008 happened as a result of the
aggression that Georgian politicians carried out against
16-05404

29/02/2016

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

southern Ossetia. The United States supported them;
at that time there were more than 100 United States
military advisers in Georgia, so it would be naïve to
think that they turned a blind eye to what was happening
or missed it. So let us not engage in propaganda but
concentrate on the ongoing work in the Caucasus and
in Ukraine so as to normalize the situation after those
crises, which were due to various factors, among which
the United States played a rather significant role.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the United States has asked for the
floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I am
pleased that the representative of the Russian Federation
can agree with so much of what I had to say. It is too
bad, however, that we cannot agree to some basic facts
in this Chamber. The facts remain that Russia backed
the separatists, Russia armed the separatists and Russia
led a military campaign that led to the purported
annexation of Crimea, in violation of the Charter of
the United Nations. Those are the facts and, sadly for
the people victimized by this crisis and these conflicts,
these facts remain unchanged, regardless of whatever
distractions are offered in the Chamber today.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of Ukraine has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I will not make a long
statement again, because I said what I said.
It is probably very easy for my Russian colleague
to pick a few parts of my statement and react to them.
Consequently, my question is: Why does he not react to
everything I said? Why does he not react to the figures,
to my call for the release of the political prisoners who
are being held in Russia? It is a fact, which has been
proven by many, that Russia has fulfilled none of its
obligations under the Minsk agreements. Let us talk
about everything in the Minsk agreements, not only
about the constitutional amendments and the elections.
They are not the topic of this meeting, after all, so I will
not go into detail.
Finally, during two years of aggression, a
40,000-strong army has been built up in the Donbas.
That army is financed, equipped and maintained by
Russia and commanded by Russian officers. It has been
supplied with sophisticated modern Russian weaponry.
I have a very long list of weapons that are not and

S/PV.7635

were never produced in Ukraine. Those weapons did
not just fall from the sky. And the list goes on and on.
Therefore, let us be more precise when we react to facts
or allegations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the Russian Federation has asked for
the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I am very ready to go into detail. I do not
think that we need to take Mr. Steinmeier’s time, as he
is already aware of this whole situation.
From the very beginning, we have said that the
crisis in Ukraine had to be resolved politically. At the
Geneva talks on 17 April 2014, which involved the
participation of the Secretary of State of the United
States, the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy of the European Union, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Russia, we agreed on a declaration
in which we stated that there was a need for inclusive
political dialogue. Indeed, the Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe also spoke about that in the road map. What
was Ukraine’s response? President Poroshenko put
forth a peace initiative that provided a week for the
capitulation of the citizens of Donbas. We immediately
responded that there could be no military settlement;
there must be a political one. The Ukrainians did not
want a political settlement; they wanted a military one,
so they get what they get.
Life is real and it is what is. My Ukrainian colleague
understands that well. If he wants to go into the whole
package of measures for the implementation of the
Minsk agreements, we can do that, but we have already
said these things many times and when everything
that is supposed to happen has already been clearly
established. Border control is supposed to happen last.
It is all very clear in the package. A special status must
be established and other things must be done, which
Kyiv simply does not want to do.
Unfortunately, some States that have a strong
influence on Kyiv — not in the Normandy format, but
delegations around the table today — say “What do you
want? Ukraine just cannot do it. We know it is written
there, but Ukraine cannot do it.” So, the representative
of Ukraine cannot raise that question. If he is really
talking about a political settlement, there is a need to
demand and ensure that Ukraine adopt the laws that

16-0540421/22

S/PV.7635

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

were supposed to be adopted under the package. Russia
cannot do it for Ukraine.
Rhetorically, the representative of Ukraine can
say whatever he wants, but unfortunately the situation
in Ukraine will only deteriorate in that context and
nobody will win.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. Steinmeier to respond to the comments made.
Mr. Steinmeier: I do not want to repeat myself
and my statement from the beginning. I will avoid
responding to representatives’ comments. I only want
to thank you, Mr. President, for your kind invitation
and the members for all their comments. We are really
grateful for members’ support regarding our priorities

22/22

29/02/2016

for the chairmanship of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in 2016 and for their
readiness for cooperation, which they have offered in
this Chamber.
Members must ensure that we remain engaged in
using the tools of the OSCE in order to improve the
security situation on the European continent, especially
as we progress on the way to the full implementation of
the Minsk agreements. As our friend the Ambassador
of France announced, we will be meeting in Paris on
Thursday. I hope that we will achieve some progress,
especially on the security situation and on our
discussion on the election.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

16-05404
