S/PV.9077

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9077th meeting

Monday, 27 June 2022, 10.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Shaheen
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-40234 (E)
*2240234*

S/PV.9077

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

crises and maintain calm, but also redoubled efforts
to strengthen the Palestinian Authority and support a
broader strategy that can ensure that collective efforts
by the parties and the international community are
geared towards establishing a two-State reality.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: The Secretary-General’s report
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), which
Council members have already received, covers the
period between 19 March and 16 June. I will devote
my briefing today to developments since the end of the
reporting period and highlight some key observations
from the report.
Before turning to the most recent developments,
I would like to express my alarm over the level of
violence that we have witnessed in the occupied West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, and in Israel over the
past months.
In recent months, violence has continued at a
high level, leading to scores of Palestinian and Israeli
casualties. Since mid-March, 49 Palestinians have
been killed in demonstrations, clashes, Israeli security
operations, including in Area A, attacks and alleged
attacks against Israelis and in settler-related violence.
The reporting period was also marked by the most
serious terrorist attacks inside Israel in years, in which
11 Israelis and three foreign nationals were killed.
The firing of a rocket from Gaza towards Israel — the
first since April — is also a concerning reminder of the
fragility of the situation in the Gaza Strip. The mounting
violence has been further fuelled and exacerbated by
provocative steps and inflammatory rhetoric.
It is crucial that all parties take immediate
steps to lower tensions and reverse negative trends
that undermine the prospects for a peaceful twoState resolution of the conflict, with a contiguous,
independent, viable and sovereign Palestinian State.
That will require not only specific actions to defuse
2/17

27/06/2022

In the period since 16 June, violent incidents have
unfortunately continued throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory.
On 17 June, Israeli security forces shot and killed
three Palestinians and injured six others in the context
of an Israeli military operation and subsequent armed
clashes between Israeli security forces and Palestinians
in Jenin. In a statement, Israeli security forces said
soldiers had returned fire towards a vehicle after armed
men inside it had shot at them. The men were later
claimed as members of Palestinian militant groups.
On 19 June, Israeli security forces shot and killed
a Palestinian man near the separation barrier in the
West Bank city of Qalqilya. A spokesperson of the
Israeli security forces said that the soldiers had shot at
“a suspect who vandalized” the barrier. The man was
reportedly trying to reach a worksite in Israel.
On 21 June, an Israeli settler killed a Palestinian
man, stabbing him during a scuffle that broke out
when Israeli settlers set up tents on Palestinian-owned
property near the village of Iskaka, in Salfit. Israeli
police arrested a suspect.
On 24 June, the Israeli security forces shot a
16-year-old Palestinian near Silwad village, near
Ramallah, who later succumbed to his wounds. An
Israel Defense Forces spokesperson said that he was
shot during an arrest operation among a group of young
people throwing stones at vehicles.
On 25 June, Israeli settlers from Adei Ad outpost
assaulted and injured two Palestinian farmers, one
critically, and set fire to three Palestinian vehicles near
Al-Mughayyir village, northeast of Ramallah.
Turning to Gaza, on 18 June a rocket was fired by
Palestinian militants in the Strip towards the Israeli
city of Ashkelon. The rocket was intercepted by the
Iron Dome system, causing no injuries or damage. In
retaliation, the Israel Defense Forces struck Hamas
targets in the Strip, including several observation posts
near the Gaza perimeter, with no injuries reported.
22-40234

27/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I will now turn to several observations concerning
the implementation of the provisions of resolution 2334
(2016) during the reporting period.
Israeli settlement expansion in the occupied West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, remains deeply
troubling. Settlements constitute a flagrant violation
of United Nations resolutions and international law.
They undermine the prospect of achieving a two-State
solution by systematically eroding the possibility of
establishing a contiguous, independent, viable and
sovereign Palestinian State.
I call on the Government of Israel to cease the
advancement of all settlement activity immediately.
The continued demolitions and seizures of
Palestinian-owned structures, including internationally
funded humanitarian projects, is also disturbing. In
particular, I am deeply concerned by the potential
implications of the Israeli High Court’s ruling on
Masafer Yatta and the humanitarian toll on the
communities in question if eviction orders are enforced.
I call upon the Government of Israel to end
the demolition and seizure of Palestinian-owned
property, prevent the possible displacement and
eviction of Palestinians, in line with its obligations
under international humanitarian and international
human rights law, and approve plans that would enable
Palestinians in Area C and occupied East Jerusalem to
build legally and address their development needs.
I remain gravely concerned by the continuing
violence against civilians, which exacerbates mistrust
and undermines a peaceful resolution to the conflict.
The violence must stop, and all perpetrators must be
held accountable.
I condemn the terrorist attacks carried out by
Palestinians and Arab Israelis against civilians in Israel
in recent months. Those attacks, the deadliest in years,
can never be justified and must be clearly condemned
by all.
I also condemn the killings of Palestinians,
including children, by the Israeli security forces, related
in particular to incidents where they did not appear to
present an imminent threat to life. I note that to date
in 2022 15 Palestinian children have been killed in the
West Bank as compared with nine children killed there
during the same period last year. Children must not be
the targets of violence or put in harm’s way. I reiterate
that the security forces must exercise maximum

S/PV.9077

restraint and intentionally use lethal force only when it
is strictly unavoidable in order to protect life.
I am appalled by the killing of journalist Shireen
Abu Akleh and disturbed by the behaviour of some
members of the Israeli security services in the context
of her funeral. I reiterate the Secretary-General’s call
for an independent and transparent investigation into
her killing and the need to ensure that those responsible
are held accountable. Journalists must never be the
targets of violence.
I reiterate that the indiscriminate launching
of rockets towards Israeli population centres is
prohibited by international humanitarian law and must
stop immediately.
I also remain concerned by the multiple instances
in which officials have used dangerous and hateful
rhetoric that has raised tensions and sparked violence
during the reporting period.
The fragility of the political and security situation,
particularly in the occupied West Bank, is highly
concerning. The persistence of conflict drivers and
the absence of political will to change course have
empowered extremists and are eroding the perception
among Palestinians and Israelis alike that a resolution
of the conflict is achievable.
In Gaza, the situation remains fragile, and the risk
of escalation persists. Efforts by the United Nations and
international partners to improve Palestinian lives and
measures by Israel to ease restrictions and facilitate
more economic activity, including increasing access to
the Israeli labour market for workers from Gaza, have
enabled the fragile ceasefire to continue.
Keeping the calm, however, is neither sufficient
nor sustainable. More needs to be done to alleviate
the humanitarian situation and enable the economy
to grow, with the eventual goal of a full lifting of the
Israeli closures, in line with resolution 1860 (2009).
Only sustainable political solutions will relieve the
pressures on the long-suffering population of Gaza.
The
Palestinian
Authority’s
financial
crisis — compounded by the constraints of the
occupation, the absence of serious Palestinian reforms
and unclear prospects for donor support — requires
urgent attention. In that regard, I welcome the renewed
financial support from the European Union, which will
give critical temporary relief to the Palestinian Authority.

22-402343/17

S/PV.9077

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

As commodity prices spike, humanitarian needs
and costs are rising across the occupied Palestinian
territories. The cost of some basic food items such as
wheat flour has increased by some 20 per cent in the
West Bank and more than 40 per cent in Gaza. The cost
of shipping alone is more than 25 per cent higher than
last year. To sustain current operations in the occupied
Palestinian territories until the end of the year and offset
increasing costs, the World Food Programme requires
an additional $36 million. Facing similar constraints
across the occupied Palestinian territories and the
region, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
shortfall remains at $100 million.
I thank all Member States that have already funded
the Agency this year and those that confirmed additional
funds at the pledging conference on UNRWA in New
York last week. I encourage donors to provide the
financial resources necessary to meet those growing
costs. Ensuring that basic services continue and
humanitarian needs are met is not only a humanitarian
imperative but also vital to stability going forward.
As events over recent months have demonstrated
yet again, managing the conflict in perpetuity is not
a viable option. There is no substitute for a legitimate
political process that will resolve the core issues driving
the conflict.
I urge Israelis, Palestinians, the States of the region
and the broader international community to take steps
that will enable the parties to retake the path towards
meaningful negotiated solutions and, ultimately, peace.
The United Nations remains actively engaged in
advancing those efforts with all relevant parties and is
committed to supporting the efforts of Palestinians and
Israelis to resolve the conflict and end the occupation
through the achievement of a two-State solution, in
line with the relevant United Nations resolutions,
international law and bilateral agreements.
The President: I thank Mr. Wennesland for
his briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
4/17

27/06/2022

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing. The
United States continues to appreciate his tireless efforts
to work closely with the parties to reduce tensions
through dialogue.
The current tension on the ground, as he
mentioned, is palpable and dangerous. The United
States has repeatedly registered its outrage over the
string of terrorist attacks against Israelis this year,
and we condemn the rocket attacks launched from
the Gaza Strip again this month, which, as Council
members know, broke a two-month pause in rocket fire
from Gaza.
Many Israelis, especially those who reside close to
the border with Gaza, live in perpetual fear that they
or their families could come under attack at any time.
That must stop. We also deplore the escalation of settler
violence against Palestinians, including the death of Ali
Hassan Harb, a Palestinian in the West Bank who was
killed on his family’s agricultural land.
We take note of the May 2022 report of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs that
found over a thousand Palestinians were injured by live
ammunition fired by Israeli forces in 2021, seven times
the number of those injured by live ammunition the
prior year.
We are also deeply concerned about the potential
evictions at Masafer Yatta, which were upheld by
Israel’s Supreme Court. We urge that these evictions
do not take place. We once again call on all parties to
refrain from unilateral actions that increase tensions and
undercut efforts to make progress on a negotiated twoState solution, such as settlement activity, demolitions,
incitement to violence and evictions.
President Biden will travel to the region in July
to meet with Israeli and Palestinian leaders to urge
calm and explore ways to promote equal measures of
security, freedom and opportunity for both Israelis and
Palestinians. The current United States Administration
continues to affirm its strong support for a two-State
solution, which remains the best way to ensure Israel’s
future as a democratic and Jewish State alongside a
sovereign viable Palestinian State.
We, like others on the Security Council, are
concerned with the killing of Palestinian American
22-40234

27/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

journalist Shireen Abu Akleh. We continue to stress
the importance of accountability for Abu Akleh’s tragic
death. The United States will not relent in our calls for
transparent accountability for those responsible for this
tragedy until justice is done.
Separately, we are troubled by the ongoing practice
of using human remains as a bargaining chip. Last
month Ambassador Thomas-Greenfield met again with
Leah Goldin, a mother whose son’s remains are being
held by Hamas. We continue to be disheartened by
the cruelty of denying a family the ability to properly
mourn their loved one. Many Palestinian families also
know this suffering, as there are Palestinian remains
that have similarly not been returned to their families.
Human remains must be returned to their families
immediately and unconditionally.
In the meantime, we should not lose sight of the
hardship facing Palestinian refugees. Some 1.8 million
Palestinians were suffering from food insecurity in
March of this year. More than 80 per cent of Palestinian
refugees in Lebanon, Syria and Gaza are living in
poverty and are struggling to afford the food needed to
feed their families.
Special Coordinator Wennesland has correctly
taken note of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), which plays a critical stabilizing role
for the region, but lamentably UNRWA’s capacity to
deliver food, education and health care to Palestinian
refugees is hindered by its long-standing financial
instability. The United States is the Agency’s largest
donor, contributing $338 million in 2021, and we have
already announced $79 million for 2022. We intend
to provide additional support this year, and we also
welcome the contributions announced at the 23 June
UNRWA pledging conference. In order to support the
Palestinian people, we urge all donors to provide robust,
reliable funding and to join us in supporting reforms
to increase the Agency’s oversight, accountability
and transparency.
Finally, the United States once again affirms its
commitment to a two-State solution and notes the
importance of an inclusive process, one that involves
the participation of women, youth and civil society.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I also thank
Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing and
for the continued efforts of his team.

S/PV.9077

Last week the United Kingdom’s Minister for Asia
and the Middle East, Amanda Milling, visited Israel and
the occupied Palestinian territories. The Minister met
many inspirational Israelis and Palestinians doing vital
work to improve the situation, including Palestinian
business leaders who, despite the challenges, are
driving success in the Palestinian economy. The
Minister also met Israelis in Lod who were working
to bridge gaps and foster tolerance and coexistence in
their communities.
However, the visit took place against the backdrop
of ongoing violence and instability across the occupied
Palestinian territories. As the Secretary General’s
report on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016) highlights, we are seeing continued negative
trends and unnecessary loss of life. The Minister saw
for herself last week the pain and suffering evictions
and demolitions are causing Palestinians in Masafer
Yatta and Sheikh Jarrah. Protecting human rights and
ensuring accountability for illegal actions and abuses
are essential.
Turning to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), the Minister observed first-hand the critical
role the Agency plays in helping to maintain stability
through its delivery of core services and humanitarian
and protection assistance to Palestinian refugees. The
United Kingdom was proud to announce this week its
new multi-year funding agreement with UNRWA and
to provide £15 million this year. We are alive to the
challenges facing the Agency and commit to ensuring
that it is on a more viable financial footing. We call on
all donors, especially those from the region, to provide
predictable multi-year funding so the Agency can
continue its vital work.
We must not ignore the toll this prolonged conflict
has taken on the people of Gaza. We continue to call on
the Israeli authorities to end restrictions on movement,
access and trade. Fifteen years of these restrictions
have caused significant damage to the living standards
of ordinary Palestinians in Gaza. Supporting prosperity
for Gazans is firmly in Israel’s long-term interests. We
encourage a time-bound commitment for a durable
solution for Gaza.
The ongoing tensions underline that a just and
lasting resolution that ends the occupation and delivers
peace for both Israelis and Palestinians is long overdue.
We urge the parties, with the support of the international

22-402345/17

S/PV.9077

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

community, to do all they can to rebuild, trust and take
the path back to dialogue.
Ms. Bongo (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his
inspiring briefing.
The peace in the Middle East that we all seek
essentially depends on the establishment of peace
between Israel and Palestine. Such a prospect requires
the firm commitment of all parties and the international
community. My country believes in the two-State
solution. The update on the situation on the ground
that we have just heard from the Special Coordinator
reveals that the road to this goal is still strewn with
many stumbling blocks and challenges, particularly of
a political, humanitarian and security nature.
The pursuit of the policy of expanding illegal
settlements, demolishing homes and evicting families,
which is being expanded in East Jerusalem and the
occupied territories in defiance of resolution 2334
(2016), constitutes a major obstacle to the peace process
between Israel and Palestine. The 12 May decision by
the Israeli authorities to approve plans to move forward
on more than 4,000 units in various locations in the
West Bank exacerbates the territorial fragmentation of
the West Bank. In the same vein, the 1 June demolition
of nine Palestinian structures in the area is a source of
tension. The precariousness of many Palestinians who
risk being dispossessed of their land as a result of the
Nahal Og reserve project is another cause for concern.
We call on the Israeli authorities to desist from any
expansionist plans, demolition or dispossession of
Palestinian property and to refrain from any actions
that would undermine international efforts for a
peaceful resolution of the conflict. Furthermore, for
decades, Palestine has been in the grip of a political
crisis with devastating consequences for the civilian
population. We note the decision of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee meeting in Brussels on 10 May to focus on
key economic issues including Palestinian Authority
fiscal reforms, revenue enhancement, trade, water
and energy.
Escalating violence during the reporting period has
made the situation on the ground even more volatile.
Police violence that accompanies multiple mass arrests
with live ammunition of Palestinian civilians, including
women, youth and children, is unacceptable. Similarly,
acts of terrorism and the firing of rockets from the Gaza
Strip into Israel must stop.
6/17

27/06/2022

We call on political leaders on both sides to prevent,
combat and suppress hate speech and the rhetoric of
intolerance, which sow belligerence and undermine
peace efforts. Opinion leaders have a crucial role
to play in easing communal tensions. They must be
uncompromising against all expressions of hatred and
glorification of terrorism.
In that respect, we welcome the condemnation by
the President of the Palestinian Authority of terrorist
acts targeting Israeli civilians and the condemnation
by members of the Israeli Government of racist and
stigmatizing speeches against Palestinians. We also
welcome the commitment of Israeli and Palestinian
civil societies to peacebuilding.
We take note of the results of the United Nations
preliminary investigation into the circumstances of the
tragic death of journalist Shireen Abu Akleh, killed
in the line of duty, and call on both parties to work
together to ensure that justice be done.
On the painful issue of the return of the human
remains to families, we call on the parties to find an
agreement that can contribute to creating a climate of
confidence conducive to peacebuilding.
The political and security crises have an impact on
the humanitarian situation in the Palestinian territories
in the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
The strong commitment of the international
community is essential in order to ensure predictable
funding for humanitarian assistance. We welcome the
holding on 23 June of the pledging conference on the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.
In addition, we call for the full lifting of the
blockade of Gaza, in accordance with resolution 1860
(2009), so that humanitarian aid can be distributed
without hindrance.
We urge the parties to relaunch negotiations to
resolve the Israeli-Palestinian crisis and achieve a
real and lasting peace. We also invite regional actors
and the Middle East Quartet to intensify their efforts
to bring the Israeli and Palestinian leaders back to
dialogue in good faith. Finally, we reiterate our support
for Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his tireless
efforts to find a peaceful solution to this conflict in a
complex environment.
22-40234

27/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.9077

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).

France also urges a transparent investigation into
the circumstances of the death of journalist Shireen
Abu Akleh.

France is concerned about the trends on the ground
that threaten the viability of the two-State solution. We
continue to consistently defend the two-State solution,
both with Jerusalem as their capital, as defined by the
agreed parameters, the resolutions of the Council and
international law. In the absence of viable alternatives
accepted by the parties, this is the only just and
lasting solution that meets the legitimate aspirations
of both peoples and ensures Israel’s long-term security
interests and the stability of the region. France will
never compromise with Israel’s security.

My country will continue to defend the civic and
humanitarian space, in particular through its continued
support for the six non-governmental organizations
recently condemned by the Israeli authorities.

France condemns the advancement of settlement
plans that threaten the viability of a future Palestinian
State and calls on Israel to halt ongoing procedures
to expand or create new settlements, in particular the
plans to expand Area E-1.
We are concerned about the first demolitions
in Masafer Yatta, in violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, and call on Israel to definitively suspend
the evictions of Palestinian families, as well as
demolitions. Those measures fuel despair and play into
the hands of extremes on all sides. This deleterious
context makes it urgent to relaunch a political process.
France welcomes the decisions taken by the Bennett
Government to increase the number of work permits
for Palestinians, especially from Gaza. However, more
must be done to improve the lives of Palestinians.
Those economic opportunities will not address the
issue of respect for international humanitarian law
and human rights or prevent an escalation similar to
that of May 2021 while the political root causes of the
conflict remain. That is why France is determined
to act to recreate a political horizon. France remains
mobilized to that end alongside its partners, notably
Jordan and Egypt.
Finally, France will continue to support
humanitarian actors and civil society. That is why it has
increased its contributions to the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East to a historic level this year, reaching $35 million.
France reiterates its concern about the deteriorating
human rights situation in the territories controlled by
the Palestinian Authority. We reaffirm that justice must
be done regarding the assassination of Nizar Banat.

At the same time, we echo the calls of the United
Nations for the rapid organization of Palestinian
legislative and presidential elections, which have been
postponed for more than a year.
France will not recognize any changes to the
1967 lines other than those agreed by the parties. We
remind Member States of their obligations in terms of
differentiation and take note of the decision of certain
Member States to bring themselves into line with
European legislation on labelling.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): Let me
start by thanking Special Coordinator Wennesland for
his briefing, which, in conjunction with the most recent
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016), is a cause for great concern
about the deteriorating situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory. Under the Israeli occupation,
Palestine’s viability has been squeezed to the limit.
We note with great concern that 18 per cent of
Sector C in the West Bank has been designated by
Israel as a zone for military exercises, and 50 per cent
has been designated for other purposes — effectively
closing off the area for Palestinian construction,
economic and development activities.
In defiance of opposition from the international
community, Israel has been entrenched in its plan to
advance more than 4,000 housing units in various areas,
including Kiryat Arba and Shilo, thereby threatening
the eviction of 1,200 Palestinians from Masafer Yatta.
What is more concerning is that the continued
expansion of settlements has encroached upon
Palestinian land and natural resources, violating
Palestine’s right to self-determination and making a
geographically contiguous, independent and sovereign
State of Palestine ever-more elusive. Every brutal inch
of settlement expansion is making the prospect of a
two-State solution that much harder to achieve. We
urge Israel to stop flouting resolution 2334 (2016),
cease all settlement activities and refrain from further
undermining the foundation for the two-State solution.

22-402347/17

S/PV.9077

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Over the most recent period, the security situation
in the occupied territories remained volatile. We
strongly condemn the continued violence by the Israeli
security forces and the settlers, which has resulted in
heavy Palestinian casualties, including children. Six
weeks ago, Al Jazeera journalist Shireen Abu Akleh
was killed while reporting on Israeli security forces
operations in the West Bank city of Jenin. The Council
expressed its condemnation of that incident in a press
statement (SC/14891). We take note that a few days ago,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights said that it was the Israeli security
forces that opened fire, killing Abu Akleh and injuring
her colleague. We urge Israel to launch a criminal
investigation into this incident as soon as possible and
to release its findings in order to ensure accountability
and provide justice to the victims, as well as to explain
itself before the international community, which it
must do.
The question of Palestine is a litmus test of
international justice and fairness. A number of Member
States attended the pledging conference organized by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) last week. While
the fact that UNRWA has been in operation for more
than 70 years is an indication of the international
community’s solidarity with the Palestinian refugees,
unfortunately it also means that for more than 70 years
the question of Palestine has remained unresolved and
international justice has been denied.
The Commissioner-General of UNRWA, Mr. Philippe
Lazzarini, recalled at the pledging conference that in
Gaza, a 12-year-old child has lived through four armed
conflicts and lived all her or his life under blockade.
How can we make a generation that has grown up in a
context of conflict, violence and the blockade believe
in peace and the future? It is a matter that calls for the
serious attention and consideration by the international
community, including the Security Council.
It has been shown repeatedly that the question
of Palestine is the crux of peace in the Middle East.
Piecemeal crisis management is not a substitute for a
comprehensive and just settlement. Limited economic
and humanitarian measures cannot erase political and
security debt, while individual national policies cannot
replace a long-established international consensus and
multilateral process, including the resolutions adopted
one after another by the Security Council and the
General Assembly.
8/17

27/06/2022

What is needed for the time being is urgent and
decisive action to prevent the complete derailment of
progress on the Palestinian and Israeli situation. We
call upon the international community, especially those
with significant influence on the parties concerned,
to make genuine efforts to advance the peace process
in the Middle East. We must promote the two-State
solution with the utmost urgency, rather than waiting
for ripe conditions for dialogue.
We must adhere to the concept of the indivisibility
of security, giving equal importance to the security
concerns of both parties, rather than tacitly allowing
one side’s security to be founded on the insecurity
of the other. We must also persevere in maintaining
a responsible approach, rather than allowing policy
uncertainty and reversals to further complicate the
peace process. Ultimately, we must abandon the
double standards and uphold an objective and impartial
position rather than engage in the long-term practice of
creating roadblocks for the Council’s handling of the
Israeli-Palestinian question.
From 23 to 24 June, the leaders of Brazil, Russia,
India, China and South Africa (BRICS) held the
fourteenth BRICS Summit and issued the Beijing
declaration, in which the leaders of those five countries
reiterated their support for peace and prosperity in
the Middle East and North Africa and called on the
international community to support peace efforts in the
Middle East.
As a responsible member of the international
community, China will always support peace and
justice, human conscientiousness and fairness, and the
right side of history. We will firmly support the just
cause of the Palestinian people to restore their legitimate
national rights and will continue to make unremitting
efforts to achieve a comprehensive, just and sustainable
peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Tor Wennesland, for his
report on Israel’s settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories.
We are concerned about the continuation, and
even the escalation, of unilateral measures leading to
irreversible steps in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
In the past year, Israel approved the construction of
more than 12,000 housing units and more than 1,000
Palestinian homes were demolished. The Israeli
22-40234

27/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

authorities’ plans to double by 2026 the number of
Israelis living in the West Bank and the occupied
Golan Heights directly contradict the provisions of the
1949 Geneva Convention. In that regard, we reiterate
Russia’s unwavering position that it does not recognize
Israeli sovereignty over the Golan Heights, which is an
integral part of Syria.
We regret to note that the level of violence in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem continue to increase
steadily, including through the harassment of Christians
and Muslims and the imposition of restrictions on their
access to the holy sites.
At the same time, arbitrary arrests of Palestinians
and the disproportionate use of force by the Israeli
armed forces continued during so-called operations
that often targeted women and children. The killing
of Al-Jazeera correspondent Shireen Abu Akleh on
11 May, while she was covering the Israeli army’s
operation in Jenin, is also revealing. We note the
conclusions of the representatives of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
following their analysis of that tragic incident, that the
responsibility for the killing of the journalist lies with
the Israeli army.
On 10 June, the Israeli Air Force once again launched
strikes against Syria, targeting Damascus International
Airport. The airfield sustained serious damage and the
runway was damaged, resulting in the suspension of all
flights, including humanitarian flights.
Israel seems to have been given carte blanche to
take unilateral unlawful actions in the region, with
the tacit consent of Washington, which has effectively
blocked any chance of reviving the peace process. In
return, our colleagues in the Council seek to impose
economic peace on the Palestinians without allowing
them to create their own independent State or satisfy
their legitimate aspirations.

S/PV.9077

In addition, a sustainable long-term solution will
not be possible without achieving inter-Palestinian
unity. In that regard, we support Egypt’s initiatives and
Algeria’s plans to host the next round of talks between
the representatives of Fatah and Hamas. Our proposal
to use the Moscow platform also remains on the table.
Under the current circumstances, it is essential
to continue to provide comprehensive humanitarian
assistance to Palestinians in need, both in the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip and in neighbouring Arab
countries. In that regard, we support the efforts of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, as the main international
entity for the provision of assistance to Palestinians in
the areas of education, health care, social services and
improving infrastructure and living conditions in the
refugee camps.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I thank Special
Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
Resolution 2334 (2016) reaffirmed the international
community’s commitment to the two-State solution,
called upon parties to prevent all acts of violence
against civilians and demanded that all settlement
activities cease. It also underscored the need to exert
collective efforts to launch credible negotiations.
We remain deeply concerned by developments in
the West Bank, Jerusalem and Gaza. Violent attacks
and the killing of civilians took many Palestinian
and Israeli lives during the reporting period. Acts of
destruction and provocation also continued. We have
consistently advocated against all acts of violence and
reiterate our call for the complete cessation of violence.

The fact that the international community is
essentially ignoring the systematic violations of
Palestinian rights is a clear reflection of Western
countries’ double standards regarding the provisions
of international humanitarian law and the protection
of human rights, which we are also experiencing with
respect to the situation in Ukraine.

We are also following the developments in Masafer
Yatta with concern. Tensions have risen over the
potential legal eviction of Palestinian families. Other
unilateral measures that unduly alter the status quo on
the ground and undercut the viability of the two-State
solution must be eschewed. It is extremely important
for the international community and the Council to
send a strong message against any step that could
prevent the possibility of durable peace between Israel
and Palestine.

We believe that the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
can be resolved only on the basis of the universally
recognized two-State formula.

We take note of the Israeli initiative to increase
the number of work permits to work in Israel for
Palestinians living in the Gaza Strip. More needs to

22-402349/17

S/PV.9077

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

be considered to alleviate the humanitarian situation.
Dialogue among the relevant stakeholders is needed.
The continued precarious financial situation of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) remains a matter
of concern, as the lack of funding to the Agency can
adversely affect the delivery of humanitarian services
to the Palestinian refugee community in Palestine
and elsewhere. At the meeting Ad Hoc Committee
of the General Assembly for the Announcement of
Voluntary Contributions to UNRWA held last week,
we reiterated our commitment to support the Agency
through our annual financial contributions. India has
already contributed $20 million over the past four
years and has also pledged $5 million for UNRWA’s
2022 programme budget. As a member of the UNRWA
Advisory Commission, we also actively participated at
its recent meeting in Lebanon.
India’s financial assistance to UNRWA and its
developmental partnership with Palestinian Authority
to support its nation-building efforts reflect India’s
firm and unwavering commitment to the peaceful
resolution of the Palestine issue. India has consistently
called for direct peace negotiations between the parties,
which, we believe, is the best path towards achieving
the goal of a two-State solution. Such negotiations must
be based on the internationally agreed framework,
taking into account the legitimate aspirations of the
Palestinian people for statehood and Israel’s legitimate
security concerns. The absence of direct talks on key
political issues has asymmetrical costs for Israelis and
Palestinians and does not augur well for long-term
peace in the region.
India has always supported a negotiated two-State
solution leading to the establishment of a sovereign,
independent and viable State of Palestine living within
secure and recognized borders side by side at peace with
Israel. India will continue to support all efforts towards
achieving a comprehensive and lasting two-State
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and stands
ready to contribute constructively to such efforts.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): At the outset, let me thank
Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his important
briefing to the Security Council this morning pursuant
to resolution 2334 (2016). I also thank him for
highlighting the measures being taken by the United
Nations and other stakeholders to restore calm between
the key parties and work towards a peaceful solution of
10/17

27/06/2022

the protracted conflict, which has negatively impacted
not only Israel and Palestine, but the entire Middle
East region.
The briefing of the Special Coordinator to
the Council is quite troubling. It reflects a further
departure from the Council’s expectation in 2016 that
its call for Israel to cease its settlement activities would
have been complied with in the facilitation of the peace
and security necessary to launch a credible negotiation
process on all final-status issues in the Middle East
Peace process.
My delegation is particularly concerned that the
period under review has seen the highest increase in
the number of settlement activities since October 2020
and deeply regrets the 12 May decision of the Israeli
authorities to approve plans to move forward and build
more than 4,000 housing units in various locations in the
West Bank. Equally of concern is the risk of the forced
eviction of approximately 1,200 Palestinians, including
more than 500 children, from a cluster of Palestinian
villages in the West Bank area of Masafer Yatta.
We therefore call for the utmost restraint in
settlement activities which, as all of us can observe, do
not enhance the security of Israel or the prospects for
peace and stability. In that regard, we recall the Israeli
authorities’ duty to take significant steps consistent with
the transition covered by prior agreements, especially
against expansion projects, evictions and demolitions,
which undermine the prospects of achieving a twoState solution.
We also express our concern about the recent spate
of killings of more than 60 Palestinians and call on the
Israeli authorities to thoroughly investigate all incidents
involving the alleged disproportionate use of force
against Palestinians, in accordance with its obligations
and responsibilities under international humanitarian
law. Accountability is required to repair the broken trust
necessary for direct negotiations between the parties.
The Middle East Peace process cannot be put
back on track on the rails of insecurity, instability and
mistrust. The recent spate of terrorism in Israel therefore
cannot under any circumstances be considered useful
to the Palestinian cause. We reiterate our unequivocal
condemnation of all such acts of terrorism and aver that
no justification can enable overlooking such acts. We
encourage the Palestinian leadership to demonstrate
zero-tolerance for such acts, as well as all parties to
condemn all forms of violence.
22-40234

27/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

As a Council, we have the responsibility to assist the
parties to adopt measures that would help de-escalate
the situation on the ground when they themselves are
unable to do so in a way that fosters peace and stability.
In that regard, we must live up to our historical
responsibility for the benefit of both the Palestinian and
the Israeli people, who deserve to live side by side in
peace side, as envisaged in the two-State solution.
In conclusion, Ghana calls on both parties to show
maximum restraint and refrain from unilateral actions
that could escalate tensions and undermine the peace
and mutual trust that are urgently needed, first, to
stabilize the situation and reverse negative trends on
the ground and, secondly, create the conditions of peace
and stability necessary for subsequent negotiations and
for reinvigorating credible negotiations for the twoState solution and all final-status issues related to the
Middle East peace process.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Allow me to thank
Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing.
Brazil remains concerned about the continuous
incidents of violence involving Israelis and Palestinians.
The mounting tension that was witnessed this past
month, with the string of attacks against Israeli citizens
and military raids in Palestinian territories, came to
a head with rocket fire targeting Israeli territory. We
deplore any terrorist attack and thoroughly condemn
the launching of rockets that put civilians in harm’s way.
Brazil urges the parties to refrain from any acts
that could further incite violence and tensions in the
region. That includes the use of dangerous and hateful
rhetoric, as well as unilateral actions that can jeopardize
reaching a negotiated two-State solution. De-escalating
the situation on the ground and rebuilding trust and
confidence are urgent measures needed to rekindle the
peace process.
Brazil is also concerned about the Palestinian
Authority’s financial crisis. A broad political process
cannot thrive in the absence of appropriate economic
conditions. In that regard, coordinated international
assistance to provide the Palestinian Authority with a
fiscal footing must be an integral part of the efforts for
peace and stability. It is equally important to address
the structural impediments imposed on the Palestinian
economy, which needs support to strengthen its
industrial and agricultural production.

S/PV.9077

Moreover, with regard to financial resources, we
lament the chronic challenges faced by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). In lacking the
means to mobilize the necessary funds, it falls short of
providing the protection and assistance that the United
Nations mandates. As the global scenario currently
demonstrates, the insufficiency of economic aid for the
region is less a matter of financial availability than it
is of political priority. Despite budgetary constraints
at the national level, Brazil has made efforts to
respond to UNRWA’s appeals for funding. Last week,
we were pleased to announce an additional financial
contribution. We support the renewal of UNRWA`s
mandate at the next session of the General Assembly.
On a more positive note, Brazil praises concrete
initiatives aiming to provide economic opportunities
for Palestinian workers in Israel. We welcome
the resumption of the policy of setting quotas for
Palestinians from Gaza and expect to see more
initiatives in that regard, given their longer-term
benefits for economic integration.
Concerning the electoral scenario in Palestine,
Brazil commends Palestine’s Central Election
Commission for successfully concluding the voting
processes for local councils. We continue to believe
that presidential and legislative elections would further
contribute to political stability in the region. Brazil
encourages intra-Palestinian reconciliation, which is a
crucial step to resume a genuine dialogue in the peace
process. The full and equal participation of women
should also be sought.
There is no alternative to a genuine commitment to
the two-State solution, as Mr. Wennesland reminded us
today. We expect a reconciled Palestinian Government
and the incoming Israeli leadership to renew their
efforts towards a legitimate political process and to
show openness and flexibility in that endeavour.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his remarks.
It is clear from the Secretary-General’s report
that resolution 2334 (2016) is not being implemented.
Settlement-building, demolitions and evictions have
continued since 2016. We are especially concerned
about plans to demolish several villages in the Masafer
Yatta area and, as we have heard from the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, Israel has already started military training in

22-4023411/17

S/PV.9077

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the area. The inhabitants are vulnerable and have lived
there for generations. If those plans are carried out,
the humanitarian consequences will be dire, and 1,200
residents — over 500 of whom are children — will lose
everything, including their homes, schools and access
to water.
Let me reiterate that all measures aimed at altering
the demographic composition of the occupied areas
are in violation of international humanitarian law. We
therefore urge Israel to refrain from carrying out this
plan. Furthermore, we repeat our call on the Israeli
authorities to halt all settlement expansions, evictions
and demolitions.
We underscore that all civilians, including
children, must be protected. Everyone has the right
to live in security. Let me also highlight the high
number of Palestinian civilians killed this year. Of the
48 Palestinians killed between January and May, 14
were children. That situation is untenable and cannot
continue. Security forces must act proportionally and
in line with international law.
There have also been several terror attacks, killing
10 Israeli and three foreign civilians. Let me reiterate
Norway’s condemnation of all forms of terrorism.
We also condemn rockets and attacks from Gaza
towards Israel. We recognize Israel’s need to defend
itself against such attacks, while underlining that any
measures taken must comply with international law.
I shall now turn to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). The Agency’s funding crisis — as well as
increased food prices globally — has the potential for
dramatic consequences, including for regional stability.
UNRWA plays a critical role in promoting the rights
and serving the essential needs of Palestinian refugees.
We urge donors to increase their contributions, and we
support increased cooperation with other organizations
within the limits of UNRWA’s mandate.
Norway also remains deeply concerned by the
Palestinian Authority’s ongoing financial crisis. We
are committed to working with the parties to move
the Palestinian Authority onto a firmer fiscal footing.
We encourage the parties and development partners to
implement all commitments made during the meeting
of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of International Assistance to Palestinians held in
Brussels in May. We also welcome the recent expansion
12/17

27/06/2022

of the approved quota for Palestinians from both Gaza
and the West Bank to enter Israel for work.
Let me conclude by reiterating Norway’s
commitment to the two-State solution, whereby Israelis
and Palestinians can live side by side, in peace and
prosperity. That is the only viable solution to secure the
rights and safety of both peoples. Norway will continue
to work towards that goal.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I wish to thank Special
Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing today.
In resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council
reiterated its demand that Israel immediately and
completely cease all settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and that
it fully respect all of its legal obligations in that regard.
The assessment in the Secretary-General’s report in
relation to the Security Council’s demand is clear and
stark: no such steps were taken during the reporting
period, as settlement activities continued. That is
simply unacceptable.
I reiterate the long-standing position of Ireland and
the European Union (EU) that settlements are illegal
under international law; that they constitute a major
obstacle to peace; and that they gravely undermine
the prospects of a two-State solution. Yet again, the
reports of Special Coordinator Wennesland and the
Secretary-General have highlighted the expansion of
illegal Israeli settlements, with the highest number of
settlement units advanced since October 2020.
In 2021, only 10 building permits were granted
for Palestinians, as compared to 2,526 housing starts
in settlements. Israel’s cessation of further settlementbuilding could preserve the possibility of an eventual
negotiated solution between the parties. Israel must
also cease evictions and demolitions, including of
donor-funded structures, in line with its obligations
under international humanitarian law.
I reiterate Ireland’s position on the decision last
month on the Masafer Yatta eviction case in the South
Hebron Hills in the occupied West Bank. That increases
the risk of the forcible transfer of some 1,150 Palestinians
and the demolition of their homes. The establishment
of a firing zone is not an imperative military reason
to transfer a population under occupation. We are
also concerned by reports of increased movement
restrictions for the communities and those providing
humanitarian assistance.
22-40234

27/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council
calls for immediate steps to prevent all acts of violence
against civilians, including acts of terror. Ireland
condemns all acts of violence. There has been a horrible
series of attacks against civilians in Israel. In addition,
the killings of Palestinians, including children, in Jenin
and elsewhere is becoming all too frequent. During the
reporting period, the Israeli security forces killed nine
children. Those responsible must be held accountable,
and the Council must do more to address the issue.
Ireland condemns recent attacks from the Gaza Strip. It
is imperative that all parties strive to maintain the calm.
More needs to be done to alleviate the humanitarian
situation, facilitate economic development and lift the
blockade, in line with resolution 1860 (2009). Ireland
is also gravely concerned by the situation in the
West Bank. Economic hardship is increasing for the
Palestinian people in the context of rising fuel and food
prices, while the Palestinian Authority’s fiscal position
remains very difficult. The increased encroachment of
settlements on land and natural resources, especially on
water, also undermines Palestinian economic potential.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East plays a vital role
and must get sufficient support. Ireland and its EU
partners will continue to play our part.
The Palestinian Authority has an important role to
play. Ireland therefore calls on the Palestinian Authority
to do more to intensify the process towards elections,
as Special Coordinator Wennesland has already said,
to strive towards Palestinian reconciliation and reduce
levels of tension and violence in whatever ways it can.
Ireland shares Tor Wennesland’s concerns at the
tensions in Jerusalem and the unacceptable challenges
to the status quo at the Temple Mount/Haram Al-Sharif.
The custodian role of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
is essential and must be fully respected.
In a context of flagrant violations of international
law and a lack of accountability, the role of civil society
becomes all the more important. Ireland’s support for
civil society is steadfast, and we reiterate our concern at
Israel’s designation of six Palestinian non-governmental
organizations as terrorist organizations.
The freedom of the media is also essential. We echo
the comments of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. It is deeply disturbing
that the Israeli authorities have not conducted a criminal
investigation into the killing of Shireen Abu Akleh.

S/PV.9077

I thank Tor Wennesland for his briefing to the
Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security. Ireland would welcome more regular
reporting by him to the Council on the engagement and
participation of women in peace and security in the
region, and we would like to have a systematic analysis
of the implications of the conflict, particularly the
occupation, for women and girls.
In conclusion, the Council has an obligation to
ensure the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
We are clearly failing in our duty to do that.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland
for his briefing. Given the views expressed and the
content of the Secretary-General’s most recent report,
we must regret the fact that no progress has been
made in implementing resolution 2334 (2016), since
the expansion of Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory continues. As mentioned, those
Israeli settlements are illegal under international law
and represent an obstacle to the two-State solution. We
echo the calls for a halt to activities such as eviction and
the destruction or demolition of Palestinian property, as
well as population transfers.
In that regard, we reiterate the call for the
Supreme Court to reverse the 4 May ruling on Masafer
Yatta, which threatens the forced displacement of
1,200 Palestinians.
Given the steadily increasing number of violent
incidents on both sides, it is impossible to claim that the
status quo equates to maintaining peace, and neither
is it an option to settle for managing the conflict. The
volatility on the ground makes it clear that the root
causes remain unaddressed.
However, such frustration cannot be used as a
justification for indiscriminate attacks. Mexico strongly
condemns the firing of missiles and incendiary devices
from Gaza into Israeli urban centres.
We also urge the Israeli security forces to avoid
the disproportionate use of force. The Security Council
should call on Palestinian and Israeli leaders alike to
refrain from provocations and incitement to violence,
as well as the use of inflammatory rhetoric.
The number of Palestinian minors detained by
Israeli law enforcement agencies is also a cause for
alarm. The detention of minors must be a last resort,
and those currently in detention should be released.

22-4023413/17

S/PV.9077

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Furthermore, we reiterate the calls of the Council
and the Secretary-General for an independent
investigation into the murder of the journalist Shireen
Abu Akleh. Those responsible for that must be brought
to justice.
The success of the Palestinian agenda contributes
to the prosperity and security of Israelis. However, the
lack of structural reforms hampers the multiplier effect
of the contributions that donor countries and United
Nations agencies provide to the Palestinian territories.
Progress on the economic front must be accompanied
by parallel steps conducive to an inclusive political
dialogue that effectively contributes to resolving the
issues. In that regard, we emphasize the importance
of holding free and transparent general elections in
the West Bank, Gaza and East Jerusalem as soon as
possible and of promoting the broad participation of
the Palestinian population, in particular women and
young people.
I am pleased to report that, on 23 June, the Mexican
Agency for International Development Cooperation
delivered essential medical equipment and supplies to
the hospital of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) in Qalqiliya, in the West Bank. That will
improve the capacities of the emergency services of
a hospital that primarily serves Palestinian refugees.
My delegation expresses its appreciation for UNRWA’s
humanitarian and stabilizing role.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Mexico’s position on the
two-State solution, which addresses Israel’s legitimate
security concerns and the establishment of a sovereign
and politically and economically independent
Palestinian State living side by side in peace within
secure and internationally recognized borders, in
accordance with international law and the relevant
United Nations resolutions.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland for his briefing and overview of the
Secretary-General’s report.
As regards the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016), there has unfortunately been no meaningful
progress since its adoption five years ago. The objectives
of that resolution speak to the urgency of stabilizing
the situation and reversing the negative trends on the
ground, which are undermining the prospects of the
two-State solution and the creation of conditions for
14/17

27/06/2022

successful final-status negotiations, which remain
largely unimplemented.
Today, and as reflected in the Secretary-General’s
report, we heard about the evolving situation on the
ground, including in Masafer Yatta.
Cycles of tensions at the holy sites and in and
around the Old City persist, propelled by incitement,
provocations and inflammatory rhetoric. Settlements,
demolitions and evictions continue to increase
at an alarming rate in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, in violation of
international law.
Violence and clashes characterize day-to-day
living in Gaza, the West Bank and East Jerusalem — a
normalization that should not be acceptable.
Today we also heard the disturbing statistics
flowing from violent incidents and fatalities involving
children and young people.
In line with resolution 2334 (2016), Kenya
continues to condemn, and call for accountability and
strengthened efforts to combat, the continuing wave
of terrorist attacks perpetrated by Hamas, Palestinian
Islamic Jihad and other militant groups in Israel.
We also call for immediate steps to prevent all
acts of violence against civilians that have tragically
claimed both Israeli and Palestinian lives, including the
recent incidents in Jenin. Such instances all point to
the need to look beyond expressions of concern and the
listing of incidents.
As Kenya has stated before, while the quarterly
reports remain essential in keeping the Security Council
informed, there is a need to present broader trends and
provide a sober analysis of their implications in the
context of the current realities on the ground, including
the prospects for the two-State solution whereby Israel
and Palestine live side by side in peace and within
secure and recognized borders based on the 1967 lines.
More important, while recognizing the importance
of direct negotiations and irrespective of the existence
or resumption of such negotiations, the report, in line
with paragraph 11 of resolution 2334 (2016), should
present clear objectives, timelines and feasible solutions
to resolve pending issues in a way that will better
position the Council to examine practical ways and
means to secure the full implementation of its relevant
resolutions on this protracted conflict.
22-40234

27/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

That is not to say that the onus of ending the
conflict lies solely with the Security Council. The
uniqueness of resolution 2334 (2016) lies in the fact
that it is propositional, not prescriptive. Indeed, its
implementation requires the political will of both the
Israeli and Palestinian authorities if it is to succeed.
That is the only way to bring about political traction on
the ground immediately, not just in future.
Kenya recognizes and commends the progress made
through regional mediation efforts, including calls to
ensure resilient, united and representative governance
institutions for stability.
We take note of the steps taken by the Israeli
Government to approve work permits and improve
the regular flow of goods and people through the
Gaza crossings, in line with resolution 1860 (2009).
Addressing the economic isolation of Gaza from the
wider regional and global economy will be critical to
the peace, security and stability of the broader Middle
East region.
The just-concluded pledging conference for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East further reinforced its vital
role in providing humanitarian and socioeconomic
assistance within Gaza and the broader Palestinian
population in extremely difficult circumstances.
We therefore reiterate the need for all concerned
parties, in the interest of the promotion of peace and
security, to support the daily dividends of constructive
grass-roots efforts in mitigating against cycles of
conflict practically and consistently.
Here Kenya would like to commend the Special
Coordinator’s participation in the 24 June meeting of
the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security, which highlighted the gender dimensions
of this file, including the call for a strengthened role
of local women in peace processes and cooperation
between Palestinian and Israeli women peacebuilders.
In conclusion, Kenya once again urges both parties
to exert collective efforts to launch peacebuilding and
peacemaking processes that will demonstrate a political
commitment to the desirable and obtainable objectives
of resolution 2334 (2016).
Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for his thorough
briefing and significant efforts.

S/PV.9077

Five years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2334 (2016), with a view to reaffirming
the position of the international community
demanding an end to all Israeli settlement activities
as an imperative to salvage the two-State solution.
Regrettably, however, the Secretary-General’s latest
report notes the persistence of negative trends on the
ground, including the construction and expansion of
settlements, demolitions and forced displacement — the
most notable of which was the decision regarding the
displacement of Palestinians from Masafer Yatta in
the West Bank — and the threat to demolish homes in
various parts of East Jerusalem.
We note that the construction and expansion of
settlements jeopardizes the geographical contiguity
of the occupied Palestinian territory and affects the
lives of the population, especially women and children,
including by limiting their movement and by depriving
farmers of access to their land and water sources. Those
settlements are also points of tension and are among the
factors that perpetuate violence. They also undermine
peace efforts and constitute a violation of international
law and United Nations resolutions.
On a larger scale, and as Mr. Wennesland
highlighted, the security and political situations
continue to deteriorate, especially in the West Bank
and East Jerusalem, as events have exacerbated current
tensions, threatening to ignite violence at any moment.
As the Secretary-General makes clear in his report,
those situations are becoming more dangerous in the
absence of prospects for peace and the failure to address
root causes of the conflict. It must be emphasized
here the necessity to abide by resolution 2334 (2016)
regarding the prevention of all acts of violence against
civilians, as well as all acts of provocation, incitement
and destruction, especially in the light of those
escalating tensions.
Against that backdrop, the fragile situation should
not be left unaddressed. Regional and international
diplomatic efforts must be intensified to ensure that
proactive measures are taken that maintain calm and
contribute to creating an environment conducive to
peace. In that regard, we look forward to the upcoming
visit of United States President Biden to the region next
month, especially his visits to Israel and Palestine. We
believe also that strengthening cooperation between the
parties at all levels would contribute to building trust
between them and give way to credible negotiations.

22-4023415/17

S/PV.9077

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In the context of the worsening humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, especially
in the Gaza Strip, amid a spike in commodity prices,
we stress the importance of alleviating those conditions
by taking concrete measures to revive the economy
and facilitate the movement of workers and trade
flows. We reiterate the United Arab Emirates ongoing
and historical commitment to support the brotherly
Palestinian people, including with humanitarian aid
and support for the health and education sectors.
We welcome last Friday’s meeting of the Security
Council’s Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace
and Security, which focused for the first time on the
peace process in the Middle East and highlighted the
status of Palestinian women and their contributions to
peace and security. There was also consensus on the
need to pay greater attention to strengthening the role of
Palestinian women in that field and empowering them
in various sectors, given their vital role in building
peaceful and stable societies.
In conclusion, my country reiterates its firm
and supportive position for achieving the two-State
solution, which calls for the establishment of an
independent and sovereign Palestinian State based on
the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living side by side with Israel in peace, security
and mutual recognition.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
I thank the Special Coordinator for his update on
the situation on the ground.
We meet every month to discuss the situation in the
Middle East and the state of play of the peace process.
The key message that we highlight over and over again
is the absolute need to do everything in our power
to break the cycle of violence and prevent a further
intensification of the conflict.
We firmly believe that full implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016) is a vital means to that end. We
reiterate it today, with a sense of urgency, in a situation
when the peace process remains stalled. Resolution
2334 (2016) established that settlements in Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, constitute a
violation under international law and a major obstacle
to the vision of two States living side by side in peace
and security, within internationally recognized borders.
16/17

27/06/2022

We observe with regret that that landmark resolution
has not been implemented and that settlements have
continued to expand, dimming hopes for a meaningful
peaceful resolution, which is a precondition for
peaceful coexistence between Israelis and Palestinians,
living in two States, a viable Palestine State that lives
in peace with a democratic Israel, with Jerusalem as a
shared capital.
We have said it before and will continue to say
it loud and clear: the security of Israel will never be
in question. But settlements do not contribute to the
security of Israel. Settlements lead to violence and loss
of lives on both sides.
Israel is a democracy. The backbone of every
democracy is the rule of law. Albania remains
fully committed to the rule of law domestically
and internationally.
We remain deeply concerned about the threats to
the preservation of the status quo of the holy sites in
Jerusalem and incendiary and hate speech that further
exacerbates tensions. Hate speech and incitement
to violence should not be tolerated anywhere. They
have even less place in the holy sites and should be
condemned universally and unequivocally.
We are also deeply troubled by the increase in
everyday violence. We strongly condemn terrorism in
all its forms and incitement to commit such heinous
acts. We therefore support the legitimate right of Israel
to defend itself against such acts, with due regard to
proportionality and the protection of civilians.
Demolitions and evictions, including in Masafer
Yatta, can and should be prevented, as they turn the
lives of people upside down and only exacerbate the
animosity and distrust between both peoples.
The killing of Shireen Abu Akleh and the storming
of her funeral procession by the Israeli police require an
independent and impartial investigation to establish the
truth. Truth brings trust. We urge both the Palestinian
and Israeli authorities to cooperate in carrying out a
thorough, fair and impartial investigation, so as to ensure
accountability, as called for by the Security Council.
The troubled history of the Middle East tells us that
the extreme sensitivity and fragility of the situation
has always been easily exploited by those who do not
want peace and do not work for peace. Regrettably,
with time, their grip has strengthened. We should not
have to contemplate this dangerous predicament, which
22-40234

27/06/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

could transform the prospects of a peaceful solution
from a wish into a souvenir. This bleak outlook is a
cry for the resumption of peaceful negotiations on the
bases of the legal framework created by the United
Nations and relevant regional initiatives, and we very
much look forward to the visit of President Biden in
the region. That is why we welcome all initiatives to
unblock the status quo, including by the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee, which met in Brussels last month, and the
measures taken but the Israeli Government to expand
the issuance of work permits to Palestinians.
We also commend the vital support that the
European Union is giving to the Palestinian people,
including to the United Nations Relief and Works

S/PV.9077

Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. Such
measures will never be enough; they are not really
game-changers. Yet they are important since they
help reverse the negative trends and keep the hope
for a peaceful resolution of the conflict alive. The
Palestinians and Israelis have suffered enough from
this tragic conflict. They all need peace. We must do
whatever we can to help them achieve that end.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

22-4023417/17
