S/PV.8753

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8753rd meeting

Tuesday, 28 July 2020, 10.40 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Heusgen/Mr. Sautter. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Bencosme Castaños
Mr. Auväärt
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Djani
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Kabtani
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Craft
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-19706 (E)
*2019706*

S/PV.8753

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen; Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; Ms. Wafa’a Alsaidy, General Coordinator
in Yemen of Médecins du Monde; and Ms. Raja
Abdullah Ahmed Almasabi, Chairwoman of the Arab
Human Rights Foundation.
Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock are joining the
meeting via video-teleconference from Geneva and
New York, respectively. Ms. Alsaidy and Ms. Almasabi
are joining the meeting via video-teleconference
from Sana’a.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I welcome those joining us from
Sana’a. I thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council. I want to start by
congratulating the Muslims in Yemen and around the
world on the occasion of Eid Al-Adha, which comes
towards the end of this week. May this Eid bring to the
people of Yemen calm, health and safety.
The last time I briefed the Council, a month or more
ago, I outlined the substance of the United Nationsbrokered negotiations between the Government of
Yemen and Ansar Allah. To recall: those negotiations
seek to reach agreement on a joint declaration that
will include a nationwide ceasefire, economic and
humanitarian measures and the resumption of the
political process aimed at comprehensively resolving
and ending the conflict.
I warned then that we had a reached a delicate
moment with much at stake. Those negotiations have
now been ongoing for four months. Both parties have
2/23

28/07/2020

provided feedback on various drafts and proposals,
but they have yet to reach agreement on a final text.
The process, as we discussed the last time, has been
long and challenging. It has experienced bursts of
momentum as well as very significant hurdles. That
is normal, I suppose, for any mediation process that
addresses issues of great importance to the parties. But
it is important that both parties continue to engage in
the process. The negotiations must be concluded before
the window of opportunity of these months of early
summer closes.
As a mediator — not as a negotiator — I continue
to attempt to bridge the divides between the parties’
positions. I hope that they will make the necessary
compromises to reach their agreement — not
mine — one that meets the aspirations of the Yemeni
people. Unfortunately, even as the negotiations
continue — and as we will hear from all the briefers
today much more cogently than from me — for
Yemenis across the country, life has become even more
unforgiving. I am sure that Mr. Mark Lowcock will tell
us that Yemen is experiencing the worst of times.
The military situation has not improved over the
past month. The continued military campaign against
Ma’rib has had profound humanitarian and economic
consequences, and it could easily undermine the
prospects of reaching agreement on a ceasefire for
the whole country and the ending of the shooting
war. The strategic importance of Ma’rib should not be
underestimated, and that is why we have frequently
made reference to it. I call for immediate and urgent
steps for de-escalation now more than ever, on the eve
of Eid Al-Adha. Of course, my Office stands ready to
support all efforts to that end.
I am concerned — and I am sure that Mr. Lowcock
will be more so — about the missile attacks that have
threatened and injured civilians in Ma’rib. I have been
dismayed by civilian fatalities, including many children,
caused by aerial attacks in Al-Jawf and Hajjah. Like
Mr. Lowcock, I condemn all attacks against civilians
and civilian objects. I call on all sides to uphold their
obligations under international humanitarian law to
protect civilians, in general, and children, in particular.
In Al-Hudaydah, the level of violence has not
relented and there has been an increase in the number of
ceasefire violations. The Redeployment Coordination
Committee and the joint mechanisms to implement the
Al-Hudaydah Agreement are still not functioning. I
20-19706

28/07/2020

The situation in the Middle East

am sure we will hear later on this from my colleague
General Guha. His Mission, the United Nations Mission
to Support the Hodeidah Agreement, continues efforts
to overcome the mistrust between the parties and to
restore dialogue, at a minimum, between them.
In a further sign of how life is becoming even
more difficult for Yemenis — and I apologize that
this briefing is gloomy in many ways — the economic
indicators are all pointing in the wrong direction. As
Mr. Lowcock will explain, food prices are rising, the
currency is depreciating and most Yemenis do not
have enough money in their pockets to meet their basic
needs. There are no quick fixes to Yemen’s economic
problems, but the parties need to agree on steps to
keep the economy out of the conflict. It is the people
of Yemen who suffer when the economy is weaponized
and politicized. The joint declaration process seeks to
reach agreement between the parties on key economic
and humanitarian measures that can finally bring at
least some tangible results to improve people’s lives.
We look to the parties to agree quickly on mechanisms
to make that happen.
Last month, I informed the Council that we were
engaging the parties to find a solution to allow for
the continued and regular entrance of ships carrying
oil derivatives into Al-Hudaydah port. Those efforts
are ongoing. The humanitarian consequences of the
impasse grow greater by the day, and this situation
cannot continue. It is essential that all obstacles to
imports and the domestic distribution of fuel and other
goods vital for the civilian population be removed.
The Government of Yemen has taken the positive
step of clearing a number of fuel ships in recent weeks,
and we encourage them to continue to release more
ships. I want to stress our position on this because it
is frequently misunderstood. Of course, we need, want
and would like to see those ships entering Al-Hudaydah
port. Nevertheless, that can only provide temporary
relief. We have shared ideas with the parties about
how to move forward in the immediate term, prior to a
joint declaration agreement, but a long-term solution is
needed. Through the President of the Council and the
Council itself, I urge the parties to engage constructively
with the proposals that are in front of them so that the
Yemeni people can get the fuel they desperately need.
In addition, as the parties know well, they also
urgently need to agree on a mechanism to disburse
revenues from Al-Hudaydah port — as was agreed

S/PV. 8753

in Sweden 18 months ago, as a contribution towards
civil servant salaries. My Office has consistently
endeavoured to support the parties in reaching an
agreement on paying civil servant salaries to all
Yemenis, based on the 2014 payroll database. I repeat it
here because there are some who publicly deny it. These
civil servants have the right to receive their salaries in
full and on time. We will continue to engage the parties
on proposals to achieve this vitally important goal. It is
a deserved entitlement of these people, but it is also of
extraordinary importance in terms of the humanitarian
requirements of Yemen.
It has been two weeks since the Security Council’s
meeting (see S/2020/721) under the German presidency
on the FSO SAFER, the decaying oil tanker that is
threatening to spill over 1 million barrels of oil into the
Red Sea. At that meeting, Mr. Lowcock and others raised
the alarm yet again about the immense environmental
and humanitarian threat posed by the tanker. At the
beginning of this month, Ansar Allah confirmed in
writing to us that they would authorize a long-planned
United Nations-supervised technical mission to the
tanker. However, we are still awaiting the permissions
necessary for the team to deploy. The United Nations
has it made clear to Ansar Allah that the team’s mission
is to assess the condition of the tanker, undertake any
initial possible repairs and formulate urgently needed
recommendations on what further action is required.
I think we can all agree that an independent and
expert-driven assessment is of critical importance to
allowing us to fully understand the scope, size and
threat of this issue and the possible solutions to it.
With Mr. Lowcock, I will keep the Council informed
of any developments in this regard in the coming days
and weeks.
In the southern governorates, I am encouraged
that there has been a reduction in the level of military
activity in recent weeks, owing to the efforts of the
parties, despite some limited casualties at the front lines
in Abyan. Tensions over State institutions persist in
Aden and other areas, which are particularly troubling
given the humanitarian context that Mr. Lowcock will
describe. As we know, the Government of Yemen and
the Southern Transitional Council are engaged in daily
efforts in Riyadh under the auspices of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia in order to reach agreement on moving
forward on the Riyadh agreement. We had hoped to have
specific news on that before today’s Council meeting;
we are given to understand that there is some good

20-197063/23

S/PV.8753

The situation in the Middle East

news. We hope so. It is of extremely vital importance
for all of us, as well as for the joint declaration and
its process.
The elements under negotiation in the joint
declaration are important both for the parties and
for the Yemeni people. We have seen intense debate
among civil society and others around these issues. I
am grateful for the advice and guidance that we have
received from them. My Office is fully committed to an
inclusive mediation process, as is required, as Council
members very well know, by resolution 2216 (2015).
I will continue to engage with civil society actors,
including through digital means.
Gender inclusion is a high priority. I know it also
a high priority of yours, Mr. President. My Office is
systematically integrating gender perspectives into the
joint declaration text and the planning to follow it in
what we hope is its implementation.
Finally, I continue to hope that the joint declaration
negotiations will turn the tide away from these maudlin
views, but towards peace. But I do not want to sugar-coat
things today. There is a real risk that these negotiations
will slip away, and that Yemen will enter a new phase of
prolonged escalation, of the uncontrolled spread of the
coronavirus, and of severe and threatening economic
decline. The United Nations and all its entities are
committed to doing all they can to support the parties
in reaching an agreement that puts Yemen on a path
towards a peaceful and prosperous future.
Through you, Mr. President, I call on all Member
States, including members of the Security Council,
and others who have an interest in the stability and
future of the region to lend their full support to us to
persuade all involved to move forward with speed to a
successful conclusion. But ultimately the responsibility
lies with the parties to bring peace negotiations to a
successful close. I have said it before, and I hope I will
not have to say it too often again: the coming period
will test the political will of the parties to bring forward
a breakthrough. I hope I can bring you better news,
Mr. President, when next we meet.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: The humanitarian crisis in Yemen
has never been worse. I want to be clear on that
point. Famine is again on the horizon. Conflict is
4/23

28/07/2020

again escalating. The economy is again in tatters.
Humanitarian agencies are again nearly broke.
And then there are the new problems. The
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is spreading out of
control. And we have the sorry saga of the FSO SAFER
oil tanker. I promised when I briefed the Security
Council the week before last that I would update Council
members on the FSO SAFER today. There has been no
progress. As I told the Council last time, the thing that
worries me most about the FSO SAFER is that, if it
explodes or leaks, the oil spilled could, the technical
experts have told us, put the ports of Al-Hudaydah and
Saleef out of action for weeks — or even months.
Some Council members will remember that in
late 2017, and again in late 2018, I warned that the
coalition blockade and then their mooted attack on
Al-Hudaydah were likely to plunge Yemen into famine.
Those warnings were heeded. The worst was avoided. It
would then be the unhappiest of ironies if the failure of
Ansar Allah to allow us to deal with the tanker were to
be the cause of the loss of the ports. The consequences
would be just as I warned in 2017 and 2018. I hope wiser
counsel will prevail. The rhetoric on Yemen is often
reassuring, yet the actions are relentlessly ruinous.
I will brief the Security Council today on five
issues: the protection of civilians, humanitarian access,
funding, the economy and progress towards peace. With
respect to the protection of civilians, hostilities are
intensifying across the country. There are now 43 active
front lines in Yemen — as compared to 33 in January.
The number of conflict incidents causing civilian harm
increased in the second quarter of the year — for the
third quarter in a row. On 15 June, at least 12 civilians
were killed in an attack on a vehicle in Sa’ada. On
12 July, an attack killed nine civilians in Hajjah. Three
days later, another attack killed 11 civilians in Al-Jawf.
Available information indicates that those attacks were
all air strikes.
I am particularly concerned at escalating hostilities
in Ma’rib, including recent shelling incidents.
Mr. Griffiths has already talked about that. Nearly
1 million people are displaced and sheltering in and
around Ma’rib. If there is an assault on the city, we
will almost certainly see waves of already vulnerable
people fleeing the area. I call on all the parties to do
everything possible to de-escalate the violence now,
both in Ma’rib and across the country. Yemenis need a
nationwide ceasefire.
20-19706

28/07/2020

The situation in the Middle East

Secondly, with regard to humanitarian access,
overall, efforts to improve the operating environment
in the north, where we have most of the problems, are
making progress. There is of course more to be done.
In the coming weeks, we will work with everyone to
build on the good practices we have seen recently on
approving project agreements and other issues. We also
want to see the long-planned World Food Programme
pilot begin for biometric registration of food-aid
recipients. After delaying for several weeks, the
coalition has now agreed that the technical equipment
can be shipped to Yemen, which is welcome. I urge the
Ansar Allah authorities to move quickly to implement
the pilot. Meanwhile, in the south, we continue to have
serious concerns, with an uptick in violent incidents
targeting humanitarian assets and local authorities
adding new bureaucratic requirements for aid agencies.
My third point is funding for the aid operation,
which is, frankly, on the verge of collapse. We have
already seen severe cuts to many of our most essential
activities. We used to provide food to 13 million hungry
people every month in Yemen. Because of funding
cuts, only 5 million of those people are still getting
full rations. Eight million have had their rations cut
in half. Similar cuts are affecting millions of people
who rely on aid for water, health care and other needs.
Aid organizations have so far received about 18 per
cent of what we need for this year’s humanitarian
response plan. What had been, in recent years, one of
the better-funded humanitarian operations around the
world is now one of the most underfunded.
In August, that will mean a 50 per cent cut to
water and sanitation programmes in 15 cities across the
country. We will also have to stop hygiene activities for
people who recently fled their homes. In September,
nearly 400 health facilities, including 189 hospitals,
will lose their supply of clean water and essential
medicines. That could cut off health care for 9 million
people. Also in September, we will run out of money to
treat more than a quarter of a million children who are
suffering from severe malnutrition. Without treatment,
those children will die.
It is not difficult to predict the effects of less food,
less water and less health care in Yemen. Without more
funding, we should all expect large increases in hunger,
malnutrition, cholera, COVID-19 and, above all, death.
We should expect many more people to die.

S/PV. 8753

And just as we are cutting programmes, demands
for assistance are set to increase sharply. Last week, a
new food security survey was released, covering 133
districts controlled by the Government of Yemen. About
40 per cent of people in those areas are now estimated
to be highly food insecure — an increase from 25 per
cent at the start of the year. Sixteen districts are now
categorized as phase 4, which is one step away from
famine conditions. At the beginning of the year, just
two districts had been rated as phase 4. In the coming
weeks, we will have results from a similar assessment
in Ansar Allah-controlled areas, where funding cuts
required significant reductions in food aid this year.
I therefore once again implore donors to pay their
pledges immediately. I am grateful to the United States,
Germany, Japan and the European Commission. They
are the largest contributors, according to the tracking
service my Office runs, of the money we have received
so far. I urge those with undisbursed pledges to pay
now. There is no time to lose. I also call on Yemen’s
neighbours in the Gulf to increase their support.
The sharp drop in pledges and payments from Gulf
countries this year is the main reason the resource gap
remains so large.
My fourth point concerns Yemen’s economy,
which is in free fall. When the risk of famine was
greatest in late 2018, the exchange rate had fallen to
800 Yemeni rial to the United States dollar. On its
current trajectory, economists predict that the value of
the rial will drop to 1,000 to the dollar in the coming
months. Already in some areas, the rate has been well
above 700 rial for weeks. The exchange rate is one of
the major determinants of the price of food and other
commodities, nearly all of which are imported. In other
words, as the rial collapses, fewer people will eat.
One solution is for the Government to finance
commercial imports, but the Government has run
out of foreign exchange. A deposit by Saudi Arabia
in the Central Bank of Yemen is nearly depleted,
and oil revenue — a major source of Government
income — has collapsed. Yemen needs regular foreignexchange injections to help stabilize the rial, underwrite
essential imports and pay salaries. When Saudi Arabia
did that in the past, it was very effective.
Fuel is another key determinant of basic commodity
prices. Fuel is needed to distribute goods around the
country, to pump drinking water and to power basic
services. In June, only 8,100 metric tons of commercial

20-197065/23

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.8753

fuel imports reached Al-Hudaydah — by far the lowest
amount ever recorded. As a result, drinking water prices
have increased, in some cases more than doubling
within a few weeks. Aid agencies are increasingly
affected, with some reporting that they can no longer
travel to communities to deliver assistance because
there is no fuel. As we know, famine is stalking the
country again, and the fuel shortages are also behind
sharply escalating food prices.
On top of those challenges, many Yemenis are losing
any remaining income at an alarming rate. COVID-19
has cut into remittances — long the country’s invisible
life-line — by as much as 70 per cent. A recent survey
found that about half of families have lost at least 50 per
cent of their income since April.
My fifth point is about progress towards peace. The
Council just heard from Mr. Griffiths on the political
process. With adequate funding, humanitarian agencies
can address the most immediate needs in Yemen and
prevent a renewed slide towards famine. That would
spare millions of people from needless suffering,
which would in turn help to create more space for the
political process.
The choice before the world is the same as last
month — help Yemen now or watch the country fall
into the abyss.
The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

Lowcock

for

I now give the floor to Ms. Alsaidy.
Ms. Alsaidy: I would like to thank in particular
the German presidency for this invitation to brief the
Council. I also thank Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock
for their briefings, which accurately reflect what is
happening in Yemen.
Based on my personal experience as a civilian
who lives in Yemen, and based on my professional
experience as head of Médecins du Monde in Yemen
since 2017, which allows me to move through areas
under the control of various parties, I will walk the
Council through what is happening in the lives of
ordinary Yemeni civilians. I want to tell the Council
what we experience in Yemen, in addition to what
Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock already mentioned.
We see mothers and children dying because of
preventable complications during pregnancy or birth.
We see a 22-year-old mother struggling to make her
6/23

28/07/2020

way through clashes and roadblocks to reach a hospital
in Aden to give birth. She ended up losing her baby
and undergoing an emergency hysterectomy to save
her life. We see fathers despairing because they cannot
afford to get their malnourished children to treatment
centres. We see patients dying from the inability to
find or afford medicine to treat their chronic diseases.
Families in Yemen must now choose between chronic
disease medicines for their loved ones and food. We see
children who have survived bombings in Al-Hudaydah
and now have post-traumatic stress disorders and
specific phobias that render them afraid of even the
sound of rain. We see a 12-year-old girl shocked after
stumbling upon the dead body of her classmate as she
escaped the bombing of her school in Sana’a. We see
families torn apart by the war. I know that two days
from now, when we celebrate Eid Al-Adha, many
families will not be reunited.
This already insufferable situation has been
aggravated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. Although accurate data on COVID-19 cases
and deaths are not available in Yemen, I can tell the
Council that we see people dying in their homes and
in health facilities not only from coronavirus-like
symptoms but, above all, from the lack of timely access
to basic health-care services. Of the national health
systems in the world, Yemen’s was the least ready
for the pandemic. More than half of health facilities
are not functioning well or at all because of the war.
Destruction, lack of supplies, shortage of fuel and lack
and irregularities of Government salaries are some of
the many difficulties we encounter daily.
I would like to pay tribute to Yemeni health workers,
who are just as dedicated to their patients as their
counterparts in any other country. Health workers in
Yemen have to choose between unpaid or inadequately
paid work in health facilities or paid work outside
health facilities. They basically have to choose between
caring for their patients or feeding their children. It is
not fair, and no health worker in the world should be put
in that position.
Yet, health workers are not the only ones with their
backs against the wall. The same is basically true for
public servants and all Yemenis. Clashes, bombings,
shellings and lack of security are killing men, women
and children, as was the case in the most recent attack,
in the Al-Hazm district of Al-Jawf, killing 11 civilians,
including women and children. In addition, the current
economic deterioration directly threatens the lives of
20-19706

28/07/2020

The situation in the Middle East

the survivors because food, drugs and safe drinking
water are now unaffordable for most.
Let me tell the Council about our awareness
campaign about the prevention of cholera. At the time,
many men and women expressed their frustration and
asked how they were expected to wash their hands
with plenty of water if they struggled to secure enough
water for cleaning and cooking. Indeed, hundreds of
thousands of Yemenis lost their jobs, salaries, farms,
fisheries and access to ports and markets because of the
conflict. They lost all access to a decent income, and
are now running out of options.
The Security Council can and should give options
back to Yemen. To this end, I have four asks.
My first ask is to stop the war in Yemen. Stopping
the war is the only solution for civilians to be selfreliant again instead of aid-dependent. All the aid in
the world will not be enough to address the soaring
needs. We are grateful to all Governments that have
announced support for peace and for the unstinting
efforts of Mr. Griffiths, but they can do more to stop
this war.
Among the things that can be done are, first, the
Security Council should push the parties to engage in
good faith in peace talks. Secondly, Council members
should put pressure on countries directly involved
in the conflict to stop military operations in Yemen
and to stop weaponizing different groups in Yemen.
Thirdly, Council members should put pressure on the
many countries, including the permanent members
of the Security Council, to put an end to their direct
and indirect logistical and military support to military
operations in Yemen. On the level of the street, regular
civilians like myself keep wondering if there truly is
collective international willingness to end this war,
because these and other countries continue selling
weapons in the region and fuelling the war. This
contradiction makes no sense to the Yemeni people,
which is why we question and strongly demand the
international community’s honest and principled
support for peace.
We are also concerned that the negative impact of
COVID-19 on the global economy will boost weapons
sales in the hopes that that will boost economies. We
hope that we are mistaken, because any economic
profits made from selling weapons that might be used in
Yemen are literally made off the dead bodies of Yemeni
men, women, boys and girls. I hope that decision makers

S/PV. 8753

will keep that in mind before legitimizing any future
weapons sales in Yemen. If members of the Security
Council truly support peace in Yemen, then they should
stop all contributions to the war.
My second ask relates to saving Yemen’s economy.
Depreciation of the Yemeni rial and the deterioration of
the economy are both the direct result of this war and
the direct underlying factors in the continuation of the
cycle of violence. How can the Security Council save
Yemen’s economy?
First, it should put pressure on the countries
directly involved in the conflict to step in and stop
the depreciation of the Yemeni rial. I know that many
economies around the world are struggling because
of COVID-19, yet we should not forget that Yemen’s
plight is an entirely human-made suffering and that
the countries directly involved in the conflict have
obligations under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law to protect economic and
social rights. Saving the Yemeni economy must remain
a priority.
Secondly, the Security Council should put pressure
on the Yemeni parties to the conflict to pay all taxes
and put all oil revenue in the Central Bank of Yemen.
We too should stand by our economy.
Thirdly, the blockade and any other restrictions
on importations and exportation of all commercial
goods to and from Yemen should be lifted. Restoring
functioning market dynamics in all areas of Yemen
is essential to giving Yemenis opportunities to live in
dignity. It is also the only way to restore the ability of
families to afford basic needs without depending on
humanitarian aid.
Repeated fuel crises in the north and the south
threaten the ability of civilians to survive. The world is
watching the long queues of cars in Yemeni gas stations
and must be wondering why people do not walk instead.
In Yemen, in reality, fuel is not just about cars. Fuel is
equal to water because water pumps depend on fuel. It
is equal to health because hospitals are working from
generators. Fuel is equal to food because cultivation
and transportation of basic goods come at a higher cost
and become unaffordable for regular civilians.
My third ask is for ensuring safe and unfettered
humanitarian access. I therefore ask the Security Council
to push all warring parties to respect international
humanitarian law and humanitarian principles and to

20-197067/23

S/PV.8753

The situation in the Middle East

support safe, unhindered access of affected populations
to relief. Front-line humanitarian workers demand to be
unconditionally able to reach those in need. To this end,
internal impediments and additional bureaucracies on
movement of aid and personnel in both the north and
south must be lifted immediately.
My fourth ask is for the maintenance of aid
funding and that the world not abandon Yemen. Aid
cannot and will not replace peace. However, even
though the country is still torn apart by war, as it faces
unprecedented economic collapse, recurrent floods
and the global pandemic, the simultaneous decrease
of funding to Yemen is absolutely unjust to affected
populations in the country. We did not choose to be
dependent on aid, but we are. This is not who we are.
Those who have visited or worked in Yemen
know that Yemeni people in the north and the south
are a peaceful, decent nation, full of dignity, pride,
social solidarity and generosity. These are not the
circumstances in which we want to see our children grow
up. Growing up hopeless, powerless and condemned to
wait for what the world will give them out of charity is
not a future that any child in the world deserves. We
want our lives back. We want an equal chance with
other nations to work, invent and build our country.
Nelson Mandela said that overcoming poverty is
not a gesture of charity. It is an act of justice. It is the
protection of a fundamental human right — the right to
dignity and to a decent life.. For Yemen, this will never
happen until the war stops. Yemen needs the Security
Council to prevent the Yemeni economy from collapsing
and to stop the war instead of stopping the aid.
The President: I thank Ms. Alsaidy for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Almasabi.
Ms. Almasabi: First of all, I thank the German
presidency for its invitation to participate in today’s
meeting and for this opportunity to address the Security
Council on how the war in my country, Yemen, has
affected people with disabilities.
My name is Raja Abdullah Ahmed Almasabi,
and I am the Chairwoman of the Arab Human Rights
Foundation, the only local organization in Yemen that
advocates for the rights of people with disabilities.
As a woman with a disability myself, I speak from
experience. I fight for our rights.
8/23

28/07/2020

For years, the Security Council has been briefed
on the suffering Yemenis have experienced from the
ongoing war. The situation has been described by the
United Nations as the world’s worst humanitarian
crisis. Even now, bombs are falling and people are
fleeing in the midst of the pandemic. This war has had
an excessive impact on us persons with disabilities.
Before the war started in 2015, there were 2 million
people with disabilities in Yemen. Today, that number
is estimated to be between 3.5 to 4.5 million. There is
no reliable data on people with disabilities in Yemen
and, given the ongoing conflict, the actual number is
certainly higher than that.
The majority of people who have acquired a
disability during the war did so as a result of injuries
sustained from air strikes, landmines or other
explosive remnants of war. But, in addition, the denial
of humanitarian access has also created such chronic
health conditions as malnutrition, especially among
children. This is one of the primary reasons why many
children in Yemen have acquired a disability. Many
people who had disabilities before the war have also
acquired new, secondary conditions as a result of
attacks and displacement. For example, before the war
I had one disability, but because of the war I now have
two: a physical disability and a hearing disability.
When the fighting breaks out, many people with
disabilities find it difficult to flee the violence. Imagine
having to run for your life without a wheelchair,
crutches or an assistive device that you need to be able
to move. Imagine having to completely depend on your
loved ones, or whoever is willing, to help you move.
Some people with disabilities end up being left behind
by their families. Others choose not to flee so that they
do not put their families at a higher risk by slowing them
down. We saw that with families escaping fighting in
Al-Hudaydah, Taiz, Sa’ada and many other places.
Life in displacement camps has been particularly
difficult for people with disabilities. Most of the camps
in Yemen were not designed for us. Basic rights, such
as access to health, water and sanitation facilities for
people with disabilities, are often ignored. Many people
with disabilities face barriers to accessing health care.
Some people need to travel up to between six and
eight hours to reach emergency medical centres along
destroyed roads with few financial resources.
With the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) now
causing a catastrophic health crisis across Yemen,
20-19706

28/07/2020

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8753

people with disabilities are once again being left behind.
There are no specific targeted actions to reach them,
even though we know that they are at a higher risk if
infected with the virus. There is no data on how many
people with disabilities in Yemen have been infected
with, or have died of, COVID-19.

I thank the Security Council for making my
voice heard today. I leave members with a simple
plea — they can do more. They can do better. We are
not an afterthought. Persons with disabilities must be
a part of every statement the Council issues and every
resolution it considers. We must have a seat at the table.

The war has made us poorer. I myself have not had
an income because I have now not received a salary for
four years. Many people with disabilities struggle to
find any source of income, while the price of everything
has increased. Even more children with disabilities are
now out of school as a result of the war. As a fighter
for our rights in Yemen, I need the following from the
Security Council.

The President: I thank Ms. Almasabi for her
briefing, which I think has touched everybody.

The longer the war persists, the situation will
continue to get worse for all civilians, including
us, people with disabilities. We need the Security
Council — all its member States — to do everything
in its power to stop the war. I urge them to stop
supporting and arming those fighting this war. People
in Yemen, like those in their home countries, need
peace and security.
Placing the rights and needs of people with
disabilities in the minds and the budgets of the United
Nations agencies, international non-governmental
organizations and members’ Governments is what
we need.
Any peace negotiations must include the
participation of people with disabilities. Currently,
there are more than 4 million persons with disabilities
in Yemen, but none of us have been engaged in any of
those processes. That means that until today, people
with disabilities have had no voice at all in addressing
the present and the future of Yemen.
It is one year since the Security Council adopted
its first resolution on the protection of people with
disabilities in wars (resolution 2475 (2019)). This was
followed by commitments from the United Nations
and Governments to do better in reaching people with
disabilities in humanitarian responses. However, such
commitments have still not led to any meaningful
changes on the ground.
Persons with disabilities and their representative
organizations are struggling to survive. I call on
the Security Council and Member States to allocate
resources and targeted funding to support them in
Yemen through financial and technical support.

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
May I remind colleagues that closed consultations
will follow. We will also hear from Lieutenant General
Guha, Head of the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hudaydah Agreement, so let us be brief and to the
point, maybe ask questions and look at the time.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank all our
briefers. I hear what you say, Mr. President, about
interactivity, but this is an open meeting, and we have
not had one for a couple of months, so please excuse me
if I set out the United Kingdom’s position. I promise
that we will be interactive in consultations.
The United Kingdom is extremely concerned that
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is compounding
an already devastating humanitarian situation in
Yemen. The officially reported cases do not represent
the reality. Modelling shows that in a worst case
scenario, 85,000 Yemenis could die. We are frustrated
that the Houthis, in particular, are not reporting cases,
have resisted implementing many mitigation measures
and are preventing critical health activities from taking
place, including vaccinations. We call on all Yemeni
parties to ensure unrestricted humanitarian access,
report cases transparently and facilitate the United
Nations response.
I am extremely concerned that the recent food
security assessment for southern Yemen projects the
fact that an additional 1.2 million people will be facing
food insecurity this year. I note that the Houthis have
obstructed the assessment in the north. This situation
is driven by economic contraction. Yemen’s currency
is continuing to depreciate to staggering new lows this
year, with food prices rising by more than 10 per cent in
June alone. Let us be frank with each other — famine
is now a realistic prospect, as Mark Lowcock has made
only too clear. As we heard, this will disproportionately
affect those who are already marginalized, particularly
persons with disabilities.

20-197069/23

S/PV.8753

The situation in the Middle East

There are two key actions the international
community can take to prevent a disastrous famine
from being realized in Yemen this year. First is to
urgently provide significant funding to the United
Nations humanitarian appeal. The United Nations
has received only $800 million this year, compared
with $2.6 billion at this point last year. This gap is
hindering, or crippling, the humanitarian response,
with 12 of the 38 major United Nations programmes,
including for food assistance, already forced to scale
back. In response, the United Kingdom has already
disbursed over 50 per cent of its £160 million, that
is, $200 million, of funding in Yemen this year. We
urge all donors to now step up and provide significant
humanitarian funding to the United Nations.
The second action is to provide financial assistance
to the Central Bank of Yemen so that it has sufficient
hard currency to sustain food imports. That will be
decisive to preventing a further collapse of household
incomes and to stabilizing prices. The Government of
Yemen has a role to play in that regard. We call on it to
develop a credible and transparent plan that reassures
donors and includes the payment of public salaries.
The United Kingdom is responding through that
$200-million funding commitment to the United
Nations this year. We expect to conduct more than
700,000 medical consultations for a range of health
conditions, train 1,500 health-care workers to work
safely in a COVID-19 environment and ensure a muchneeded boost to nearly 600 health centres in order to
continue delivering existing health services.
We are also extremely concerned about the
developing threat from desert locusts. We understand
that favourable breeding conditions have existed owing
to the heavy rain. There needs to be access to evaluate
the options, including spraying, in order to mitigate
this problem. The impact will be severe, not only in
Yemen but also, potentially, across Africa and in Asia.
We would welcome any update that Mark Lowcock can
provide in the closed consultations.
The risk of famine makes it all the more
important that the Yemeni parties reach the necessary
compromises to urgently agree a nationwide ceasefire
and a comprehensive political process to end the war
once and for all. While negotiations continue, the
Houthis’ offensive on Ma’rib and cross-border attacks
in Saudi Arabia have provoked an escalation in the
conflict. This behaviour has cast doubt over their
10/23

28/07/2020

intentions, and the escalations have resulted in civilians
dying in missile and air attacks. The Houthis must
cease such provocations.
I welcome the close coordination of Security
Council members, both here and in the region, in their
support to Special Envoy Martin Griffiths. We must
remain resolute and unified in our message to the
Yemeni parties — to all Yemeni parties — that now is
the time to cease hostilities and agree to the proposals
on the table.
There was a welcome announcement this week
that the Saudi mediation has led to renewed impetus
to implement the Riyadh agreement. I must stress the
importance of its swift implementation, including the
formation of a joint delegation for the United Nationsled peace process.
This month in the Council, we also focused on
the devastating impact of an oil leak from the FSO
SAFER tanker (see S/2020/721), as set out earlier by
Mark Lowcock. Although the Houthis have repeatedly
agreed in principle to United Nations assistance, they
have proved unwilling to take that forward in practice,
instead imposing preconditions and linking it with other
issues. After 14 days, the experts’ visas have not been
approved. The Houthis momentarily approved them,
only to cancel them the same day, claiming that was
done in error. I urge the Houthis to facilitate the experts
in that work. Anything less is extremely reckless.
Let me conclude by echoing Martin Griffiths’s
warning over negotiations slipping away from us. It
must be a clear expectation of all of us in the Council
that we expect the Yemeni parties to resolve the
outstanding issues swiftly and to agree a ceasefire and
a political process. Let us all resolve to use all the tools
at our disposal to achieve them.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): I would
like, through you, Mr. President, to thank all the
briefers for their clear presentations, which not only
painted a comprehensive picture of the situation in
Yemen but also demonstrated the urgent need to act
to save the situation in the country. I was particularly
touched by the poignant and moving testimony of
Ms. Wafa′a Alsaidy regarding the difficulties in daily
life in her country.
The latest information from Yemen indicates that
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is spreading
rapidly throughout the country. With the war-torn health
20-19706

28/07/2020

The situation in the Middle East

infrastructure, limited testing capacity and shortages
of medical supplies and equipment, the escalation of
COVID-19 will further exacerbate the humanitarian
situation of the population. The underlying conditions
of infectious diseases and malnutrition make it difficult
for people infected with the virus to recover, leading
to an increase in the number of virus-related deaths in
recent days. We are particularly alarmed by the number
of deaths among health workers, mainly in the Sana’a
area. This will undoubtedly severely undermine the
fight against the pandemic.
In order to successfully combat the virus in
the country, the three centres of power should stop
blaming each other but must unite to confront this
deadly threat. Indeed, the absence of a central authority
makes it difficult to implement precautionary measures
with which people must comply in a coordinated and
consistent manner.
Last month, we were somewhat optimistic when
we heard Special Envoy Martin Griffiths announce
that the parties to the conflict expressed great interest
in his proposals for a joint declaration of a national
ceasefire, which would pave the way for the resumption
of dialogue to end the war in Yemen. Regrettably, this
is not the case today given the latest developments on
the ground, marked in particular by the intensification
of fighting between coalition forces and the Houthis.
The Niger is of the view that no progress can be
made either in the political process or in addressing
the humanitarian situation without a genuine cessation
of hostilities. We call on all parties to heed the calls
of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for a
comprehensive ceasefire to address the COVID-19
pandemic in the country and for the resumption of the
political process.
In that regard, we call on regional actors and
Council members with influence on the parties to exert
the necessary pressure to advance the Special Envoy’s
efforts to achieve the declaration of a comprehensive
ceasefire, which we earnestly desire.
We welcome the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement
two weeks ago (see S/PV.8747). The Mission plays a
crucial role in stabilizing the area and in ensuring the
ongoing delivery of humanitarian assistance, which is
channelled mainly through Al-Hudaydah.

S/PV. 8753

The Niger welcomes and supports the tireless
efforts of Mr. Martin Griffiths to silence the weapons
in Yemen and to lead the parties to peace in the country,
devastated by this senseless and terrible war. As
Ms. Alsaidy implored us, we must act in order to end
the war in Yemen as soon as possible.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We thank Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Aid for their chilling accounts of
the Yemeni crisis. We also thank Ms. Raja Abdullah
Ahmed Almasabi for her moving testimony, as well
as Ms. Wafa′a Alsaidy. Ms. Almasabi and Ms. Alsaidy
took us, as the Council, to their houses and the streets
of Yemen, where ordinary people live. We thank them
for sharing their daily lives and challenges with us.
South Africa reiterates its support to the Special
Envoy in his arduous pursuit for a peaceful solution to
the situation in Yemen despite the escalating violence
that persists amid the unyielding coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. My delegation would like to
reiterate that, as Mark Lowcock said, the disturbing
humanitarian situation in Yemen, aggravated by the
COVID-19 pandemic, is inextricably linked to the
political impasse. As such, my intervention will focus
on those two elements, namely, the humanitarian and
the political situation.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, South
Africa remains deeply concerned about its devastating
impact on the people of Yemen, in particular women,
children, the elderly, internally displaced persons
and those with disabilities, as we just heard. As
Ms. Almasabi mentioned, it is a harrowing reality
that persons with disabilities are disproportionately
affected in situations of risk and face multiple barriers
to accessing protection and humanitarian assistance.
South Africa therefore calls on all authorities in
the various governorates to agree to a unified set of
measures to counter the spread of COVID-19 in Yemen
and alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people. It
is imperative to allow full access into the country, to
accelerate customs clearance of personal protective
equipment and medical supplies, and to facilitate air
travel of humanitarian staff into the country for staff
rotations, as well as to communities in need in both the
north and the south of Yemen. This will enable healthcare workers and the humanitarian community to slow
the rate and spread of infection.

20-1970611/23

S/PV.8753

The situation in the Middle East

It is vital for all parties to abide by their obligations
and responsibilities under international humanitarian
and international human rights law, and to take all
measures necessary to end and prevent violations
against civilians. Investigations into alleged violations
must be pursued to uphold the standards of integrity,
transparency and accountability.
On the political impasse, fighting continues in the
region of Yemen’s northern border with Saudi Arabia,
on the edge of Mar’ib city, Al-Hudaydah and Taiz. The
proposed ceasefire remains unimplemented and there
has been no substantial progress on any of the political
agreements. South Africa calls on all parties to cease
hostilities, in line with the Secretary-General’s global
ceasefire call and resolution 2532 (2020). Furthermore,
we call on the parties to agree on confidence-building
measures, such as the payment of civil servants,
the reopening of Sana’a airport and the lifting of
commercial import restrictions to help the fight against
the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as to provide impetus
to the overall political negotiations to end the war in
Yemen, as we have been asked to do.
We reiterate our position that a military response is
not a viable solution, and call on all parties to approach
the resumption of the political negotiations in a spirit
of compromise, placing the interests of Yemenis at
the centre of a negotiated political settlement — that
means all Yemenis, including, as has been requested
this morning, those 4 million people with disabilities.
We appeal to all parties to avoid approaches of seeking
to gain absolute positions.
South Africa remains concerned regarding the
lack of implementation of the Riyadh agreement.
We reiterate our call for the implementation of that
vital agreement between the Yemeni Government
and the Southern Transitional Council. We also call
for the full implementation of the December 2018
Stockholm Agreement.
South Africa urges all parties to conclude the issue
of the FSO Safer oil tanker by allowing critical repairs
to take place and thereby avoid a man-made disaster
in the Red Sea. The need to allow technical experts
to undertake an assessment and initial repairs cannot
be stressed enough. It is our wish that this impending
threat be dealt with on a purely technical basis,
without politicization.
In conclusion, South Africa reiterates that the
only solution to the conflict in Yemen is an inclusive
12/23

28/07/2020

Yemeni-led, Yemeni-owned political settlement that
will deliver on the hopes of the Yemeni people for a
strong economic and political future. In this context,
we call for the full and meaningful participation of
women in all aspects of an inclusive political process.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We wish to thank Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
for their overviews of the political and humanitarian
situation in Yemen. We listened attentively to the
striking, even heartbreaking stories delivered by
Ms. Wafa′a Alsaidy and Ms. Raja Abdullah Ahmed
Almasabi about the lives of ordinary Yemeni civilians
in the midst of conflict.
We support the mediation efforts undertaken by
Mr. Griffiths to rekindle political dialogue and reach a
settlement to the conflict. The international community
is united in the understanding that Yemen’s problems
cannot be resolved militarily. It is important for the
Yemeni parties themselves to promptly embrace this
premise and to undertake to craft measures to build
trust and establish a universal ceasefire. To that end,
the interests of all Yemeni social groups must be taken
into account and the settlement needs to be both a
compromise and satisfactory to all.
The same approach can and should be applied to
address the SFO Safer tanker issue with the assistance
of the United Nations. We are firmly of the view that
both Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock are well positioned
to help the Yemenis reach the necessary arrangements.
Unfortunately, it behoves us to note that the
implementation of the Stockholm and the Riyadh
agreements is stalled. We welcome efforts aimed
at reviving those agreements, which would help to
facilitate to a comprehensive settlement. We call on
the parties to the conflict to refrain from the use of
force and to take measures to de-escalate tensions and
to facilitate the efforts at the United Nations to reach
ceasefire and revive the political dialogue process.
The humanitarian situation in Yemen is of growing
concern. It is deteriorating not by the day but by the
hour. The conflict has already inflicted irrevocable
damage on the country’s economy, the social sector
and civilian infrastructure, which will take years to
rebuild. Millions of Yemenis are starving and unable to
access the critical medical services and treatment, and
they require various forms of assistance. Before these
problems could be solved, the country was engulfed by
20-19706

28/07/2020

The situation in the Middle East

the tidal wave of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19),
with the unfortunate statistical distinction of having the
world’s highest mortality rate. That is why the provision
of humanitarian assistance to Yemen needs to be our
priority, with a parallel pooling of efforts to settle the
conflict. This is the only way to launch a full-fledged
humanitarian response.
In this connection, we note the positive contribution
of the international High-level Pledging Event for
the Humanitarian Crisis in Yemen, which addressed
ways to improve the dire humanitarian situation and
to deliver assistance to the Yemeni population. At the
same time, I recall that humanitarian assistance must
be impartial in nature.
The Russian position on the Yemeni settlement
remains unchanged. We shall continue to assist
Mr. Griffiths and United Nations mediation efforts in
Yemen, including through contacts with all the political
forces in the country and other interested sides, both in
our national capacity and in our capacity as one of the
five permanent members of the Security Council.
We wish to emphasize that a settlement of the
conflict is not helped by attempts to shift blame to
other regional players. This is all the more true when
these regional players are positioned to play a positive
role in ending the conflict. The necessary basis for this
already exists, namely, resolution 598 (1987), which
called on the Secretary-General, in conjunction with
regional States, to develop a security architecture and
national initiatives, including the Russian blueprint for
collective security and the Persian Gulf zone.
Mr. Kabtani (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to thank the German presidency of
the Security Council for having convened today’s
meeting at United Nations headquarters. I also wish
to thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, for their valuable
briefings about developments in the humanitarian
crisis plaguing Yemen. I wish further to thank the
representatives of civil society for their briefings,
which touched us deeply.
Tunisia is gravely alarmed by the ongoing
deterioration of the situation in Yemen at all levels,
particularly the dire and unprecedented humanitarian
crisis. The situation continues to deteriorate, imperilling
thousands of residents of that fraternal country as a

S/PV. 8753

consequence of the military escalation and internecine
strife that have gone on unabated. This is liable to
further escalate, leading to disastrous consequences
in the light of the difficult circumstances stemming
from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
insufficient access to health infrastructure and lack of
resources in Yemen to combat the pandemic. Given this
crisis, Tunisia calls on all parties in Yemen to eschew
military options. The events of the past year have
reflected the fact that military alternatives cannot lead
to a solution to the crisis; quite to the contrary, they
exacerbate and prolong the crisis and further worsen
the suffering of ordinary civilians.
There is a need for a comprehensive and immediate
ceasefire. This is now of pressing importance. It must
be consolidated, with compliance by all parties, so as
to lead to the lasting peace called for by the SecretaryGeneral and in resolution 2532 (2020). We reiterate our
appreciation for the efforts undertaken at the level of
the United Nations and internationally. We appreciate
the proposals of the Special Envoy, including for a
comprehensive ceasefire throughout the country,
the immediate revival of the political process and
economic and humanitarian and measures to alleviate
the suffering of the Yemeni people, build trust among
the parties and step up efforts to counter the pandemic.
In our view, this is a pragmatic and comprehensive
approach. It could be a good opportunity to leave
violence behind and move towards a solution. We call
on all parties in Yemen to embrace peaceful dialogue
to reach a political settlement in line with the agreed
terms of reference, specifically the initiative of the
Gulf Cooperation Council and its Implementation
Mechanism, the texts arising from national dialogue and
resolution 2216 (2015). In the same vein, we reiterate
the need to implement the Stockholm and Riyadh
agreements, to continue to honour commitments with
regard to Al-Hudaydah, to comply with the measures
agreed with the Office of the Special Envoy and to
increase the full and meaningful participation of
women in the political process.
Tunisia supports the efforts undertaken by the
United Nations and the Special Envoy. At the same time,
we underscore the importance of pooling international
efforts to help the legitimate Yemeni Government
to fight the coronavirus disease pandemic, enact the
necessary economic reforms and ensure unfettered
humanitarian assistance to the people of Yemen in need.
To end the crisis and rebuild stability, both in Yemen

20-1970613/23

S/PV.8753

The situation in the Middle East

and the region, military activity must cease and all
parties must honour the overriding interests of Yemen
so as to end the suffering of the people and guarantee
their participation in the political process.
The FSO Safer oil tanker holds more than a million
barrels of oil. It is in a state of grave deterioration and
threatens an unprecedented ecological disaster. We
reiterate the call for an immediate solution to end this
crisis and for inspection and maintenance teams to
be dispatched.
To conclude, we reiterate our steadfast position of
principle in favour of a political solution, to which there
is no alternative, through constructive dialogue and
national reconciliation to end the crisis and to ensure
respect for the sovereignty, unity and independence
of Yemen.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): We
extend our sincere appreciation to our briefers for their
valuable updates and insights into the situation on the
ground, which is, frankly, heartbreaking.
The protracted conflict in Yemen continues to
deteriorate, as the security situation remains volatile
without a viable political solution. Coupled with this
is the worsening of the humanitarian situation, which
has been significantly compounded by the coronavirus
disease pandemic. To that end, we underscore the need
for unhindered passage of humanitarian aid to those
people who are most in need. Urgent as this is, however,
it is not a solution, but merely a measure to assuage the
abject consequences of the crisis. The only sustainable
solution is a political one. We reaffirm our support
for the work of the Special Envoy and all actors that
have been facilitating dialogue between the parties. As
Ms. Raja Abdullah Ahmed Almasabi said, we need to
do more; we need to do better.
We express concern over the shortfall in funding,
which is impacting and hindering humanitarian
operations. The disbursement of pledged funds is
urgently needed to ensure the continued delivery of
life-saving assistance. We need to do more; we need to
do better.
The Council recently convened a meeting to discuss
the issue of the FSO Safer oil tanker, which remains
unaddressed. We underscore that the environment,
economy and people of Yemen and the region will be
gravely impacted by any explosion or leak that occurs.
Consequently, in advancing this issue, these concerns
14/23

28/07/2020

must remain a priority, ahead of political interests
and political dynamics. To avoid a catastrophe, an
assessment of the condition of the tanker must be carried
out and appropriate steps to eliminate any threat taken.
We need to do more; we need to do better.
In concluding, we reiterate our appeal to all parties
to cease hostilities and return to the negotiating table.
While we encourage constructive engagement with the
Special Envoy, we recognize that an effective outcome
can be achieved only through an inclusive Yemeni-led
and Yemeni-owned political process. This is the only
palpable path to the advancement of Yemen’s people,
institutions and political expressions. I close by echoing
Mark’s plea. We must help Yemen now or watch Yemen
fall into the abyss.
Mr. Bencosme Castaños (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank Martin
Griffiths and Mark Lowcock for their briefings. We
would also like to express our gratitude to Ms. Wafa’a
Alsaidy and Ms. Raja Abdullah Ahmed Almasabi for
their very enlightening personal accounts.
We cannot fail to express our serious concern at
the fragile situation in Yemen. First, hostilities have
increased and the situation in Ma’rib has worsened
considerably in recent weeks. Shelling in civilian
areas with a large concentration of displaced persons
is completely unacceptable. We emphatically condemn
the air strikes that took place on 12 and 15 July, killing
17 civilians, including 10 children. On that point, we
believe that the monitoring and reporting mechanism
on children and armed conflict is a fundamental tool
that should fully reflect all the evidence. None of the
parties to the conflict must be prematurely delisted
while serious violations against children continue. We
cannot leave children exposed to danger.
Given the humanitarian situation, the coronavirus
is blazing in Yemen like an uncontrollable forest fire.
We have received reports that close to 100 health
workers have died from the coronavirus — one of
the highest numbers of deaths among heath workers
worldwide. The pandemic, compounded by the nearly
paralysed economy and the potential closure of vital
humanitarian and development projects, could trigger
a famine by the end of the year, as Mr. Lowcock warns.
That cannot be allowed to occur.
With regard to the environment, we regret to
learn that the Houthis have not yet given the United
Nations access to the FSO SAFER oil tanker. During
20-19706

28/07/2020

The situation in the Middle East

the extraordinary meeting held mid-July to discuss the
situation (see S/2020/721), participants reiterated the
grave environmental and humanitarian consequences
that would ensue in the case of an oil spillage to the
sea. We urge the Houthis to allow the United Nations
access to the tanker without further delay.
The locust plague is another crisis that is affected
by the current crisis. There are currently several control
operations on land in Yemen, but aerial operations,
which are the most effective way to curb the plague,
are not possible. If large-scale action is not taken, it is
probable that a growing locust population will lead to
a new re-invasion in the Horn of Africa and, possibly,
India and Pakistan. The crops and pastures of millions
of vulnerable people are being destroyed.
The challenges and hardships facing the Yemeni
people seem almost impossible to overcome. The
country is reaching a limit. If the situation on the
ground does not soon show signs of improving, the
Council should evaluate more drastic measures to send
a stronger message to resolve the conflict and alleviate
the suffering of the Yemeni people.
In addition to the recent positive developments with
regard to the implementation of the Riyadh agreement,
we urge all parties to adopt, without delay, the joint
declaration presented by the Special Envoy.
Before concluding, allow me to stress the
importance of ensuring an inclusive peace process
that fully takes into account the voices of all Yemeni
people — whether in the country or in the diaspora — and
those in vulnerable straits. In that regard, we wish to
ask Ms. Alsaidy if the organizations that work with
the disabled in Yemen have been given an opportunity
to express their concerns directly to the parties to the
conflict. If so, what has been the response?
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Ms. Wafa’a Alsaidy and Ms. Raja Abdullah Ahmed
Almasabi for their briefings.
It is essential that the humanitarian actors and
non-governmental organizations on the ground can
express their views of the situation before the Security
Council. It is becoming increasingly urgent to find
a political solution to definitively put an end to the
Yemeni conflict. We once again reiterate our full
support for the efforts of the Secretary-General and
the Special Envoy in that regard. We call on all parties,

S/PV. 8753

especially the Yemeni parties, to endorse the draft
agreement proposed by Mr. Griffiths.
We are encouraged by the observance of the
ceasefire between the Government of Yemen and the
Southern Transitional Council. We note that the Riyadh
agreement must be fully implemented without delay.
We commend Saudi Arabia on its role in that regard.
Only through a nationwide ceasefire, in line with
resolution 2532 (2020) and the call by the SecretaryGeneral, can we effectively fight the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic in Yemen.
We cannot overstate our concern about the
increased attacks on civilians. All parties must respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
The protection of civilians, including humanitarian and
medical personnel, as well as civil infrastructure, must
be an absolute priority. Likewise, all efforts should
be made to ensure full humanitarian access. That is
essential to curb the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic
in Yemen, which has the highest COVID-19 death rate
in the world.
With regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker,
we regret the lack of progress since the mid-July
meeting (see S/2020/721). We call on the Houthis
to honour the commitments made at the beginning
of the month and to authorize, without delay, United
Nations access to the oil tanker. An oil spill would
have catastrophic environmental, humanitarian and
economic consequences for the entire region. Urgent
action is needed.
France will continue to support the efforts of the
United Nations to find a political solution and bring
peace and security to Yemen and, more broadly, to
bring about de-escalation the region.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Martin
Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their briefings.
I also thank in particular Ms. Wafa’a Alsaidy and
Ms. Raja Abdullah Ahmed Almasabi for their work
and for sharing their experiences and recommendations
with the Security Council.
I would like to make five points.
First, I reaffirm our full support for the efforts of
the Special Envoy to achieve a nationwide ceasefire,
confidence-building measures and the resumption of
an inclusive political process. We call on all parties to

20-1970615/23

S/PV.8753

The situation in the Middle East

engage constructively in such efforts and to muster the
necessary political will to reach an agreement.
Secondly, we are alarmed by recent reports of
civilian victims, including children, of air attacks.
All parties must protect civilians and put an end to
the grave violations committed against children. As
we heard from Ms. Almasabi, disabled persons are
disproportionately affected by the conflict. They need
special protection and support.
Thirdly, the scourge of locusts creates yet further
vulnerability. We are worried about their impact on
food security, and we support the efforts of the United
Nations, particularly those of the Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO), to lead ground monitoring and
control operations. To that end, we call on the parties to
provide FAO safe access to the breeding grounds and to
implement days of calm.
Fourthly, the humanitarian situation remains of
great concern. All international partners must show
their solidarity with the Yemeni people by supporting
the Organization’s intervention plan. We therefore
encourage all parties to make additional commitments
and to honour them. I also reiterate the importance of
humanitarian access. We remind all parties to respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
Authorities must accelerate customs clearances for
medical supplies and protective equipment and facilitate
the aerial transportation of humanitarian personnel.
Finally, I note the recent meeting on the FSO
SAFER oil tanker (see S/2020/721), and I echo my
colleagues in underscoring that action is more urgent
now than ever. We therefore urge the Houthis to honour
their commitments and allow the technical experts of
the United Nations to access the oil tanker so as to
prevent a catastrophe.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to start by
paying tribute to our dear colleague Ambassador Marc
Pecsteen de Buytswerve, as I believe this is the last
time he will be in the Chamber. I thank him for his
excellent cooperation throughout his time here. I would
also like to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths,
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock, Ms. Wafa’a
Alsaidy and Ms. Raja Abdullah Ahmed Almasabi for
their briefings.
The fast spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
in Yemen and its high mortality rate is indeed worrisome
and demands the attention of the international
16/23

28/07/2020

community. The briefers have confirmed that
COVID-19 in Yemen is as deadly as the conflict itself.
I want to reiterate Mr. Lowcock’s warning that Yemen
cannot afford to fight two battles at the same time.
Mr. Griffiths also gave a gloomy picture of prolonged
escalation and suffering. Listening to the briefers is,
once again, like riding on a roller coaster — there was
a glimmer of hope some time ago and then, suddenly,
the opportunities to achieve peace are slipping away. In
that regard, let me highlight three important points in
connection with the briefings we just heard.
First, we cannot overemphasize that a political
solution is urgently needed. We are hopeful that the
joint declaration can be agreed upon soon. That will
determine the future of Yemen, as the new agreement
will reinvigorate the moment of peace that is currently
fading away, as indicated by the increase in hostilities.
The draft agreement will also include important
confidence-building, humanitarian and economic
measures, alongside the continuation of the peace
process and a nationwide ceasefire. We are confident
that this is what the Yemeni people need now. In that
connection, Indonesia would like to reiterate its support
for the Special Envoy’s efforts, with the Council ready
to back those efforts to facilitate an inclusive Yemeniled and -owned peace process.
Secondly, we cannot underestimate the threat
that COVID-19 poses to the overall humanitarian
situation. Saving people’s lives has consistently been
our top priority in the Security Council. It is indeed
frustrating that we continue to hear from Mr. Lowcock
every month about the constant, or even worsening,
humanitarian situation in Yemen. COVID-19 and its
restrictions, reduced remittances, locusts and the flat
and significant underfunding for the humanitarian
response this year have all exacerbated an already dire
situation. The COVID-19 pandemic is also displacing
a great number of people. That will further complicate
humanitarian assistance. With that in mind, pushing for
a nationwide ceasefire for humanitarian purposes is not
an excessive demand.
We would also like to reiterate our concern that
there has been no progress on the matter of the FSO
SAFER oil tanker. We had great expectations in that
regard following the 15 July meeting (see S/2020/721).
We urge Ansar Allah to give access to the United
Nations assessment team to enable the necessary
assessment and repairs.
20-19706

28/07/2020

The situation in the Middle East

Thirdly, we must stay the course and follow
through on previously agreed commitments, including
the Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh agreement,
as well as all the relevant Council resolutions, including
resolution 2216 (2015), which are legal documents that
provide building blocks for a broader peace agreement.
As we previously stated, just because some parts are
complicated to implement does not mean that we should
toss out the whole agreement.
We are also delighted to hear that the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia is continuing to facilitate the efforts of the
Government of Yemen and the Southern Transitional
Council to implement the Riyadh agreement. The
Council has the obligation to monitor that, as its
commitments remain valid and relevant. The adoption
of resolution 2534 (2020), to extend the mandate of
the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement (UNMHA) for an additional year, after the
initial six months, is yet further testament that UNMHA
continues to be important and relevant. The ceasefire in
Al-Hudaydah is helping to calm the situation, which is
crucial for the humanitarian lifeline.
In conclusion, month after month in the Council, we
have been hopeful about progress on the Yemeni file.
We started back in January 2019 with the Stockholm
Agreement, when we were full of hope that peace would
finally happen. And yet we are still facing a bleak
situation. Time is running out. As we approach the
holy celebration of Eid Al-Adha at the end of the week,
symbolizing the need to make a sacrifice, or Qurban,
we appeal to all parties to make the necessary sacrifices
for the sake of peace, to be flexible in negotiations, to
refrain from further violence and to strive for peace.
That is the ultimate sacrifice for the people of Yemen.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank our
briefers for their updates and for their teams’ continued
and resolute efforts to help resolve these daunting
crises. I want to publicly thank Mr. Griffiths, once
again, for all of his efforts towards achieving a political
solution. We stress our support for his work on the joint
declaration. We commit to supporting him in his efforts
on this complex endeavour. I also want to acknowledge
that he, too, is on the front line. Without his efforts, the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) would be even harder
to contain.
I would like to echo what everybody has said today
in their briefings and in their statements — that Yemen is
still a country at war. Now they are fighting yet another

S/PV. 8753

war — COVID-19. It is important that the parties
de-escalate the tensions on the ground and recommit
to a United Nations-mediated political settlement.
Cross-border Houthi attacks undermine efforts towards
a settlement. Those attacks can serve only to prolong
the conflict and the suffering of the Yemeni people.
As Mr. Lowcock stated today, that is leaving millions
of Yemenis without proper health care, clean water or
sanitation, which are crucial to preventing the spread
of the virus.
Turning to the humanitarian situation, I want to
stress that, despite some initial improvements, the
Houthis’ level of interference and hardened positions
earlier this month remain unacceptable and, even more,
unconscionable, with COVID-19 spreading throughout
Yemen. Before COVID-19, the United Nations had
declared Yemen the most needy place on Earth, with
24 million people who depend on aid to survive.
The Houthis can and must do better, especially
on moving forward with biometric registration for the
World Food Programme’s operations, approving all
pending sub-agreements, allowing independent needs
assessments, respecting independent procurement
and asset management in accordance with donor
regulations and facilitating the freedom of movement
and humanitarian assistance for aid workers.
We remain deeply concerned by the spread of
COVID-19 in Yemen and by the fact that cases are
vastly underreported, particularly in Houthi-controlled
areas. The lack of transparency has resulted in fewer
testing kit supplies, which has led to an inaccurate
count of the spread of the virus. The virus has clearly
shifted to widespread community transmission, and
many Yemenis are dying as a result. Humanitarian and
health-care workers are vulnerable, lacking personal
protective equipment to protect them from the disease. It
remains absolutely imperative that all parties facilitate
their efforts and not target health-care workers.
On 15 July, Secretary Pompeo announced an
additional $208 million in new humanitarian and
health assistance to bolster ongoing global COVID-19
response efforts, including more than $2.6 million to
help refugees, vulnerable migrants, internally displaced
persons and host communities in Yemen. Over the
past 20 years, the United States has provided nearly
$4 billion in total assistance for Yemen’s long-term
development, including nearly $132 million for health
programmes. In the light of the observations offered by

20-1970617/23

S/PV.8753

The situation in the Middle East

our briefers today, the United States expresses its full
support for the rights of persons with disabilities, as
well as those belonging to other marginalized groups
and minority communities in Yemen.
We are especially grateful for today’s briefings
as an example of how we can implement resolution
2475 (2019) in a concrete way, including by inviting
briefers to address the issues relating to persons with
disabilities. We call on all parties to the conflict,
particularly the Houthis, to respect the rights of all
members of Yemeni society.
Finally, I want to draw the Council’s attention to the
events of 28 June, when United States and partner forces
interdicted a vessel off the coast of Yemen containing
Iranian arms bound for the Houthis. The vessel’s illicit
cargo included 200 rocket-propelled grenade launchers,
more than 1,700 AK rifles, 21 surface-to-air and landattack missiles, several antitank missiles and other
advanced weapons and missiles. Yemen does not need
more arms. Iran must stop its efforts to arm the Houthis,
which only prolong this conflict.
Mr. Auväärt (Estonia): I would like to thank
Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock for their briefings. I also thank Ms. Wafa’a
Alsaidy and Ms. Raja Almasabi for their briefings.
Estonia fully supports the efforts of Special Envoy
Griffiths aimed at reaching an agreement on a nationwide
ceasefire, humanitarian and economic measures and the
resumption of the political process. It is unacceptable
to seek further territorial gains at the expense of the
people of Yemen, who are suffering as a result of the
increasingly grave humanitarian crisis, as we just heard
from the briefings by Ms. Alsaidy and Ms. Almasabi.
We urge all parties to heed the call of Yemeni civil
society to cease hostilities and agree on measures to
alleviate the suffering of Yemenis without further
delay. This is necessary for the start of the next phase of
the comprehensive political process, which is the only
way to find sustainable peace. Despite the important
progress made towards this agreement, it is deeply
worrisome that fierce fighting continues, resulting in
an ever-growing number of civilian casualties and the
exacerbation of the humanitarian crisis.
We strongly condemn the recent air strikes that
caused multiple civilian casualties, including children,
who are bearing an increasingly heavy burden from
the hostilities. We remind all parties of their obligation
to adhere to international humanitarian law and
18/23

28/07/2020

to protect civilians, especially vulnerable groups,
such as women and children. We also condemn the
continuous the deployment of drones and the firing
of ballistic missiles at civilian infrastructure in Saudi
Arabia. We are also deeply concerned about the
alarming humanitarian situation in Yemen, which the
coronavirus disease pandemic and the dire economic
situation have exacerbated.
We remind all parties, especially those in northern
Yemen, about the need to facilitate safe and unhindered
access for humanitarian personnel. We also urge them
to facilitate the air travel of humanitarian staff, lift
commercial import restrictions and find a solution that
will secure the regular importation of fuel.
With regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker, we urge
the Houthi authorities to take immediate concrete
steps, without preconditions, to provide the United
Nations mission access to the ship. There is not much
time left for preventing a possible leakage or explosion,
which would have catastrophic consequences for the
environment as well as to the economy.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I would like to thank
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-SecretaryGeneral Mark Lowcock for their updates. I also thank
Ms. Alsaidy and Ms. Almasadi for their briefings and
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Yemen at our meeting today.
Viet Nam is very concerned about military
escalation in different parts of Yemen and the recent
reports about civilian casualties, including children
and women. The continued military escalation across
Yemen has caused the security situation to further
deteriorate against the backdrop of the outbreak of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
The possibility of a severe food security crisis in
Yemen is another concern for us. The recent report
by the United Nations Children’s Fund, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and
the World Food Programme said that the number of
people in acute food insecurity is projected to increase
from 2 million to 3.2 million in the next six months.
In addition, economic crisis, conflict, floods, desert
locusts and now COVID-19 could deepen the dire
humanitarian situation in the country. The shortage of
funding could also put the humanitarian work being
done at the risk of being stopped. Furthermore, we
remain gravely concerned about the growing risk that
the FSO SAFER oil tanker could rupture, causing an
20-19706

28/07/2020

The situation in the Middle East

environmental, economic and humanitarian catastrophe
for Yemen and the region.
Against this background, my delegation wishes to
make the following points.
First, we urge all the parties concerned to reach
an immediate and nationwide ceasefire in Yemen so
that the humanitarian work and the fight against the
COVID-19 pandemic could be facilitated.
Secondly, we reiterate our call for all parties to uphold
their obligations under international humanitarian law
with respect to the protection of civilians and civilian
objects, especially women and children. We urge all
parties, especially local ones, to further provide safe
and unhindered access for humanitarian assistance.
We call on all potential donors and other partners to
continue funding humanitarian work and making
contributions to overcome severe food insecurity and
save the lives of people in Yemen.
Thirdly, we join other Member States in calling on
all relevant parties to fully implement the Stockholm
Agreement and the Riyadh agreement with United
Nations mediation. We also stress the importance of
ensuring the meaningful participation of women in the
political process.
Fourthly, with regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker,
we join other Member States and the United Nations in
reiterating the call for the Houthis to provide access and
the necessary support for the United Nations technical
team to undertake their tasks to prevent environmental
disaster in the region.
Last but not least, we reiterate our support for Martin
Griffiths’ three-pillar approach, and call on all parties
concerned, inside and outside Yemen, to undertake all
efforts to achieve an immediate nationwide ceasefire
and restart a Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned inclusive
political process.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Envoy Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock and the representatives of Yemeni civil
society for their briefings.
China appreciates the efforts of the United Nations
aimed at achieving a ceasefire, advancing the peace
process and improving the humanitarian situation in
the country. On 12 March, as President of the Security
Council for that month, I presided over the last meeting
held in the Council Chamber (see S/PV.8745), which

S/PV. 8753

was a public meeting, and on subsequent consultations,
both on the situation in Yemen. Today members of
the Council have overcome difficulties and returned
to United Nations Headquarters for today’s in-person
meeting, again on Yemen. This fully demonstrates the
great importance the Council and its members attach
to the Yemeni issue. I thank the Secretariat staff for its
efforts in this respect.
We are still not optimistic about the current situation
in Yemen, as it is fraught with war, the risk of famine
and disasters, and people living in dire conditions. The
international community must step up its efforts to
push for an early breakthrough in a political settlement
of the Yemeni issue. China supports the search for a
solution to the Yemeni problem involving the following
three aspects: a nationwide ceasefire, economic and
humanitarian measures and comprehensive political
negotiations. Yemen’s sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity should be fully respected and
safeguarded. In this regard, I would like to stress the
following three points.
First, the parties to the conflict should stop violence
and improve the security situation on the ground. From
April to May this year, a general ceasefire was achieved
in northern Yemen. This shows that, as long as there is
political will, it is not impossible achieve a ceasefire
and stop violence. However, the recent increase in
hostilities among parties to the conflict in Yemen has
destabilized the security situation in the north and
the south of the country. China is deeply concerned
about this.
Military means cannot solve any problem, but will
only prolong the war and the suffering of the people.
China urges all parties concerned to set store by the
future of the country and interests of the people by
actively heeding the call of the Secretary-General
and his Special Envoy and immediately ceasing
all hostilities.
Secondly, we must remain committed to a political
settlement and continue to promote good offices
and mediation. Since last March, Special Envoy
Griffiths has worked hard to broker a new peace
initiative but, owing to various factors, progress has not
been satisfactory.
With regard to the issue in the south, the relevant
parties once made political and military arrangements
for the implementation of the Riyadh agreement under
the auspices of Saudi Arabia. The progress in the

20-1970619/23

S/PV.8753

The situation in the Middle East

implementation has been limited. Over the past few
days, all parties have shown some positive movement
in terms of the implementation of the agreement,
which we hope can be translated into actual results.
China calls on all parties to the conflict to strengthen
cooperation with the Special Envoy, engage in in-depth
consultations on the peace initiative, build consensus
and narrow differences so as ensure the future of the
agreement. At the same time, it is necessary to fully
mobilize the countries of the region and urge them
to play an active role, in synergy with the mediation
efforts of the United Nations.
Thirdly, the humanitarian situation in Yemen should
be improved and humanitarian access guaranteed. The
people of Yemen are facing multiple threats, such as
violent conflict, economic crisis, floods, locusts and
other plagues, including COVID-19. It is urgent to
remove barriers to humanitarian access and expand
the scale of humanitarian operations. The international
community should encourage concerted actions by
all parties in Yemen to assist the United Nations and
relevant agencies in carrying out humanitarian relief
operations so as to ease the suffering of the Yemeni
people. Special attention should also be given to the
difficulties and needs of women, children, people with
disabilities and other vulnerable groups. The United
Nations should also urge parties that have actual
control in various regions to take effective measures
to prevent and control the pandemic. On 15 July, China
once again provided Yemen with a batch of supplies to
fight the pandemic. We will continue to support and
assist the Government and the people of Yemen, and we
call on donor countries to fulfil their pledges as soon
as possible.
The issue of the FSO SAFER oil tanker should
be given great attention. We hope that all parties
concerned will maintain dialogue on this issue in order
to ensure that the United Nations technical team can
conduct safety assessments and repairs of the tanker as
soon as possible. We have noticed that there has been
no substantive progress on access to the tanker so far,
and the Yemeni Government and relevant neighbouring
countries are seriously concerned about this matter.
The Council should urge relevant parties to take
practical actions to prevent the tanker from causing an
environmental, human and economic catastrophe.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.
20/23

28/07/2020

When we were planning for the Yemen consultations
this year, we chose, in our presidency, to have the
Security Council take a look at the situation on the
ground in the country. We wanted to have people from
the ground brief the Council. Members may recall that
last year, during the German presidency, we had another
representative of civil society briefing the Council on
the role of women in Yemen (see. S/PV. 8512).
We were witness today to two briefings that gave
us an impression of the dire situation on the ground and
what the impact of the war has been on civil society. I
would like to thank both Ms. Alsaidy and Ms. Almasabi
for their briefings. I think we were all deeply moved by
these very strong female voices. Since we usually hear
about situations in more abstract ways, I think it is good
to be confronted with the dire reality on the ground, to
hear the concrete example of the choice that a family
has to make either to buy medicine for a chronically ill
member of the family or to buy food, or the decision
that has to be made when, in a situation where a family
has to flee, a family member with a disability might
have to stay behind instead of going with the family and
slowing them down or otherwise endanger them.
There is also the concrete example we heard about
the hundreds of thousands of suffering and traumatized
children. But it is the image just presented of a child
walking on the streets after a bombing and having to see
the dead body of a classmate that is the essence of what
we are discussing. I think I share with other members of
the Council the view that it is deeply disappointing that
an agreement among the parties on a ceasefire — the
joint declaration — has not been reached.
We heard from Martin Griffiths, who is an optimist.
He always embraces the slightest opening. When there
is a glimpse of hope, he jumps on it and tries to make
something of it. However, I have never heard him
sound so pessimistic as he did today. We would like to
encourage him not to give up. He has to try and work
hard to come to a resolution. I find it deeply shocking
to hear that in recent days there was a stark increase
in the number of Houthi attacks on Saudi Arabia and
that there was an increase in coalition air strikes on
Sana’a. In the past few weeks, when many children lost
their lives, there have been also been more maimed and
traumatized children.
Let me remind Council members what the SecretaryGeneral said in his most recent report on children and
armed conflict (S/2020/525). The Secretary-General
20-19706

28/07/2020

The situation in the Middle East

stated his intention to relist the coalition, should
killings and mutilations of children not decrease this
year. International humanitarian law is not negotiable.
The briefers told us about the humanitarian
situation on the ground. There is no food or medicine.
Millions of people do not know how they survive every
day. Of course, they all need support. We heard that
the United Nations humanitarian response plan is
highly underfunded. We call on all actors to contribute.
Germany is contributing, as in all crises. But we appeal
in particular to the countries in the region to provide
funding. We call on them not only to pledge funds but
also disburse them as soon as possible.
I would like to conclude as others have done — as
the Chinese representative did — in recalling the FSO
SAFER oil tanker situation. I mean, how cynical can
you be? When we were sitting and discussing the issue
two weeks ago (see S/2020/721), the Houthis gave every
confirmation that they would allow the United Nations
inspection team to go see the vessel. Here we are two
weeks later, and again the Houthis have not delivered.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to address you, Mr. President, with our most sincere
wishes for success during your country’s presidency of
the Security Council, and we wish everyone continued
good health.
The Yemeni Government yearns for a sustainable
peace that is based on the agreed-upon terms of
reference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the
outcomes of the comprehensive National Dialogue
Conference and relevant Security Council resolutions,
especially resolution 2216 (2015). The Government
of Yemen is very keen on ensuring the success of the
efforts of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths in Yemen
in order to put an end to the suffering of the Yemeni
people caused by the Houthi militias’ coup, which
resulted in one of the worst humanitarian disasters in
the world. In order to achieve that goal, last May the
Yemeni Government accepted the proposals made by
the Special Envoy aimed at establishing a ceasefire,
launching confidence-building measures and resuming
the political process. That included all the proposed
humanitarian and economic arrangements.

S/PV. 8753

Moreover, the Yemeni Government reiterates
that it will continue to engage with the efforts by
Mr. Griffiths and the United Nations-sponsored peace
process — because we believe in the role of the United
Nations and want lasting peace. We made that clear
in previous commitments we abide by, including our
position on matters such as the payment of salaries,
opening up roads, releasing all detainees and prisoners
and opening Sana’a airport to international flights
through the national carrier, which would alleviate the
suffering of Yemenis.
We reject the continued imposition of impossible
conditions by the Houthi militias. They are impossible
to implement and are aimed solely at hampering the
efforts of the international community and the Special
Envoy and at prolonging the Houthi’s futile war against
the Yemeni people and impeding their aspirations.
The Yemeni Government has implemented the
Riyadh agreement, and stated so on more than one
occasion, in line with the agreed upon timeline. In that
regard, we would like to express our great appreciation
for the efforts made by our brothers in the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia to help resume the implementation of
the agreement. We call upon the Southern Transitional
Council to abide by the agreement, which is considered
a road map to exit this crisis. We call upon the
Council to retract its declaration of a so-called selfrule arrangement and everything that entails. We also
call upon it to allow State institutions to perform their
duties towards citizens in Aden governorate and halt
its attempts to escalate matters on the ground. We also
call upon the Council to consolidate efforts to put an
end to the Iran-backed Houthi militias, which aim to
destabilize Yemen and the region, as confirmed by the
most recent United Nations reports.
We also call for coordinating efforts to combat the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
The Government of Yemen underscores the need
to return the situation in the Socotra archipelago
to normal, which is renowned for its rich flora and
biodiversity — making it one of the most important
nature preserves in the world and a World Heritage Site.
The continuing meddling on the island is unprecedented,
rejected and condemned.
The Government of Yemen has cooperated with the
Special Envoy to draw up a plan to cover the payment
of what remains of the salaries of civil servants in the
areas under the control of the Houthi militias. We have

20-1970621/23

S/PV.8753

The situation in the Middle East

done so by allocating the customs and tax revenues from
oil products at the Al-Hudaydah port in order to pay the
salaries through the Central Bank’s branch in the city,
under the supervision of the Special Envoy. We were
surprised when the Houthis looted the deposited funds,
which exceeded $35 billion rials, using them to fund
their war effort and for the purpose of personal gain.
We continue to await a firm position to be taken against
this clear violation of the understandings sponsored by
the United Nations, including the disregard the militias
show for the international community and the suffering
of Yemeni citizens.
The Government has repeatedly issued public
calls to the Houthi militias to consolidate efforts to
confront the COVID-19 pandemic and adopt a unified
health-care policy and devote all possible capacity
to confront it. To that tend, along with the Coalition
to Restore Legitimacy in Yemen, we have declared a
unilateral ceasefire.
However, all of those initiatives have been met by
rejection on the part of the militias, which are denying
the existence of the pandemic. They have also imposed
a blackout on the health-care and medical situation in
the areas under its control. The Houthis are intimidating
medical teams and society at large, perpetrating
inhumane acts against those suspected of infection and
their families. The Houthi militias continue to politicize
the pandemic and to reject all the initiatives being made.
Moreover, they impose a lack of transparency on the
ways to confront the spread of infection — that added
to the shortages in testing and treatment, equipment
and a health-care system near collapse. In our opinion,
all of those actions are a mortal sin.
We call upon the United Nations, the international
community, donor countries and all relevant bodies to
extend urgent aid to the Yemeni Government and people
in order to confront COVID-19. We also ask for support
for health-care workers and for pressure to be brought
to bear against the Houthi militias to engage with the
call and initiatives by the Government to consolidate
efforts to combat the pandemic, which augurs for an
unprecedented disaster in Yemen.
The Security Council held a meeting (see
S/2020/721) earlier this month to deal with the
situation concerning the FSO SAFER oil tanker. The
Council called upon the Houthis to take tangible
steps — without delay or preconditions — to facilitate
access by the United Nations team of technicians to
22/23

28/07/2020

the tanker so they could evaluate it and carry out the
necessary maintenance work, including extracting
the oil. However, two weeks have passed since the
meeting was held and the Houthis continue to drag
their feet and impose obstacles and conditions on the
team. It is blatantly clear that the Houthi militias are
adopting the same way of addressing things that they
have used over the years — to deflect international
pressure before the Security Council holds a meeting
on the topic of Yemen, after which they return to their
obstinate procrastination and deceit of the international
community, thereby blatantly disregarding everything
the Council issues.
We renew our calls on the Security Council to
fulfil its responsibilities and undertake the urgent
measures needed, including pressing the militias to
allow the United Nations technical team to assess and
empty the tanker, as well as facilitating the team’s work
without delay or precondition, so that we can avert an
environmental, economic and humanitarian disaster
that will affect Yemen, the region and the world.
The President: I shall now again give the floor to
our two civil society briefers.
I give the floor to Ms. Alsaidy.
Ms. Alsaidy: I am very grateful for all of the
statements from the participants.
If I am not mistaken, the question was whether
we addressed the asks I mentioned to the parties to
the conflict inside Yemen — and if so, what was the
response when we faced them. Of the four asks we
addressed to the Security Council, we addressed to
them ask number three, namely, unimpeded access to
aid for all people in need. That is the daily ask on which
we engage with the parties to the conflict in different
areas. Whenever we want to access people in need,
that is one part of our daily work. However, we do that
jointly with other non-governmental organizations,
with the United Nations and with all humanitarian
agencies. And we also do it bilaterally for our specific
projects and activities.
As to the rest of the asks — including discussions
of war and peace — being a humanitarian worker and
head of an international medical organization, we do
not engage in such talks with parties to the conflict. We
do not mix politics with aid efforts. However, whenever
we have a chance to go out in public and speak about
suffering in Yemen and what is needed to stop it, we
20-19706

28/07/2020

The situation in the Middle East

do not hesitate to say it. The message is received by all
parties, and they keep referring to that.
I hope I have addressed the question. Perhaps my
colleague Ms. Almasabi would like to add something.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Almasabi.
Ms. Almasabi: I would like to say two things.
First of all, I am grateful to the speaker who said the
Council could do more and do better. We are waiting
for the Council. What is it going to do for us as people
with disabilities? Actually, people with disabilities are
waiting for me. Hundreds of messages are coming into
my WhatsApp asking what is next for us. I am waiting

S/PV. 8753

for the Council to tell me what is next. In real life, how
can it support, assist and help people with disabilities
and present their rights, needs and realities in its work
and budget? I would like to answer them. I am waiting
for the Council. What is it going to do for us?
The President: I thank Ms. Almasabi for her plea
for a continuation of humanitarian aid.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

20-1970623/23
