A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/195
11 March 1996
Fiftieth session
Agenda item 112 (c)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/50/635/Add.3)]
50/195.

Protection of and assistance to internally
displaced persons

The General Assembly,
Deeply disturbed by the growing number of internally displaced persons
throughout the world who receive inadequate protection and assistance, and
conscious of the serious problems this is creating for the international
community,
Recalling the relevant norms of international human rights instruments
and of international humanitarian law,
Bearing in mind the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, 1/
adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, which calls
for a comprehensive approach by the international community with regard to
refugees and displaced persons,
Reiterating its call for a more concerted response by the international
community to the needs of internally displaced persons while emphasizing that
activities on their behalf must not undermine the institution of asylum,
Conscious of the continuing need for the United Nations system to gather
information comprehensively on the issue of the protection of human rights of
and assistance to internally displaced persons,
Welcoming the decision of the Commission on Human Rights in its
resolution 1995/57 of 3 March 1995, 2/ in which it extended the mandate of
the representative of the Secretary-General on internally displaced persons
for another three years to continue his review of the need for protection of
and assistance to internally displaced persons, including his compilation and

1/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

2/
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1995,
Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/1995/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
96-77131

/...

A/RES/50/195
Page 2

analysis of legal norms, the root causes of internal displacement, prevention
and long-term solutions,
Noting the progress made thus far by the representative of the
Secretary-General in developing a legal framework, studying the causes and
manifestations of internal displacement and analysing institutional
arrangements, undertaking dialogue with Governments, issuing a series of
reports on particular country situations together with proposals for remedial
measures, and raising the level of awareness, at both the national and
international levels, concerning the problem of internal displacement,
Welcoming the cooperation already established between the representative
of the Secretary-General and the United Nations humanitarian assistance and
development organizations engaged in protecting and assisting internally
displaced persons, as well as the International Committee of the Red Cross,
the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies and other
relevant organizations,
Welcoming in particular the decision by the Executive Committee of the
Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to promote
further consultations with the representative of the Secretary-General, as
well as the decision by the Inter-Agency Standing Committee and its working
group to invite the representative to participate in relevant meetings and in
its Task Force on Internally Displaced Persons,
Recalling the report of the representative of the Secretary-General
submitted to the Commission on Human Rights at its fifty-first session, 3/
and the conclusions and recommendations contained therein with regard to
improving protection of, assistance to and development for internally
displaced persons,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the representative
of the Secretary-General on internally displaced persons; 4/
2.
Commends the representative for the catalytic role he is playing
in raising the level of consciousness about the plight of internally displaced
persons;
3.
Noting the efforts of the representative to develop a framework
and to promote strategies for better protection, assistance and development
for internally displaced persons;
4.
Encourages the representative to continue his analysis of the
causes of internal displacement, the needs of those displaced, measures of
prevention and ways to increase protection, assistance and solutions for
internally displaced persons;
5.
Also encourages the representative to continue to pay specific
attention in his review to the protection and assistance needs of women and
children, bearing in mind the relevant strategic objective in the Beijing

3/
Add.4.
4/

E/CN.4/1995/50 and Add.1 and Corr.1, Add.2 and Corr.1, Add.3 and

See A/50/558.
/...

A/RES/50/195
Page 3

Declaration and the Platform for Action, 5/ adopted by the Fourth World
Conference on Women, held at Beijing from 4 to 15 September 1995;
6.
Calls upon the representative to continue to study the problem of
internally displaced persons and to invite, with the approval of Governments,
specialists and consultants to contribute expert assistance during missions
and to make use of research facilities;
7.
Invites the representative to finalize his compilation and
analysis of existing legal norms for inclusion in his report to the Commission
on Human Rights at its fifty-second session;
8.
Calls upon the Commission on Human Rights to consider the question
of establishing a framework in this regard on the basis of the report of the
representative and the recommendations contained therein;
9.
Calls upon all Governments to continue to facilitate the
activities of the representative, encourages them to give serious
consideration to inviting the representative to visit their countries so as to
enable him to study and analyse more fully the issues involved, and thanks
those Governments which have already done so;
10.
Invites Governments to give due consideration, in dialogue with
the representative, to the recommendations and suggestions made to them by
him, in accordance with his mandate, and to inform him of measures taken
thereon;
11.
Urges all relevant United Nations humanitarian assistance and
development organizations concerned to establish frameworks of cooperation
with the representative so as to provide all possible assistance and support
to him in the implementation of his programme of activities, and invites the
representative to report thereon;
12.
Calls upon the representative and regional intergovernmental
organizations, such as the Organization of African Unity, the Organization of
American States and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
to intensify their cooperation with a view to encouraging their undertaking
initiatives to facilitate assistance to and protection of internally displaced
persons;
13.
Requests the Secretary-General to give all necessary assistance to
the representative to carry out his mandate effectively;
14.
Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its
fifty-second session.
99th plenary meeting
22 December 1995

5/

A/CONF.177/20 and Add.1, chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
