A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/79
8 January 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 73
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/53/586)]
53/79.

Review of the implementation of the recommendations and decisions
adopted by the General Assembly at its tenth special session
A
REPORT OF THE DISARMAMENT COMMISSION

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Disarmament Commission,1
Recalling its resolutions 47/54 A of 9 December 1992, 47/54 G of 8 April 1993, 48/77 A of 16
December 1993, 49/77 A of 15 December 1994, 50/72 D of 12 December 1995, 51/47 B of 10 December
1996 and 52/40 B of 9 December 1997,
Considering the role that the Disarmament Commission has been called upon to play and the
contribution that it should make in examining and submitting recommendations on various problems in
the field of disarmament and in the promotion of the implementation of the relevant decisions adopted by
the General Assembly at its tenth special session,
1.

1

Takes note of the report of the Disarmament Commission;1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/53/42).

99-76057

/...

A/RES/53/79
Page 2

2. Reaffirms the importance of further enhancing the dialogue and cooperation among the First
Committee, the Disarmament Commission and the Conference on Disarmament;
3. Reaffirms also the role of the Disarmament Commission as the specialized, deliberative body
within the United Nations multilateral disarmament machinery that allows for in-depth deliberations on
specific disarmament issues, leading to the submission of concrete recommendations on those issues;
4. Commends the Disarmament Commission for the successful conclusion of the review of its work
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 52/12 B of 19 December 1997 at the resumed session
of the First Committee in June 1998, resulting in the adoption of Assembly decision 52/492 of 8
September 1998;
5. Encourages the Disarmament Commission to continue to make every effort to enhance its
working methods so as to enable it to give focused consideration to a limited number of priority issues
in the field of disarmament, bearing in mind the decision it has taken to move its agenda towards a twoitem phased approach;
6. Requests the Disarmament Commission to continue its work in accordance with its mandate, as
set forth in paragraph 118 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,2
and with paragraph 3 of Assembly resolution 37/78 H of 9 December 1982, and to that end to make every
effort to achieve specific recommendations on the items of its agenda, taking into account the adopted
“Ways and means to enhance the functioning of the Disarmament Commission”;3
7. Notes that the Disarmament Commission, at its 1998 organizational session, adopted the
following items for consideration at its 1999 substantive session:
(a) The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at
among the States of the region concerned;
(b) Guidelines on conventional arms control/limitation and disarmament, with particular emphasis
on consolidation of peace in the context of General Assembly resolution 51/45 N of 10 December 1996;
(c) The fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament;
8. Requests the Disarmament Commission to meet for a period not exceeding three weeks during
1999 and to submit a substantive report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the Disarmament Commission the annual report
of the Conference on Disarmament,4 together with all the official records of the fifty-third session of the
General Assembly relating to disarmament matters, and to render all assistance that the Commission may
require for implementing the present resolution;

2

Resolution S-10/2.

3

A/CN.10/137.

4

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/53/27).
/...

A/RES/53/79
Page 3

10. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure full provision to the Disarmament Commission and
its subsidiary bodies of interpretation and translation facilities in the official languages and to assign, as
a matter of priority, all the necessary resources and services, including verbatim records, to that end;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled “Report
of the Disarmament Commission”.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998
B
REPORT OF THE CONFERENCE ON DISARMAMENT
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Conference on Disarmament,4
Convinced that the Conference on Disarmament, as the single multilateral disarmament negotiating
forum of the international community, has the primary role in substantive negotiations on priority
questions of disarmament,
Considering, in this respect, that the present international climate should give additional impetus to
multilateral negotiations with the aim of reaching concrete agreements,
Recognizing that the Conference on Disarmament has a number of urgent and important issues for
negotiations,
1. Reaffirms the role of the Conference on Disarmament as the single multilateral disarmament
negotiating forum of the international community;
2. Welcomes the determination of the Conference on Disarmament to fulfil that role in the light of
the evolving international situation, with a view to making early substantive progress on priority items of
its agenda;
3. Also welcomes the decisions of the Conference on Disarmament to establish an Ad Hoc
Committee under item 4 of its agenda entitled “Effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclearweapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons”, to negotiate with a view to reaching
agreement on effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons, which could take the form of an internationally legally binding
instrument, as well as an Ad Hoc Committee under item 1 of its agenda entitled “Cessation of the nuclear
arms race and nuclear disarmament”, to negotiate, on the basis of the report of the Special Coordinator5
and the mandate contained therein, a non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively
verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive

5

CD/1299.
/...

A/RES/53/79
Page 4

devices, and takes note of the recommendations that they be re-established at the beginning of the 1999
session;
4. Further welcomes the decision of the Conference on Disarmament to entrust its successive
Presidents with the task of pursuing intensive consultations and seeking the views of its members on
appropriate methods and approaches for dealing with item 1 of its agenda entitled “Cessation of the
nuclear arms race and nuclear disarmament”, and takes note of the recommendation by the last President
of the 1998 session that they should resume at the start of the 1999 session;
5. Notes with satisfaction the desire of the Conference on Disarmament to promote substantive
progress during its 1999 session, and expresses the hope that appropriate consultations during the intersessional period could lead to commencement of early work on various agenda items;
6. Encourages the Conference on Disarmament to continue its consultations on the review of its
membership with a view to reaching an early agreement on its further expansion;
7. Also encourages the Conference on Disarmament to intensify further the ongoing review of its
agenda and methods of work;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure the provision to the Conference on
Disarmament of adequate administrative, substantive and conference support services;
9. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to submit a report on its work to the General Assembly
at its fifty-fourth session;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled “Report
of the Conference on Disarmament”.
79th plenary meeting
4 December 1998
