solution in accordance with the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,
Convinced that the so-called "new constitution"
endorsed on 2 November 1983 by the exclusively
white electorate in South Africa would continue the
process of denationalization of the indigenous African
majority, depriving it of all fundamental rights, and
further entrench apartheid, transforming South Africa
into a country for "whites only",
A ware that the inclusion in the · ·new constitution"
of the so-called "coloured" people and people of Asian
origin is aimed at dividing the unity of the oppressed
people of South Africa and fomenting internal conflict,
Noting with grave concern that one of the objectives of the so-called "constitution" of the racist
regime is to make the "coloured" people and people
of Asian origin in South Africa eligible for conscription
into the armed forces of the apartheid regime for
further internal repression and aggressive acts against
independent African States,
Welcoming the massive united resistance of the
oppressed people of South Africa against these ··constitutional" manreuvres,
Reaffirming the legitimacy of the struggle of the
oppressed people of South Africa for the elimination
of apartheid and for the establishment of a society in
which all the people of South Africa as a whole, irrespective of race, colour, sex or creed, will enjoy
equal and full political and other rights and participate
freely in the determination of their destiny,
Firmly convinced that the so-called "elections" to
be organized by the Pretoria regime in the current
month of August for the "coloured" people and
people 0f Asian origin and the implementation of this
"new constitution" will inevitably aggravate tension
in South Africa and in southern Africa as a whole,
I. Declares that the so-called "new constitution"
is contrary to the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, that the results of the referendum of
2 November 1983 are of no validity whatsoever and
that the enforcement of the "new constitution" will
further aggravate the already explosive situation
prevailing inside apartheid South Africa;
2. Strongly rejects and declares as null and 1·oid
the so-called "new constitution" and the "elections"
to be organized in the current month of August for
the "coloured" people and people of Asian origin as
well as all insidious manreuvres by the racist minority
regime of South Africa further to entrench white
minority rule and apartheid;
3. Further rejects any so-called "negotiated
settlement" based on bantustan structures or on the
so-called "new constitution";
4. Solemnly declares that only the total eradication of apartheid and the establishment of a non-racial
democratic society based on majority rule, through
the full and free exercise of universal adult suffrage
by all the people in a united and unfragmented South
Africa, can lead to a just and lasting solution of the
explosive situation in South Africa;

Egypt and Zimbabwe, 8 to extend invitations to
Mr. Mfanafuthi J. Makatini and to Mr. Ahmed Gora
Ebrahim under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.

At its 2549th meeting, on 16 August 1984, the
Council decided to invite the representatives of Benin,
Cuba, Mongolia, the Syrian Arab Republic, Trinidad
and Tobago and Yugoslavia to participate, without
vote, in the discussion of the question.

At the same meeting, the Council also decided to
extend an invitation, under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure, to the Chairman of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.

At its 2550th meeting, on 17 August 1984, the Council decided to invite the representatives of the Congo,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Qatar and Sri Lanka to participate,.
without vote, in the discussion of the question.

At its 2551st meeting, on 17 August 1984, the Council decided to invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Guyana, Kenya and Togo to participate, without
vote, in the discussion of the question.

At the same meeting, the Council also decided, at
the request of the representatives of Burkina Faso,
Egypt and Zimbabwe, 9 to extend an invitation to
Mr. Lesaoana Makhanda under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Resolution 554 ( 1984)
of 17 August 1984

The Security Council,
Recalling its resolution 473 (1980) and General
Assembly resolution 38/11 of 15 November 1983, as
well as other relevant United Nations resolutions
calling upon the authorities in South Africa to abandon
apartheid, end oppression and repression of the
black majority and seek a peaceful, just and lasting
• Documents S/16698 and S/16699, incorporated in the record of
the 2548th meeting.
9
Document S/16704, incorporated in the record of the
2551 st meeting.

3

39/2 of 28 September 1984, which declared the socalled "new constitution" contrary to the principles
of the Charter of the United N:;itions,
Relifftrming the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, particularly article 21, paragraphs 1 and 3, which recognize, inter alia. the right
of everyone to take part in the Government of his
country, directly or through freely chosen representatives, and the will of the people as the basis of the
authority of Government,

5. Urges all Governments and organizations not
to accord recognition to the results of the so-called
"elections" and to take appropriate action, in cooperation with the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity and in accordance with the
present resolution, to assist the oppressed people of
South Africa in their legitimate struggle for a nonracial, democratic society;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council on the implementation of the present
resolution;
7. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

Alarmed by the aggravation of the situation in South
Africa, in particular the wanton killing and the maiming
of defenceless demonstrators and workers on strike
as well as the imposition of virtual martial-law conditions intended to facilitate the brutal repression of the
black population,

Adopted at the 2551st meeting
hv /3 l'oles to none, with
i ahstentions (United Kingdom <~f" Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
United
States of America).

Gravely concerned at the continuing arbitrary arrests
and detentions without trial of leaders and activists of
mass organizations inside the country as well as the
closure of several schools and universities,
Commending the massive united resistance of the
oppressed people of South Africa, including the strike
by hundreds of thousands of black students, to the
imposition of the so-called "new constitution",

Decisions

At its 2560th meeting, on 23 October 1984, the Council decided to invite the representatives of Ethiopia
and South Africa to participate, without vote, in the
discussion of the item entitled "The question of South
Africa: letter dated 17 October 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Ethiopia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/16786)" . 10

Commending also the Asian and coloured communities in South Africa for their large-scale boycott
of the recent '"elections" which constituted a clear
rejection of the so-called "new constitution".
Reaffirming the legitimacy of the struggle of the
oppressed people of South Africa for the full exercise
of the right to self-determination and the establishment
of a non-racial democratic society in an unfragmented
South Africa,

At the same meeting, the Council also decided to
extend an invitation, under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure, to the Chairman of the Special
Committee against Apartheid.

Coni·inced that racist South Africa's defiance of
world public opinion and the imposition of the rejected
so-called "new constitution" will inevitably lead to
further escalation of the explosive situation and will
have far-reaching consequences for southern Africa
and the world,

At the same meeting, the Council further decided,
at the request of the representatives of Burkina Faso,
Egypt and Zimbabwe, 11 to extend an invitation to
Bishop Desmond Tutu under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

1. Reiterates its condemnation of the apartheid
policy of the South African regime and South Africa· s
continued defiance of the resolutions of the United
Nations and designs further to entrench apartheid, a
system characterized as a crime against humanity:
2. Further condemns the continued massacres of
the oppressed people, as well as the arbitrary arrest
and detention of leaders and activists of mass organi-zations;

Resolution 556 (1984)

3. Demands the immediate cessation of the massacres and the prompt and unconditional release of all
political prisoners and detainees;

of 23 October 1984

The Security Council,
Recalling its. resolution 554 (1984) and General
Assembly resolutions 38/11 of 15 November 1983 and

4. Reaffirms that only the total eradication of
apartheid and the establishment of a non-racial.
democratic society based on majority rule, through
the full and free exercise of adult suffrage by all the
people in a united and unfragmented South Africa.
can lead to a just, equitable and lasting solution of the
situation in South Africa;

10
See Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-ninth
Year. Supplement for Octoher, Nm·emher and December /984.
11
Document S/16794, incorporated in the record of the
2560th meeting.

4
