46

General Allelllbly-ElMeaah s-1on

1089 (XI). Administrative and financlal arrangements for the United Nations Emergency
Force21
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1001 (ES-I) of 7 November 1956 and 1122 (XI) of 26 November 1956,
Emphasizing the fact that expenses incurred by the
Secretary-General under the resolutions of the General
Assembly are without pre~u?!c~ to a~y s1;1bsequent
determinations as to responsib1btles for situations leading to the creation of the United Nations Emergency
Force and to ultimate determination as to daims established as a result of expenses arising in connexion
therewith,
Considering that the Secretary-General, in his report of 4 November 1956,22 particularly in paragraph
15, has stated that the question of how the Force
should be financed requires further study,
C onsidering that the Secretary-General, in his reports dated 21 November 23 and 3 Deceniber 1956,24
has recommended that the expenses relating to the
Force should be apportioned in the same manner as
the expenses of the Organization,
Considering further that several divergent views,
not yet reconciled, have been held by various Member
States on contributions or on the method suggested by
the Secretary-General for obtaining such contributions,
Considering that the Secretary-General has already
been authorized to enter into commitments for the expenses of the Force up to an amount of $10 million,
Considering jurther that the matter of allocation of
the expenses of the Force beyond $10 million necessitates further study in all its aspects,
1. Decides that the expenses of the United Nations
Emergency Force, _other than for such p~y, equip_ment,
supplies and services as may be furmshed w1thout
charge by Governments of Member States, shall be
borne by the United Nations and shall be apportioned
among the Member States, to the extent of $10 million,
in accordance with the scale of assessments adopted
by the General Assembly for contributions to the annual
budget of the Organization for the financial year
1957 / 6
2. Decides jurther that this decision shall be without prejudice to the subseq.u~nt ap~rtionmen! of any
expenses in excess of $10 million which may be mcurred
in connexion with the Force;
3. Decides to establish a Committee composed of
Canada, Ceylon, Chile, El Salvador, India, Liberia,
Sweden, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and
the United States of America to examine the question
of the apportionment of the expenses of the Force in
excess of $10 million. This Committee shall take into
consideration, among other things, the discussions on
this matter at the General Assembly, and shall study
the question in ail its aspects, including the possibility
of voluntary contributions, the fixing of maximum
n For other resolutions relating to agenda item 66, see pages
46, 61 and 62.
• Official Records of the General Assembly, First Emergency Special Session, Annexes, agenda item 5, document
A/3302.
• Ibid., Eleventh Session, Annexes, agenda item 66, document
A/3383.
"'Ibid., Eleventh Session, Fifth Committee, 541st meeting,
paras. 78 to 81.
.. See resolution 1087 (XI) ..

amounts for the expenses of the Emergency Force
that, with prior approval by the General Assembly,
could be established on each occasion, and the principle
or the formulation of scales of contributions different
from the scale of contributions by Member States to
the ordinary budget for 1957. The Committee will
present its report as soon as possible.
632nd plenary meeting,
21 December 1956.

1090 (XI). Administrative and financial arrangements for the United Nations Emergency Force 20
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1122 (XI) of 26 November
1956 authorizing the establishment of a United Nations
Emergency Force Special Account in an initial amount
of $10 million and its resolution 1089 (XI) of 21
December 1956 apportioning this initial $10 million
among the Member States in accordance with the scale
of assessments adopted by the General Assembly for
contributions to the annual budget of the Organization
for 1957,25
N oting that the expenses of the Force already approved for 1957 represent a sizable increase in assessments placed on Member States, causing a grave unanticipated financial burden for many Governments,
Acknowledging that certain Governments have borne
without charge certain of the expenses of the Force,
such as pay, equipment, supplies and services,
N oting nevertheless that the Secretary-General estimates that the expenses of the Force for 1957 will
exceed the $10 million previously assessed,
N oting the request of the Secretary-General for
authority to enter into commitments for the Force up
to a total of $16.5 million,
1. Authorizes the Secretary-General to incur expenses for the United Nations Emergency Force up
to a total of $16.5 million in respect of the period of
31 December 1957;
2.· Invites Member States to make voluntary contributions to meet the sum of $6.5 million so as to ease
the financial burden for 1957 on the membership as a
whole;

3. Authorizes the Secretary-General, pending receipt of contributions to the United Nations Emergency
Force Special Account:
(a) To advance from the \-Vorking Capital Fund
such sums as the Special Account may require to meet
any expenses chargeable to it ;
( b) Where necessary, to arrange for loans to the
Special Account from appropriate sources, including
other funds under the control of the Secretary-General,
provided that the repayment of any such advances of
loans to the Special Account shall constitute a tirst
charge against contributions as they are received, and
further provided that such loans shall not affect current
operational programmes ;
4. Decides that the General Assembly, at its twelfth
session, shall consider the basis for financing any costs
of the Force in excess of $10 million not covered by
voluntary contributions.
662nd plenary meeting,
27 February 1957.
