United Nations

S/PV.5463

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-first year

5463rd meeting
Thursday, 15 June 2006, 11.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Løj . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Denmark)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. García Moritán
Mr. Wang Guangya
Mr. Gayama
Mr. De La Sablière
Nana Effah-Apenteng
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Oshima
Mr. Gallardo
Mr. Al-Nasser
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Burian
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Mahiga
Mr. Bolton

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 30 of resolution
1546 (2004) (S/2006/360)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

06-38901 (E)

*0638901*

S/PV.5463

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 30 of resolution 1546 (2004)
(S/2006/360)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Iraq in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zebari
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: On behalf of the members of the
Council, I extend a warm welcome to His Excellency
Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Iraq.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Ms.
Angela Kane, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
30 of resolution 1546 (2004), document S/2006/360.
Members of the Council also have before them
photocopies of a letter dated 12 June 2006 from the
Secretary-General, transmitting letters concerning the

2

International Advisory and Monitoring Board. This
letter and its enclosures will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/2006/394.
I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2006/377, which contains a letter dated
9 June 2006 from the Permanent Representative of Iraq
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. Angela Kane, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, and by His Excellency
Mr. John Bolton, representative of the United States,
on behalf of the multinational force.
I now give the floor to Ms. Angela Kane,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs.
Ms. Kane: The report of the Secretary-General
before the Council details the work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) from 8
March to 2 June 2006, based on its mandate under
resolution 1546 (2004). I am pleased to brief the
Council today on the activities of UNAMI under the
leadership of the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative, Mr. Ashraf Jehangir Qazi.
During the past months, the Government
formation process was at the centre of political
attention in Iraq. Following the election for a new
parliament on 15 December 2005, Iraq’s political
leaders engaged in a period of extensive and complex
negotiations, which culminated on 20 May in the
formation of the first constitutionally elected
Government led by Prime Minister Nouri Al-Maliki.
Differences of view within and among the political
blocs delayed three ministerial appointments.
Following further negotiations, this process was
completed on 8 June with the confirmation of the
Ministers of Defence, Interior and National Security.
Through this process, Iraq’s political leaders have
shown that they can rise to the challenge of dialogue
and compromise with a view to forming an inclusive
and democratic Government, despite difficult overall
circumstances. This is all the more remarkable given
the serious deterioration of the security situation
following the Samarra bombing in February 2006.
Of particular concern is the mounting loss of
civilian life as a result of insecurity, high levels of
violence and a breakdown in law and order. It appears
that intercommunal violence and criminal activities
have compounded insurgent violence as threats to

06-38901

S/PV.5463

national security and stability. Among the most
affected provinces were Baghdad, Ninewa, Salahuddin,
Anbar and, more recently, Diyala and Basra. In Basra,
the Government declared a month-long state of
emergency on 31 May and reinforced its security
presence. Ta’mim — mostly the city of Kirkuk — also
witnessed a growing number of violent incidents.
While the United Nations does not have precise
information about the numbers and breakdown of the
victims and perpetrators of violence, UNAMI
concluded in its latest bimonthly human rights report
that “hundreds of civilians are reported killed or
wounded weekly, including women and children, as
targeted or unintended victims of violent attacks”.
The Secretary-General’s report emphasizes that
March 2006 was the fourth most deadly month since
May 2003, with twice as many Iraqis killed as in
December 2005. In Baghdad, the Medico-Legal
Institute recently confirmed that more than 6,000
bodies were received in the first five months of 2006
alone. These are indeed gruesome figures. Targeted
assassinations, including attacks against prominent
politicians and their relatives, intimidation, threats and
kidnappings appear to be aimed directly at provoking
sectarian strife, lawlessness and ungovernability, as
well as a general atmosphere of fear and the loss of
public trust in the authorities. This violence has led to
an increase in internal displacement. Since late
February more than 100,000 people have been
displaced, adding up to a total of approximately 1.3
million internally displaced persons country-wide.
It is encouraging that immediately upon taking
office Prime Minister Al-Maliki expressed his
commitment to improve the security situation and
promote national reconciliation as his key priorities.
His new Government must now be empowered to
enable it to heal political and social divisions through
dialogue and confidence-building, to strengthen
democratic institutions and the rule of law and to
improve the living conditions for all Iraqis. This
approach offers the best prospects for ensuring that the
political process impacts positively on the security
situation. A promised review of anti-terror and deBaathification legislation will help to shape a more
conducive environment for national reconciliation.
However, achieving positive results in all these
areas will require time. At the outset, the effectiveness
of the new Government will largely be defined by its

06-38901

ability to inspire the confidence of the Iraqi people by
taking immediate measures to improve security.
First and foremost, this will require the new
Government to gradually take full ownership of its
national affairs, including in the vital area of security,
assisted, as necessary, by the international community.
Efforts by the Multinational Force to speed up the
training and equipping of the Iraqi security forces
remain indispensable in this regard. A determined
effort is also needed to control militias and other
unauthorized armed forces with a view to reestablishing a State monopoly on weapons. The United
Nations welcomes Prime Minister Al-Maliki’s
expressed commitment to this issue.
In addition, in tackling violence, both the Iraqi
security forces and the Multinational Force have a
particular responsibility to act in full accordance with
international human rights and humanitarian law.
Notwithstanding their efforts to address Iraq’s security
challenges, the United Nations is deeply concerned
about reported violations of those standards and urges
the Iraqi security forces, as well as the Multinational
Force to ensure full, transparent and effective
investigations of all such incidents to prevent their
recurrence.
Furthermore, the United Nations hopes that the
new Government will make it a priority to set a robust
human rights agenda that addresses both past and
current human rights violations and includes the
establishment of an independent national human rights
commission and a centre for missing and disappeared
persons. A robust human rights protection mechanism
must include investigating all allegations of human
rights violations and bringing perpetrators to justice in
order to prevent the development of a culture of
impunity.
In this context, the United Nations remains
concerned about the large number of detainees held in
detention centres country-wide without investigation or
criminal
charges.
While
we
welcome
the
announcement by the new Government to release 2,500
detainees — on 7 June an initial group of
approximately 600 detainees was released — more
needs to be done to find constructive solutions to this
issue, including the release of the investigation into the
illegal detention centre of Al-Jadiriya and of other
investigations carried out by the Government on this
issue.

3

S/PV.5463

In addition to security measures, the new
Government will have to take broader measures with
the ultimate aim of promoting national reconciliation.
Although the new Government bears primary
responsibility in this regard, regional countries and the
wider international community can play an important
role in support of its efforts. The following steps at the
national, regional and international level might be
considered.
At the national level, it is not just the
responsibility of the Government, but of all Iraqi
political, social and religious leaders to eschew the
politics of sectarianism, hatred and violence, in which
everybody ultimately stands to lose, and instead
embrace dialogue, compromise and intercommunal
harmony in the larger national interest, in which all
stand to gain. Through their increasing active
participation in Iraq’s democratic process, the vast
majority of Iraqis have demonstrated time and again
that, despite severe provocations, they reject the
politics of extremism pursued by a few and are
determined to resolve their differences peacefully.
This demonstrates that Iraq has a strong
foundation for national reconciliation. Three main
elements are needed to succeed. The first is an
inclusive political process that is responsive to the
needs of all Iraqi constituencies. The second is the
political will by all Iraqi leaders to work towards this
end, and the third element is effective mechanisms to
promote dialogue and consensus-building. The review
of the constitution that was agreed upon last year by
Iraq’s political leaders could be an effective vehicle for
advancing the process of national reconciliation,
including for reaching a national consensus on a strong
framework for the Iraqi State. The constitution
provides for the early establishment of a constitutional
review committee of the new parliament. The United
Nations hopes that the new parliament will address this
issue as a matter of priority and remain fully
committed to providing continued assistance through
UNAMI’s Office of Constitutional Support in
Baghdad.
The new parliament will also be required to form
specialized committees on important issues such as the
adoption of an electoral law and the establishment of a
new independent high electoral commission. These will
be fundamental steps for ensuring effective
preparations for future electoral events, such as the
planned governorate council and municipal elections.

4

UNAMI also stands ready to continue its support role
in this important area.
At the regional level, the League of Arab States is
planning to convene a conference on Iraqi national
accord. Such a forum could serve to encourage
dialogue and consensus among different Iraqi political
groups and thus contribute to national reconciliation.
Special Representative Qazi and UNAMI are working
closely with the League of Arab States on the
preparations for that conference — now scheduled for
August — in follow-up to the November 2005 Cairo
conference. Thorough preparations ensuring broadly
and truly representative Iraqi participation and
effective follow-up will be an important element for
the success of the conference.
At the international level, there is now an
opportunity to build a deeper consensus in support of
Iraq's transition, including in the Security Council. In
addition to fulfilling existing pledges and increasing
the levels of debt forgiveness, support for
reconstruction and foreign investment and an Iraqi-led
framework for mobilizing new and additional
international assistance for Iraq that has the broadest
possible support from the international community
should be considered as a matter of priority. For its
part, UNAMI and the country team have continued to
support the new Government in establishing effective,
transparent and accountable public institutions,
providing access to basic services and restoring public
infrastructure. UNAMI has also maintained its leading
role in donor coordination. We look forward to
discussing our future support role in this area in the
context of the priorities of the new national
development strategy.
As noted in the Secretary-General's report, the
Organization's presence and ability to operate
effectively in Iraq remain severely constrained by the
security environment. To provide United Nations staff
with the best security possible, and therefore continue
to maintain a presence in Iraq, a number of mitigating
and protective measures are in place. The development
of an integrated long-term United Nations complex in
Baghdad has continued, and new premises in Erbil and
Basra have now been completed. For the foreseeable
future, the United Nations will continue to rely on the
Multinational Force for static and movement
protection.

06-38901

S/PV.5463

With respect to dedicated air assets, we very
much welcome the decision by Denmark to offer
UNAMI a dedicated aircraft, and look forward to
discussions on the implementation arrangements of that
offer.
We are also grateful to all other Member States
that, in a variety of roles, support the work of the
United Nations in Iraq from its bases inside the
country, as well as in Jordan and Kuwait.
The United Nations remains fully committed,
circumstances permitting, to implement its mandate
under resolution 1546 (2004). Special Representative
Qazi and his team stand ready to render their good
offices and provide political facilitation to the new
Government, with a view to promoting dialogue and
national reconciliation. In addition, we intend to
strengthen our activities in other key areas of our
mandate, particularly concerning reconstruction and
development. We look forward to a comprehensive and
sustained dialogue with the new Government to
explore how we can best fulfil our mandate within the
prevailing circumstances.
In conclusion, with the establishment of the first
constitutionally elected Government, Iraq's political
transition, set forth in the Transitional Administrative
Law endorsed by resolution 1546 (2004), has been
completed. Over the past three years, Iraq's transition
has moved successfully from the Governing Council to
the Interim Government and the Transitional
Government. That culminated, in December 2005, in
Iraq's first elections for a constitutionally elected
Government. During that process the Iraqi people
showed great courage in participating in two elections
and one constitutional referendum, under very difficult
circumstances. These are important accomplishments
that have laid the foundations for Iraq's democratic
future, which need to be sustained with the full support
of the international community.
That successful political transition, however, has
been accompanied by continued instability, violence
and gross violations of fundamental human rights by
all sides. While it may be understandable that, due to
their transitory character, previous Governments were
unable to take some of the hard decisions required to
address the urgent needs of the Iraqi people, the
establishment of a constitutionally elected Government
for a full four-year term offers new hope.

06-38901

Throughout their long history, the people of Iraq
have demonstrated that they have all the necessary
human, financial and natural capital to succeed. The
key to success remains finding lasting inclusive
political solutions to Iraq's most pressing challenges
within an overall framework of national reconciliation.
The United Nations remains committed to playing its
part in that endeavour.
The President: I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Kane for her briefing.
Mr. Bolton (United States of America): As
requested by Security Council resolutions 1546 (2004)
and 1637 (2005), I am pleased to report to the Security
Council on behalf of the 29 countries making up the
Multinational Force (MNF) on the Force's progress
towards fulfilling its mandate.
This reporting period has borne witness to a
striking development. On 7 June, MNF and Iraqi forces
killed Al-Qaida in Iraq terrorist leader Abu Musab AlZarqawi and one of his key associates, Sheikh Abd AlRahman, in an air strike against an identified isolated
safehouse. Tips and intelligence from Al-Zarqawi's
own network led forces to Al-Zarqawi and several of
his associates, who were conducting a meeting.
Although the original leader of Al-Qaida in Iraq is now
dead, he has been replaced, and the terrorist
organization still poses a threat, as its members will
continue to attempt to intimidate the Iraqi people and
threaten the Iraqi Government as it moves towards
greater stability and prosperity.
The Iraqi people overwhelmingly reject violence
as a means to drive political change. The international
community continues to stand with the people of Iraq
in their determined drive for a secure, stable and
democratic country. We honour the memory and
sacrifice of all who have lost their lives in the struggle
for a federal, democratic, pluralistic and unified Iraq.
There have been historic developments since our
last report, some of them unfolding even as we meet
today. Iraq's leaders and the Iraqi people reached a
critical milestone in Iraq's political development on
22 April, when Iraqi political leaders announced the
selection of senior members of a new Government,
including the Prime Minister-designate, President, two
Deputy Presidents and Speaker of the Council of
Representatives. That key event was followed on
20 May by the approval by the Council of
Representatives of nearly all of Prime Minister

5

S/PV.5463

Maliki's Cabinet. The final three ministers were
approved on 8 June. Prime Minister Maliki and his
Council of Ministers brought into office with them the
hopes of all Iraqis, as well as the good wishes of the
international community. So significant was the
combination of forming a fully democratic Government
and the well-deserved end of Al-Zarqawi that President
Bush this week visited Baghdad to demonstrate our
commitment to those who support peace and
democracy and oppose the terrorists.
The extremists and terrorists remain capable of,
and intent on, carrying out attacks against Iraqi
civilians, officials and security forces, with the goal of
destabilizing the legitimately elected Government of
Iraq and denying the Iraqi people the democracy that
they have chosen through free and fair elections.
During this period more than 81 per cent of
attacks were concentrated in four of Iraq's 18
provinces — Baghdad, Al Anbar, Salah ad Din and
Ninawa. Since our last report, Diyala province and
Ninawa province were among the four most attackprone provinces. Twelve provinces, containing more
than 50 per cent of the population, experienced only 6
per cent of all attacks. Nine provinces have averaged
one or no attacks per day since February.
In addition to the threat from terrorist groups
such as Al-Qaida in Iraq, militias and other groups
continue to challenge the rule of law at the local and
regional levels. Attacks on Iraq's infrastructure
continue to adversely affect oil revenues and the
availability of electricity. However, the number of
infrastructure attacks has declined since August 2005,
suggesting that efforts by the MNF and the Iraqi
Security Forces (ISF) to secure Iraq's infrastructure are
meeting with some success. The Multinational Force
will continue to work with the Iraqi Government and
other international partners to strengthen further
infrastructure security.
The Iraqi Security Forces continue to grow,
improve and conduct more and more independent
operations each day. Multinational Forces continue to
train, mentor and equip the ISF and to hand over battle
responsibilities to Iraqi forces as proficiency allows
and conditions permit. Transfers are evaluated area by
area and region by region, and are incremental to
ensure an effective and successful handover of security
responsibilities.

6

As of 29 May, 111 Iraqi army, strategic
infrastructure and special operations battalions are
conducting counter-insurgency operations. Seventy-one
of those battalions are operating in the lead with
coalition support and several are operating
independently. All 28 Iraqi National Police battalions
are operational, with two of those battalions also
operating in the lead with coalition support. Iraqi
Security Forces assuming security and control of their
own areas of responsibility increased to two division
headquarters, 16 brigade headquarters and 63
battalions. Those areas include more than 30,000
square miles of Iraq. By the end of the summer, 75 per
cent of Iraqi brigades and battalions will be leading
counter-insurgency operations with coalition support.
A strong Iraqi Security Force presence continues
in Baghdad. Iraqi forces now total over 265,000
Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Interior personnel
trained
and
equipped
for
counter-insurgency
operations. That includes over 117,000 Ministry of
Defence personnel, over 103,000 police and over
45,000 other Ministry of Interior forces.
Recent examples of how Iraqi Ministry of
Defence and Ministry of Interior forces are progressing
in the ability to provide security to the Iraqi people
include the following. In late March, 196 Iraqi police
officers, known as the sons of Al Anbar, successfully
graduated from the Baghdad police academy. Upon
their return to Ramadi, where they protect the people
of their home province, they were enthusiastically
greeted by Iraqi and multinational forces. “We are the
future of Iraq, each and every one of us”, proclaimed
one new graduate. “We will make a difference for our
sons and daughters.”
In April, the 1st Brigade, 4th Iraqi Army
Division, began the first phase of assuming
responsibility for security in Salah ad Din province.
The event was commemorated with a ceremony
attended by Multinational Force and Iraqi officials. The
1st Brigade has progressively taken a larger role in
security for the province by assuming responsibility for
security in residential areas including Samarra and
Tikrit.
In April, soldiers from the 4th Company, 2nd
Battalion, 4th Brigade, 8th Iraqi Army Division
conducted Operation Cobra Strike with MNF forces.
Cobra Strike was a mission to locate the suspected
leader and financier of a terrorist cell working in the

06-38901

S/PV.5463

area. Iraqi leadership planned the scheme of
manoeuvres for the operation. MNF forces were on
hand in an advisory role.
In May, the 3rd Battalion, 3rd Brigade, 3rd Iraqi
Army Division assumed the lead in security operations
in and around Sinjar, in western Ninawa province,
marking another example of the steadily-increasing
Iraqi army role in providing security to the people of
Iraq.
In May, the first class of 20 Iraqi soldiers
graduated from the Iraqi army basic medical course,
certifying them as Iraqi medics who will serve with the
Iraqi military throughout western Al Anbar province.
The goal is to have 150 trained Iraqi medics by year’s
end to serve with the army, partnered with the MNF
forces throughout the province.
United Nations contributions are vital. We urge
the United Nations to continue to fulfil its mandate
under Security Council resolution 1546 (2004).
Considerable work remains. We look forward to
UNAMI’s expansion of its presence in Iraq, especially
to Basra and Erbil.
The Multinational Force, notably the Georgian,
Romanian and South Korean contingents, continues to
provide security for the United Nations in Baghdad,
Basra and Erbil, respectively. The troops provide static
site security, reconnaissance, security patrols, convoy
escorts, checkpoints and when necessary, MEDEVAC
and emergency evacuation. Also, Fijian troops provide
static and close-in protection for United Nations
personnel and facilities in Baghdad.
The measure of success will be the dawn of the
day when the Iraqi people are fully able to secure their
own safety, freedom and prosperity. Training Iraqi
security forces to assume primary responsibility for
security is essential. The completion of the
Government formation process under the popularlyratified constitution heralds the beginning of a new era
in Iraq’s history. Prime Minister Maliki’s Government
faces great challenges. We hope that he will work to
promote national dialogue and inclusion, as well as to
strive tirelessly to deliver improvements in security,
stability and quality of life to the Iraqi people.
The international community and Iraq’s
neighbours, especially Syria and Iran, must do more to
stop foreign fighters from entering Iraq. Additionally,
they must do more to answer the Security Council’s

06-38901

call in resolution 1546 (2004) to end material and
financial support for individuals and groups that
oppose the new legitimate Iraqi Government.
Moreover, we call upon the entire international
community to support Iraq’s sovereign Government
and to redouble its assistance efforts.
In conclusion, the MNF and combined MNF-ISF
operations continue to provide the security necessary
for Iraq’s new democratically elected constitutional
Government to succeed. We are pleased to note
Foreign Minister Zebari’s 9 June letter (S/2006/377,
annex) to the Security Council, expressing the Iraqi
Government’s support for the MNF’s continued role in
providing for security and stability in Iraq. The MNF
remains committed to its responsibilities and to
achieving ultimate success.
The President: I thank Mr. Bolton for his
briefing.
I invite His Excellency, Mr. Hoshyar Zebari,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq to take the floor.
Mr. Zebari (Iraq): I thank the members of the
Security Council for allowing me the privilege of
addressing the Council today. In accordance with
Security Council resolution 1637 (2005), and pursuant
to Iraq’s request in a letter to the Security Council
dated 27 October 2005 (S/2005/687, annex), the
mandate of the Multinational Force in Iraq is now due
for review.
Over the previous 12 months, despite formidable
challenges, the people of Iraq have realized historic
progress towards a pluralistic, federal and united
democracy. The Transitional National Assembly
drafted a new permanent constitution, which was
successfully ratified through public referendum on
15 October 2005. In December, over 70 per cent of the
eligible electorate voted for Iraq’s first constitutional
Government, in the third internationally approved
election of 2005. This inspiring exercise of our
democratic rights is a credit to the determination and
courage of the Iraqi people to secure their future and
their country.
Our first permanent national unity Government
has now assumed office for a four-year term, in
accordance with the constitution, and is held
accountable by the 275 men and women of the freely
elected
Council
of
Representatives.
These
achievements mark the completion of our timely

7

S/PV.5463

compliance with our obligations under the political
process mandated in Iraq’s transitional administrative
law and endorsed in resolution 1546 (2004).
However, as we have enjoyed this political
progress, a difficult and destructive security situation
persists. We continue to fight an insurgency, crime,
incidents of sectarian violence and foreign terrorists
trying to incite civil war and prevent the consolidation
of our democratic gains. The continued cooperation
between Iraqi forces and the Multinational Force
remains necessary for our security and critical to
attaining the goal of self-sufficiency in defending our
country and securing peace.
In reference to my letter to the President of the
Security Council of 9 June (S/2006/377, annex), the
Government of Iraq therefore requests, and welcomes,
the continued presence of the Multinational Force in
our country. We thank those forces, and the coalition
countries, for their vital contribution and commitment
to the people of Iraq.
With the formation of a new full-term
Government, and the recent elimination of the most
notorious terrorist, Abu Musab Al-Zarqawi, who was
responsible for the bombing of the United Nations
headquarters in Baghdad in August 2003, we sense a
great momentum among the Iraqi people and a very
real chance to turn our situation around.
But we remain realistic. We do not underestimate
the challenge of getting a tight grip on the insurgency
and uniting the country behind the new Government.
Our agenda includes security as our immediate priority
and the critical prerequisite to progress on national
reconciliation, Government performance and economic
development. In cooperation with the MNF, NATO
training missions and protection forces of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), we are
building up the capacity, training, professionalism and
equipment of Iraqi forces. We share the same end goal
as our coalition allies: for our forces to reach selfsufficiency as soon as possible so that the multinational
troops can return home with our great gratitude.
Volunteer recruits represent a cross-section of
Iraqi society under the banner of Iraqi national identity.
The Government of Iraq, as the sole legitimate
administrator of armed forces, will activate its policy
to demobilize militia members and integrate them into
society.

8

Our forces are gradually assuming responsibility
for significant areas of the country and are leading
independent offensive operations with visible success.
As the ongoing process of handing over security
responsibilities from the MNF to Iraqi forces
continues, more provinces will come under our control.
Eliminating Zarqawi was a major blow to the Al-Qaida
terrorist network and a victory for the MNF and the
Iraqi forces and people, and for our intelligence
gathering operations, a key weapon in the fight against
terror networks and insurgency. As I speak today, a
large security operation is under way in Baghdad,
conducted jointly by Iraqi forces and the Multinational
Force, to secure the political and economic heart of
Iraq. This security plan will be extended to the rest of
the country.
My Government understands that security
operations must go hand in hand with a series of
initiatives to promote national consensus, tolerance,
justice and respect for human rights. Already our
Government has, in a goodwill gesture of amnesty,
released hundreds of detainees and prisoners. We
continue to pursue political dialogue to broaden the
political process. Despite intimidation, Sunni leaders
joined us at the negotiating table. Last year, they
boycotted elections; today they are an essential part of
the national unity Government and hold top cabinet
positions.
Recently, Iraq and the Arab League jointly agreed
to hold a reconciliation conference in Baghdad in early
August. Under this umbrella, all those who believe in
the political process and who are ready to abandon
terrorism and violence as a means to an end will have
the opportunity to participate, along with other Arab
countries, a number of other friendly countries and the
United Nations.
Contrary to media portrayals and despite the
terrorist tactics, civil war is not taking place in Iraq.
However, there are increased incidents of sectarian
violence. But Iraqis have a long history of peaceful
coexistence. We have explicitly rejected attempts to
stoke sectarian strife by exercising remarkable unity
and restraint and by voting for a sovereign National
Unity Government. That Government is broadly
representative of, and is governing by the consent of,
Iraq’s multiethnic religious and political society. It
assumes its legitimacy and authority from the
constitution, which itself is a product of an inclusive
process of consultation and compromise.

06-38901

S/PV.5463

Our next political challenge is the review of the
constitution within agreed mechanisms stipulated in its
charter. Successfully identifying necessary revisions
and accommodating competing interests will further
strengthen national consensus.
For us to consolidate political stability we must
also expedite socio-economic development and
reconstruction. My Government is acting fast to restore
public confidence by giving high priority to the
provision of basic services and strengthening the
Commission for Public Integrity to eradicate
corruption and improve accountability. We are
undertaking broad ministerial reform, capacitybuilding and modernizing of institutions within a core
framework of democracy, human rights and the rule of
law. At the same time, we plan to accelerate the pace of
reconstruction and lay the foundations of a sustainable
economy to generate employment, stimulate the private
sector and capitalize on Iraq’s wealth of natural
resources. Whereas over the previous three years
development has been frustrated, mainly by lack of
security but also by transnational administration, we
can now benefit from continuity in long-term planning
in line with Iraq’s national development strategy. As
the mandates of the Development Fund for Iraq (DFI)
and of the International Advisory and Monitoring
Board are also due for review, the Government of Iraq
proposes to continue the present arrangements
according to resolution 1637 (2005). These bodies play
a crucial role in promoting transparency in the
disbursements of Iraq’s resources for the benefit of the
Iraqi people.
We also note the support of UNAMI in the
constitutional process, humanitarian assistance, donor
coordination and electoral assistance. We ask that the
United Nations continue to offer its unique expertise
for the forthcoming provincial elections throughout
Iraq. We commend the work of the Special
Representative, Ambassador Ashraf Qazi, and welcome
UNAMI’s proposal for the Baghdad peace initiative to
help bridge communal differences. We also note the
Secretary-General’s concerns regarding human rights
in his quarterly report to the Security Council. While
the primary perpetrators of human rights abuses in Iraq
are the insurgents, terrorists and criminals, we as a
Government acknowledge our ongoing obligation to
uphold and protect human rights as enshrined in our
constitution. The Government of Iraq is committed to
meeting violations with justice and reaffirms its

06-38901

commitment to establishing an independent human
rights commission in Iraq.
We continue to need the United Nations to
engage in Iraq to its maximum capacity. We call upon
Member States to step up the provision of funds and
operational support, and my Government pledges to
provide any assistance necessary to enhance the United
Nations mission. As security in Iraq improves, we
request that the United Nations reinforce its staff and
increase its role throughout the country. We must not
underestimate the positive impact of a sovereign,
united and stable Iraq at the strategic and geographical
heart of the Middle East. We have demonstrated that
our progress does not contradict the interests of our
neighbours. We continue to pursue regional
cooperation on economic exchanges, political dialogue
and border security in order to promote peaceful
coexistence with our neighbours. Furthermore, we
expect our neighbours to demonstrate genuine support
for the new Government and goodwill in securing
borders and preventing arms, foreign elements and
terrorists from crossing into Iraq to undermine the
stability of the new Government.
We believe that the formation of an international
contact group, involving Iraq’s neighbours, the five
permanent members of the Council, the United Nations
and the Arab League, would be a fair and useful means
to build international support for regional security and
to enhance reconstruction plans for the country.
We would also like to take this opportunity to
point out that the time is now ripe for the Security
Council to review the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission mandate with
a view to terminating it, since the circumstances that
led to its creation no longer exist.
The Government of Iraq thanks the United
Nations for its expressed support as we begin our
challenging mandate. We ask that the international
community take this opportunity to revitalize its
assistance and support to Iraq and fulfil donor pledges
already made at Madrid, Amman and Tokyo so as to
help my Government to accomplish its responsibilities
to our people.
This is the beginning of a new chapter in Iraq’s
transformation from dictatorship to a sovereign,
peaceful and prosperous federal democracy, as voted
for by the Iraqi people. My Government recognizes
that we have a critical window of opportunity to break

9

S/PV.5463

with the past. The future of the country is up to us, and
we are seizing the initiative. We have paid dearly —
along with the sacrifices of the sons and daughters of
our allies — and we will not let our losses be in vain.
The more help we receive now, the sooner we can
succeed in our common cause.

The President: The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
I should now like to invite Council members to a
private meeting to continue our discussion of the item.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

10

06-38901
