S/PV.7383

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7383rd meeting

Tuesday, 17 February 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Hmoud
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. McLay
Mr. Laro
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Fifth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2015/70)
Second report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 2169
(2014) (S/2015/82)

15-04201 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1504201*

S/PV.7383

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

as the fifth report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/70)
pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution 2107 (2013) on the
issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals,
and missing Kuwaiti property.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Fifth report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2015/70)
Second report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 2169
(2014) (S/2015/82)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Iraq to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/70, which contains the fifth report
of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of
Security Council resolution 2107 (2013). I also wish to
draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2015/82, the second report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 2169 (2014).
Before giving the floor to Mr. Mladenov, I would
like to take this opportunity, given that this will be his
final briefing to the Council as Special Representative
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq, to thank him for his exceptional service. The
Council wishes him every success as he transitions
to his new role as Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Personal Representative of
the Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the Palestinian Authority, and we
look forward to continuing to work with him in that
capacity.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: I have the honour to present the
second report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/82)
pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 2169 (2014), as well
2/7

17/02/2015

As I complete my tenure as the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative for Iraq, to borrow a phrase, I
remain a paranoid optimist — an optimist because,
despite the year-long security crisis, Iraq’s political,
community and religious leaders have coalesced to save
their country from terror. Today more than ever, there
is a growing understanding that Iraq can move forward
only on the basis of the principles of democracy, the
rule of law, respect for diversity and inclusivity. This
understanding has been increasingly evident since
the formation of a national unity Government set on
addressing many long-standing concerns of the Iraqi
people. I am, however, also paranoid that things may go
wrong. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
remains in control of most of Iraq’s western provinces;
the fragile efforts towards unity and reconciliation
need to be carefully nurtured if they are to bear fruit;
while the economy has been hit by falling oil prices and
skyrocketing security costs.
Since its formation in September 2014, the
Government has taken important steps in fulfilling its
agenda. It has engaged countries of the region, all with
a view to regaining the confidence of Iraq’s population
in the political process and promoting stability. While
pursuing these objectives, Iraq’s most pressing goal
remains to win back territory taken by ISIL. In that
respect, the Government hats taken important measures
for security sector reform. The authorities have pledged
to provide military and financial assistance to local
leaders and tribal fighters to aid their struggle against
ISIL. Since the beginning of the year, at least 4,000
Iraqis from Anbar and Ninewa have signed up as part
of the popular mobilization force — an important first
step in securing local forces for the liberation of Iraq’s
western provinces.
I encourage the Government to empower and
quickly provide all necessary means to these local
fighters as they seek to free their homes from ISIL,
while also supporting recovery and reconstruction. I
also encourage the Council of Representatives to adopt
the necessary legislation to establish the Iraqi national
guard so as to allow the provinces to take greater
responsibility for their own security. In January, the
Government submitted to Parliament a bill to that
effect.

15-04201

17/02/2015

The situation concerning Iraq

An exclusively military solution to the
problem of ISIL is impossible; indeed, it would be
counterproductive. I therefore welcome the consistent
calls for unity by the President, the Prime Minister
and the Speaker of Parliament. Any effort to achieve
unity through reconciliation must be based on the
Constitution and the principles of inclusivity, with the
full participation of political, religious and community
leaders from across Iraq. A particular focus must also
be placed on increasing the role and participation
of women. As such, the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) has strongly supported
the Government’s national reconciliation and social
cohesion agenda.
Recently, we convened in Baghdad a round table
on social cohesion with prominent Iraqi political,
religious and civil society representatives, who
discussed the causes of recommendations that were
presented to the Government. Subsequently, the
United Nations convened round tables in Karbala and
Basra, bringing together local leaders. During these
meetings, participants reiterated the importance of
strengthening social and religious cohesion, as well as
of rectifying divisions within Iraqi society. the United
Nations Development Programme is also expanding its
community reconciliation initiative at the grass-roots
level.
In addition to these developments, relations between
the federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional
Government have improved following their historic
agreement on energy exports and revenue-sharing.
Improved cooperation is also evident between the
Iraqi security forces, the Peshmerga, volunteers,
local communities and the forces of the anti-ISIL
international coalition. This cooperation has been
key in dealing with the most recent security threats,
including to the city of Kirkuk, the Ein Al-Assad air
base and elsewhere in the country.
Despite these positive steps, the process is fraught
with risks. Armed conflict and acts of terrorism continue
to inflict a terrible toll on the people of Iraq. In 2014,
at least 12,000 civilians were killed and over 23,000
injured. In January this year alone, there were over
2,200 civilian casualties, including 790 killed and some
1,500 injured. Almost daily terrorist attacks continue to
deliberately target all Iraqis — most notably from the
Shiite community, as well as from ethnic and religious
minorities — across the country. The continued reports
of massive human rights violations and abuses being

S/PV.7383

committed by ISIL against civilians are gruesome. ISIL
has made a point of not hesitating to openly publicize
its crimes committed against men, women and children.
The safety and security of members of Iraq’s diverse
ethnic and religious communities in areas controlled
by ISIL — particularly the thousands of women and
children who remain in captivity — remain of grave
concern. Equally worrying is the increasing number
of reports of revenge attacks committed particularly
against members of the Sunni community in areas
liberated from ISIL control.
All of these ongoing human rights violations
present a serious threat to the cohesion of Iraq.
Some of Iraq’s recent military gains in Diyala, Salah
al-Din and Ninewa governorates have been marred by
claims that militias have killed unarmed civilians and
intentionally destroyed property and places of worship.
It is imperative that the Government act swiftly and
decisively to bring under control all armed groups that
are outside of the Constitution. Failing to do so risks
undermining the much-needed process of national
unity and reconciliation. Political parties, however,
should also show restraint in their statements in the
face of such acts, which are clearly aimed at destroying
Iraq’s social fabric.
It is in that respect that I welcome the Government’s
decision to conduct a full investigation into the alleged
massacres in Diyala province. To paraphrase Prime
Minister al-Abadi, a crime is a crime, no matter who
has committed it, and all responsible should be held
accountable It is also encouraging that, as we speak
today, Iraq’s President, Prime Minister and Speaker
of Parliament are holding a joint meeting to identify
measures to address the events of recent days.
The Government faces the additional challenge of
a very fiscally constrained environment. In a hallmark
of success in January, the Council of Representatives
approved the 2015 budget. Despite very tight spending
limits due to the fall in oil revenue, spiralling security
costs and an massively expanded public sector wage
bill, Parliament was able to set aside some $500 million
to help rebuild lives and livelihoods in those areas that
are liberated from ISIL. The United Nations is working
actively with the authorities to set up a recovery and
reconstruction fund through which Iraq’s allies,
neighbours and friends can contribute to this process
as well.
Most urgently perhaps, the Iraqi authorities and
the United Nations need to redouble our efforts in

15-042013/7

S/PV.7383

The situation concerning Iraq

supporting over 2 million internally displaced persons
(IDPs) who have been forced from their homes since
January 2014. Let me recall for the Council the gravity
of the situation on the ground by highlighting some
numbers. Some 5.2 million people need humanitarian
assistance in Iraq today, of whom 2.25 million are
displaced and 235,000 are refugees from the conflict in
Syria. To date, the population of the Kurdistan region
has increased by some 30 per cent because of the influx.
Despite the generosity of local communities across the
country, one-third of IDPs in accessible areas are living
in unfinished and abandoned buildings, makeshift
shelters and spontaneous settlements. They are highly
vulnerable and dependent on assistance to survive.
Let me sound the alarm bell. Sixty per cent of
humanitarian operations in Iraq are likely to shut
down or be curtailed unless funding is received in
the next few weeks. The food pipeline will break in
mid-May unless funding is received before the end of
March. The essential medicines pipeline will break at
the end of March. The United Nations humanitarian
country team, led by newly appointed Humanitarian
Coordinator Lise Grande, has put together a list of fasttrack priorities that cannot be postponed or ignored. We
urgently need approximately $150 million to support
IDPs, whose life-saving protection needs are enormous
and likely to grow. I take this opportunity to appeal to
the international community in that regard, at a time
when Iraq is highly vulnerable and when support for the
humanitarian operation will make a decisive difference
in the direction of the country.

17/02/2015

to move forward with their lives and find their place in
their country.
While tackling the security and political
challenges, the social and economic agenda must also
remain in focus. Addressing pockets of deep poverty,
particularly in the south of the country, providing
quality social services, providing a business climate for
investors, fighting pervasive corruption and, perhaps
most urgent, facilitating the return of displaced persons
to their homes and rebuilding areas liberated from
ISIL — all such policies are all key to social peace in
Iraq. I also take this opportunity to assure the people
and the Government of Iraq that the United Nations
will continue to provide international assistance and
expertise in that process.
Let me turn briefly to the fifth report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution
2107 (2013), on the issue of missing Kuwaiti and thirdcountry nationals and on property.
Iraq-Kuwait relations continue to be on the
ascendant. High-level Iraqi visits and the results of the
fourth Joint Ministerial Committee meeting are very
encouraging. Kuwait’s consulates in Basra and Erbil,
when opened, will take Iraq-Kuwait relations to the
next level.

As I conclude my mission in Iraq I would like to
send a message to the Government of Iraq to encourage
it to move swiftly on the full implementation of the
ministerial programme and the political agreement.
Those documents hold the key to seeing Iraq
successfully move forward. Discussions on approving
the necessary legislation for a national guard should be
swiftly finalized. That is important in order to empower
provinces to take more responsibility for their own
security. It will also help ensure that all weapons are
firmly under the control of the State. Most important,
the Government should act decisively to rebuild the
armed forces on a truly national basis.

I wish that I could report similar progress
to the Council on the missing Kuwaitis and the
Kuwaiti national archives since the previous report
(S/2014/776). The Kuwaiti Government and people are
understandably disappointed that nothing tangible has
been achieved for many years now. UNAMI shares
their disappointment. We have placed much emphasis
on witnesses and continue to emphasise that the most
modern scientific advances and technology should
be utilized. A UNAMI-identified witness travelled
recently to Kuwait during the reporting period. That
visit, for which UNAMI and the Iraqi Government
had worked hard, regrettably did not yield anything
substantial. Time remains our most formidable foe.
Our team is working to reach another witness, who has
been overseas and who Kuwait believes holds the key
to identifying a gravesite that may contain as many as
180 mortal remains.

Part of the political agreement that has been the
basis for the formation of the Government is to grant
amnesty and to revise the justice and accountability
law in order to allow Iraqis who have not committed
crimes under the brutal regime of Saddam Al-Hussein

Let me assure the Council and the families of
the Kuwaiti missing persons that the United Nations
will continue to do its utmost to fulfil its mandate.
Nonetheless, the key to achieving tangible progress is
primarily in the hands of the parties themselves. The

4/7

15-04201

17/02/2015

The situation concerning Iraq

goodwill between Kuwait and Iraq is at its highest since
1990. I believe that this is a very opportune moment
for their respective leaderships to come together on this
important humanitarian issue, review efforts so far and
decide on a new course of action. Resources, technology
and a fresh approach may all be required. As always,
UNAMI stands ready to support that process.
As I conclude my tenure as the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative for Iraq, let me say, on a more
personal level, how humbled I have been by the people
of the country. For decades they have lived with
dictatorship, conflict and terrorism, yet they persist
in their determination to build a democratic State.
Generations have been scarred and brought up in
fear — fear of oppression, fear for their future, fear for
their lives. Iraqi society has been deeply scarred and
will take a long time to heal. But the medicine is to look
forward to unity and reconciliation, not to turn to the
failed policies of the past.
ISIL flourishes when Iraq is weak, and Iraq is
weak when it is divided by sectarian politics and when
political patronage overtakes national loyalty. My
unyielding optimism for the country, however, stems
from the spirit of the ordinary Iraqi people, those who
stood up to defend their country in the summer of last
year, those who went out to vote despite car bombs and
terrorist attacks, those Iraqis who do not care whether
someone is Shia, Sunni, Christian, Yazidi, Kurd, Arab
or from any other community. It is the overwhelming
majority of ordinary Iraqis who have no foreign country
to flee to, no foreign passport to rely on. Those are the
men and women who will build a new Iraq. What we
in the international community can and must do is to
help them succeed. We must support them in building
democracy, without which the majority of Iraqis will
not feel secure, nor will their human rights be protected.
We must work with them to achieve a balance among
their diverse communities inside the country, because
without balance violence and extremism will persist.
We must assist them in ensuring justice, not reprisal,
for the crimes of the past and violations of today.
Finally, we must grant the people of Iraq the respect
and dignity that they deserve. That is the noble mission
of the United Nations in Iraq.
Allow me to thank Council members’ Governments
and the Secretary-General for the unity that they have
shown in supporting Iraq, for the unyielding support
for UNAMI and for the trust they have placed in me to
lead this difficult Mission. I also want to express my

S/PV.7383

deep gratitude to my colleagues in the Mission, in the
Secretariat and in the United Nations country team for
their commitment, bravery and hard work throughout
the years. And I would like to thank the Government
and the people of Iraq for the hospitality that they have
extended to me, for their friendship and for their daily
courage to never give up in the face of terror. It has
been an honour serving as the Secretary-General’s
Representative for Iraq.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to express my congratulations to
the People’s Republic of China on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
also pay tribute to the Permanent Mission of Chile for
its skilful presidency of the Council last month. And
I thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his important and
comprehensive briefing.
The Government and the people of Iraq express
their appreciation to the Russian Federation, China,
the United Kingdom, the United States and all the
other members of the Council for adopting resolution
2199 (2015) under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, with the aim of drying up the financial
resources of terrorist gangs.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/82)
positively and objectively places the spotlight on
developments in Iraq and on the achievements of the
Government of Prime Minister Haider Al Abadi since
the vote of confidence last August, which illustrates the
commitment of the Government of Iraq to make progress
on the programmes agreed for the first six months,
in spite of the security, humanitarian and economic
challenges facing Iraq, so as to ensure equality and the
rule of law, fight corruption and improve relations with
all States of the region and the world — with combating
the terrorist group Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) at the top of its priorities.
In the context of promoting internal political
stability, the Council of Representatives approved the
2015 federal budget bill. This is a fundamental step in
revitalizing Iraq’s economy. It is also a manifestation
of political agreements that reflect the Iraqi polity’s
acknowledgment of the responsibility it bears at the
current critical stage in Iraq.

15-042015/7

S/PV.7383

The situation concerning Iraq

The Government of Iraq continues to promote
national reconciliation on a number of fronts. The
Government has held intensive contacts with political
leaders, clans and religious authorities of all sects
with a view to reconciliation, renewing national bonds
and sending out a message of unity to the effect that
the national interest is paramount. Everyone believes
that cooperation among the Iraqi armed forces, the
Peshmerga, the Popular Movement and the clans in the
combat against ISIL is important and essential.
The Government has completed the drafting of a
law creating the national guard and has submitted it to
Parliament. It represents an opportunity for the members
of the clans and the national movements to defend their
cities in all governorates. Furthermore, during the same
period, an important political agreement was reached
between the central Government and the Government
of the Kurdistan region pertaining to the distribution
of natural resources in Iraq to all the Iraqi people in a
just manner, which is a fundamental step in the right
direction. It is a commitment made with Kurdistan as a
fundamental partner in the homeland, which will pave
the way to a long-term agreement.
In the context of promoting the rule of law and
combatting corruption, the Government has taken
administrative, legislative and judicial reform measures
aimed at uniting ranks and spreading a spirit of equality
and justice to all citizens. The Government is now
reviewing all Governmental sectors in order to pinpoint
corruption and undertake necessary reforms, including
the prosecution of some military leaders, in order to
create an atmosphere that would bring in foreign
investment to develop commercial opportunities in
the country and help in reconstruction. Furthermore,
the law on accountability and justice was reviewed
and referred to Parliament in order to reintegrate
many Government officials who had not committed
any crimes against the Iraqi people. This is, again, an
attempt at creating a united front.
A law has been signed that commits the security
forces and the justice ministry to protecting the human
rights of detainees in Iraqi prisons, including a central
register of all detainees, together with the reason
for their detention and a time frame for prosecution.
Paragraph 51 of the report of the Secretary-General
refers to reports of some incidents related to breaches
by some armed units, and the Prime Minister has
adopted an executive order to set up an investigative
committee on these events.

6/7

17/02/2015

We stress once again the importance of the
commitment of all Member States to the implementation
of resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2014)
on combatting terrorism and drying up its sources
of financing. There is no alternative to international
cooperation to combat terrorism, and many occasions
have proven that no State is safe from the threat of
terrorism. We look forward to seeing the role being
played more effectively, particularly by neighbouring
countries, in terms of cooperation, intelligence sharing
and border control, because these terrorist groups have
desecrated all human values. They have committed the
most heinous criminal terrorist acts against the Iraqi
people, whether Shiite, Sunni, Christian, Turkmen,
Shabak or Yazidi.
Those acts are in fact crimes of genocide committed
against humankind whose perpetrators must be held
accountable before international justice, without even
mentioning the trafficking in human organs and the theft
of and trafficking in archeological items and oil. The
Iraqi armed forces and the Kurdish Peshmerga forces,
in cooperation with the popular forces, in coordination
with the clans and with an international support, will
undertake combatting terrorism. However, we require
still more assistance if we are to overcome ISIL.
The protection of civilians is a fundamental
responsibility of the Iraqi Government. Terrorism
has displaced 2 million people from their homes, in
addition to the Syrian refugees being hosted by Iraq,
who number about 250,000. Therefore, the Government,
in cooperation with the United Nations and other
organizations working in the field, is providing for
humanitarian needs to lessen the suffering of those
internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees and
facilitate their return to their homes after their liberation
from the terrorism of ISIL. The Government has set
aside $1 billion for 2014 and $1 billion in the federal
budget for 2015 to help IDPs. Iraq continues to require
the support of the international community to take on
the humanitarian crisis raised by the ISIL terrorist
entity and to help Iraq confront humanitarian needs,
particularly in the winter with very low temperatures
and very harsh living conditions.
This year 2015 will be critical to the Iraqi
Government’s effort to liberate all the areas under
ISIL’s control, with the assistance of the international
coalition which is fighting side by side with us against
ISIL. Iraq continues to require assistance to reconstruct
liberated areas that have been gravely degraded by

15-04201

17/02/2015

The situation concerning Iraq

terrorists and to assist IDPs in returning and creating
livelihoods. Therefore, Iraq has frequently raised the
possibility of creating a fund to reconstruct areas in
northern and western Iraq.
With respect to relations with countries of the
region, Iraq is continuing to promote relations with
all its neighbours in order to coordinate efforts to
combat terrorism more effectively. The Prime Minister
lately visited the State of Kuwait, Iran, the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
Turkey and the United Arab Emirates, and the President
has visited both Saudi Arabia and Qatar. These visits
led to agreements to strengthen security cooperation
and intelligence sharing in order to defeat the ISIL
terrorist entity and review plans to promote cooperation
in the areas of economy, oil, investments, trade and
the defence of our common borders. Furthermore, the
Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister were present at
the conferences on counter-terrorism held in Brussels,
London and Berlin.
Iraq looks forward to developing relations with the
State of Kuwait. We value Kuwait’s positions in support
of Iraq. We thank the State of Kuwait for understanding
the very difficult economic conditions prevailing in
Iraq because of the war against the terrorist entity ISIL.
We value its cooperation to restitute 5 per cent of Iraqi
oil export revenues for 2015. Iraq is keen to continue
making strong efforts to find and identify the remains

S/PV.7383

of disappeared Kuwaiti persons and the national
Kuwaiti archives.
My Government is making every effort to go forward
on the democratic path to protect the achievements of
democracy under the Constitution, whether through
reforming the Government, national reconciliation,
combatting ISIL and freeing areas under its control and
strengthening relations with neighbouring countries.
We value the role of the international coalition led by
the United States and permanent Member States of
the Security Council, as well as Arab States. We also
value the efforts of the United Nations and UNAMI to
provide advice and support to the Iraqi Government.
We pay tribute to them for their courage in continuing
to provide humanitarian assistance even under the
difficult conditions prevailing in my country. We
cannot fail to renew our thanks and appreciation to
Mr. Mladenov for his commitment and his strong
efforts to assist Iraq during his mandate as the head of
UNAMI. Allow me to express our best wishes for him
in his future fuctions.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more speakers inscribed on my list.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on this subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

15-042017/7
