Reeolatlom adopted without referenre to a Main Committee

2322 (XXII). Credendala of representatives to
the twenty-eeeond seHion of the General
Assembly
The General Assembly
Approves the report of the Credentials Committee. 6
1635th plenary meeting.
16 December 1967.

2324 (XXD), Question of South West Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966, by which it terminated the Mandate for South
West Africa and decided, inter alia. that South Africa
has no other right to administer the Territory and that
henceforth South \Vest Africa comes under the direct
responsibility of the United Nations,
Gravely concerned about the arrest, deportation and
trial at Pretoria of thirty-seven South West Africans
hy the South African authorities in flagrant violation
of their rights and of the aforementioned resolution,
Recalling further the resolution adopted on 12 September 1967 by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples7 and also the consensus adopted by the
United Nations Council for South West Africa on 27
November 1967, 8
Conscious of the special responsibilities of the United
Nations towards the people and Territory of South
West Africa,
1. Condemns the illegal arrest, deportation and trial
at Pretoria of the thirty-seven South West Africans
as a flagrant violation by the Government of South
Africa of their rights, of the international status of the
Territory and of General Assembly resolution 2145
(XXI);
2. Calls upon the Government of South Africa to
discontinue forthwith this illegal trial and to release
and repatriate the South West Africans concerned ;
3. Appeals to all States and international organizations to use their influence with the Government of
South Africa in order to obtain its compliance with
the provisions of paragraph 2 above;
4. Dratws the attention of the Security Council to
the present resolution;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report as soon
as possible to the Security Council, the General Assembly, the United Nations Council for South West
Africa and the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples on the implementation of the present
resolution.
1635th plenary meeting,
·
16 December 1967.
8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-,econd
Session. Annexes. agenda item 3, document A/6990.
7 Ibid., addendum to agenda item 23 (A/6700/Rev.1), chapter
IV, para. 232.
1 lbid., agenda item 64, document A/6919.

s

2325 (XXD). Question of South West Africa
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Council for South West Africa, 9
Reaffirming the inalienable right of the people of
South West Africa to freedom and independence in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960, which contains the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Reaffirming its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966, by which it terminated the Mandate for
South West Africa and decided, inter alia. that South
Africa has no other right to administer the Territory
and that henceforth South West Africa comes under
the direct responsibility of the United Nations,
Reaffirming also its resolution 2248 ( S-V) of 19
May 1967, and particularly paragraph 5 of section IV
thereof,
Taking n.ote of the refusal of the Government of
South Africa to co-operate with the United Nations
in the implementation of resolutions 2145 (XXI) ancl
2248 ( S-V), as indicated in its communication of 26
September 1967 addressed to the Secretary-Generai, 10
I. Notes with appreciation the report of the United
Nations Council for South West Africa and the Council's efforts to discharge the responsibilities and functions entrusted to it;
2. Requests the United Nations Council for South
West Africa to fulfill by every available means the mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly ;
3. Condemns the refusal of the Government of South
Africa to comply with General Assemblr resolutions
2145 (XXI) and 2248 (S-V), which provide for granting the people of South West Africa an opportunity
to exercise their inalienable right to freedom and independence;
4. Declares that the continued presence of South
African authorities in South West Africa is a flagrant
violation of its territorial integrity and international
status as determined by General Assembly resolution
2145 (XXI), as well as of the terms of General Assembly resolution 2248 (S-V);
5. Calls upon the Government of South Africa to
withdraw from the Territory of South West Africa,
unconditionally and without delay, all its military and
police forces and its administration, to release all political prisoners and to allow all political refugees who
are natives of the Territory to return to it;
6. Urgently appeals to all Member States, particularly the main trading partners of South Africa
and those which have economic and other interests in
South Africa and South West Africa, to take effective
economic and other measures designed to ensure the
immediate withdrawal of the South African administration from the Territory of South West Africa, thereby
clearing the way for the implementation of General
Assembly resolutions 2145 (XXI) and 2248 (S-V);
7. Requests the Security Council to take effective
steps to enable the United Nations to fulfil the responsibilities it has assumed with respect to South
West Africa;
9 Ibid.,

document A/6897.

1 0 Ibid., document A/6822.
